--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Oro Valley Town Code

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER 1 GENERAL

Articles:
1-1          How Code Designated and Cited
1-2          Construction of Ordinances
1-3          Definitions
1-4          Reference to Chapters, Articles or Sections: Conflicting Provisions
1-5          Section Headings
1-6          Effect of Repeal
1-7          Severability of Parts of Code
1-8          Penalties
1-9          Repeal of Existing Ordinances
1-10         Effective Date of Code

Article 1-1 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED

Sections:
1-1-1        How Code Designated and Cited

Section 1-1-1 How Code Designated and Cited
The ordinances as contained in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona," and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the "Oro Valley Town Code."

Article 1-2 CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES

Sections:
1-2-1        Construction of Ordinances

Section 1-2-1 Construction of Ordinances
The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the town unless such construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the town.

Article 1-3 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
1-3-1        General Rule Regarding Definitions
1-3-2        Acts by Agents
1-3-3        And, Or
1-3-4        Code
1-3-5        Council
1-3-6        County
1-3-7        Day
1-3-8        Daytime, Nighttime
1-3-9        Department, Board, Commission, Office, Officer or Employee
1-3-10       Gender; Singular and Plural
1-3-11       Heretofore and Hereafter
1-3-12       In the Town
1-3-13       Joint Authority
1-3-14       Keeper, Proprietor
1-3-15       Mayor
1-3-16       Month
1-3-17       Oath
1-3-18       Owner
1-3-19       Person
1-3-20       Personal Property
1-3-21       Preceding, Following
1-3-22       Property
1-3-23       Public Place
1-3-24       Real Property
1-3-25       Shall, May
1-3-26       Shall Have Been
1-3-27       Signature or Subscription by Mark
1-3-28       State
1-3-29       Tenant or Occupant
1-3-30       Tenses
1-3-31       Time--Computation
1-3-32       Time--Reasonable
1-3-33       Town
1-3-34       Week
1-3-35       Writing
1-3-36       Year

Section 1-3-1 General Rule Regarding Definitions
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.

Section 1-3-2 Acts by Agents
When an act is required to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.

Section 1-3-3 And, Or
"And" may be read "or" and "or" may be read "and" if the sense requires it.

Section 1-3-4 Code
The words "the code" or "this code" shall mean "The Code of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona," unless the context indicates otherwise.

Section 1-3-5 Council
Whenever the word "council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the common council of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona.

Section 1-3-6 County
"County" means Pima County, Arizona, except as otherwise provided.

Section 1-3-7 Day
A "day" is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

Section 1-3-8 Daytime, Nighttime
"Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

Section 1-3-9 Department, Board, Commission, Office, Officer or Employee
Whenever any "department, board, commission, office, officer or employee" is referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; and the prescribing of any duty or power of an officer by title shall include his duly authorized representatives.

Section 1-3-10 Gender; Singular and Plural
Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular.

Section 1-3-11 Heretofore and Hereafter
Whenever the word "heretofore" occurs in any ordinance or this code it shall be construed to mean any time previous to the date when such ordinance shall take effect; and whenever the word "hereafter" occurs it shall be construed to mean the time after the ordinance containing such word shall take effect.

Section 1-3-12 In the Town
The words "in the town" or "within the town" shall mean and include all territory over which the town now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

Section 1-3-13 Joint Authority
All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.

Section 1-3-14 Keeper, Proprietor
"Keeper, proprietor" includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.

Section 1-3-15 Mayor
"Mayor" means the mayor of the Town of Oro Valley unless otherwise specifically designated.

Section 1-3-16 Month
The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.

Section 1-3-17 Oath
"Oath" includes affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."

Section 1-3-18 Owner
The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of part of such building or land.

Section 1-3-19 Person
The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations or voluntary associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.

Section 1-3-20 Personal Property
"Personal property" includes every species of property, except real property as defined in this article.

Section 1-3-21 Preceding, Following
The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.

Section 1-3-22 Property
The word "property" shall include real and personal property.

Section 1-3-23 Public Place
"Public place" means any streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, and any public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings not privately owned or controlled.

Section 1-3-24 Real Property
"Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.

Section 1-3-25 Shall, May
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.

Section 1-3-26 Shall Have Been
The words "shall have been" include past and future cases.

Section 1-3-27 Signature or Subscription by Mark
"Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

Section 1-3-28 State
The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Arizona.

Section 1-3-29 Tenant or Occupant
The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of such building or land or any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

Section 1-3-30 Tenses
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

Section 1-3-31 Time--Computation
The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Sunday or holiday it shall be excluded; and when such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.

Section 1-3-32 Time--Reasonable
In all cases where any section of this code shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.

Section 1-3-33 Town
"Town" means the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona, in the County of Pima, State of Arizona, except as otherwise provided.

Section 1-3-34 Week
A "week" consists of seven consecutive days.

Section 1-3-35 Writing
"Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

Section 1-3-36 Year
The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.

Article 1-4 REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS, ARTICLES OR SECTIONS: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS

Sections:
1-4-1        Additional Rules of Construction
1-4-2        References to this Code
1-4-3        Conflicting Provisions--Different Chapters
1-4-4        Conflicting Provisions--Same Chapter

Section 1-4-1 Additional Rules of Construction
In addition to the rules of construction specified in Articles 1-2 and 1-3, the rules set forth in this article shall be observed in the construction of this code.

Section 1-4-2 References to this Code
All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this code unless otherwise specified.

Section 1-4-3 Conflicting Provisions--Different Chapters
If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.

Section 1-4-4 Conflicting Provisions--Same Chapter
If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction is inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter.

Article 1-5 SECTION HEADINGS

Sections:
1-5-1        Section Headings

Section 1-5-1 Section Headings
Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute part of the law.

Article 1-6 EFFECT OF REPEAL

Sections:
1-6-1        Effect of Repeal

Section 1-6-1 Effect of Repeal
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.

Article 1-7 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE

Sections:
1-7-1        Severability of Parts of Code

Section 1-7-1 Severability of Parts of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be severable, and, if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.

Article 1-8 PENALTIES

Sections:
1-8-1        Penalties

Section 1-8-1 Penalties
A. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this code, except as otherwise provided, shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2500) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by a period of probation not to exceed three years, or by any combination thereof. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein described.
B. Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by Chapter 11 of this code constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of Title 28, Chapter 6, Articles 20 and 21, Arizona Revised Statutes and amendments thereto.
C. It shall be a civil infraction for any person, firm, corporation, etc. or any combination thereof to violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with, or to resist enforcement of any provision of the current Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised or Grading Ordinance. All fine amount limits shall be identical to those designated as a petty offense under Arizona state law. The court may order remedial action by the defendant in addition to any fines imposed. The cost of the remedial action may exceed the maximum fine for violation of this ordinance. This is a strict liability ordinance.
If any property or improvement thereon is used in violation of the provisions of the above mentioned codes or ordinances, the Zoning Administrator and/or his designees and/or the Town Engineer and/or his designees, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding by the issuance of a civil citation or summons. The above mentioned individuals may also issue separately or in conjunction with the citation or summons any other administrative order or action that they deem necessary in order to restrain, correct or abate such violations, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land, or to prevent any further work or additional violations arising from further conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. If the property is platted, each platted lot on which the violation occurs shall also constitute a separate offense. A citation or summons must be issued for each separate offense.
The "Town of Oro Valley Local Rules of Practice and Procedure" shall apply to civil violations of the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised and Grading Ordinance. If said rules are not adopted by the Arizona Supreme Court, then the "Local Rules of Practice and Procedure of the City Court in the City of Tucson" shall apply to civil violations of the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised and Grading Ordinance with such changes as may from time to time be adopted by the Oro Valley Magistrate Court. The words "Town of Oro Valley" shall replace the words "City of Tucson" in applying the above Local Rules. ((O)94-18, Amended,  08/03/1994; (O)94-17, Amended,  08/03/1994)

Article 1-9 REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES

Sections:
1-9-1        Effective Date of Repeal
1-9-2        Ordinances Exempt from Repeal

Section 1-9-1 Effective Date of Repeal
All ordinances of the town except those specially exempted in this article, now in force and effect are hereby repealed effective at twelve o’clock noon on twenty-seventh day of October, 1989 but all rights, duties and obligations created by said ordinances shall continue and exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.

Section 1-9-2 Ordinances Exempt from Repeal
The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or in any way to modify or affect:
A. Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations, dedications or zoning.
B. Any ordinance making an appropriation.
C. Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been authorized.
D. The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this code becomes effective.
E. The continued existence and operation of any department, agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held.
F. Any bond of any public officer.
G. Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed.
H. Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State of Arizona or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof.

Article 1-10 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE

Sections:
1-10-1       Effective Date of Code

Section 1-10-1 Effective Date of Code
Each and every section of this code as herein contained and hereby enacted shall take effect and be in force on and after twelve o’clock noon on twenty-seventh day of October, 1989 except that where a later effective date is provided it shall prevail.

CHAPTER 2 MAYOR AND COUNCIL

Articles:
2-1          Council
2-2          Reserved
2-3          Council Election
2-4          Council Procedure
2-5          Ordinances, Resolutions and Contracts

Article 2-1 COUNCIL

Sections:
2-1-1        Elected Officers
2-1-2        Eligibility
2-1-3        Office of Mayor
2-1-4        Office of Vice-Mayor
2-1-5        Mayor Pro Tempore
2-1-6        Vacancy
2-1-7        Compensation
2-1-8        Financial Disclosure

Section 2-1-1 Elected Officers
A. Pursuant to ARS Section 9-231, the elected officers or common council of the Town shall consist of seven Council Members including the directly elected Mayor as provided for in Section 2-1-3.
B. The Mayor and Council Members shall constitute the Oro Valley Town Council and shall continue in office until their successors are duly elected and sworn-in. All Council Members shall serve four year overlapping terms.
C. Public Officers. The Mayor and Council are Public Officers as defined in ARS 38-502.
D. Corporate Powers. The corporate powers of the Town shall be vested in the Council and shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order, or motion.
E. Oath of Office. Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each Council Member shall, in public, take and subscribe to the Oath of Office.
F. Assumption of Duties. Council Members shall assume the duties of office at the regularly scheduled Council meeting next following the date of the General Election at which, or effective as of the date which, the Council Members were elected.
G. Bond. Every Council Member shall have executed an official bond on their behalf paid by the Town, which shall be conditioned on the due and faithful performance of the Council Member’s official duties, and payable for the benefit of the Town or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of such officer in their official capacity. A person so injured or aggrieved may bring suit on such bond under provisions identical to those contained in ARS 38-260. ((O)03-28, Amended,  09/17/2003; (O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001)

Section 2-1-2 Eligibility
Pursuant to ARS 9-232 and 38-201, no person shall be eligible to any of the offices provided in this Article except a person of the age of not less than eighteen (18) years, who shall have been a qualified elector residing within the Town at the time of the election, and has resided in the Town for one (1) year next preceding the election. ((O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001)

Section 2-1-3 Office of Mayor
A. Election. Beginning with the election to be held at the primary election in 1998, the Mayor of the Town of Oro Valley shall be directly elected by the qualified electors of the Town. The term of office of the Mayor shall be four (4) years or until a successor is elected and sworn-in.
B. Qualification and Tenure. Pursuant to ARS 38-296, the "resign-to-run" provision, except during the final year of the term being served, no incumbent Council Member may offer their nomination for the office of Mayor. Once an incumbent formally resigns from their duty elected office, the office is declared vacant. Any person desiring to become a candidate for office shall file nomination papers pursuant to ARS 16-311(a) in order to declare candidacy for that office.
C. Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:
    1. The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Town.
    2. The Mayor shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its meetings. The Mayor may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings.
    3. The Mayor shall enforce the provisions of this Code.
    4. The Mayor shall execute and authenticate by his/her signature such instruments as the Council or any statutes, ordinances, or this Code shall require.
    5. The Mayor shall make such recommendations and suggestions to the Council as is considered proper.
    6. The Mayor may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing, or any other natural or man-made calamity or disaster or in the event of threat or occurrence of riot, rout, or affray or other acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property within the Town. After such declaration of such emergency, the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the Town, including but not limited to:
        a. Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the Town.
        b. Ordering the closing of any business.
        c. Closing to public access any public building, street, or other public place.
        d. Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the political subdivision for assistance.
    7. The Mayor shall perform such other duties required by state statute and this Code as well as those duties required as Chief Executive Officer of the Town.
D. Leave of Office.  The Mayor shall not leave the office of Mayor, ceasing to discharge the duties of Mayor, for a greater period than fifteen (15) days without the consent of the Council.
E. Failure to Sign Documents. If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand, or other document or instrument requiring his signature for five days consecutively, then three (3) members of the Council may, at any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice-Mayor or, in his absence a Mayor Pro Tempore, to sign such ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand, or other document or instrument which when so signed shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor. ((O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001)

Section 2-1-4 Office of Vice-Mayor
A. Election. At the first regular meeting in December of each calendar year, the Town Council shall elect one of its members as Vice-Mayor by a majority vote.
B. Term. The Vice-Mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the Council for a term of one (1) years or until a successor is elected.
C. Duties. The Vice-Mayor shall be appointed to perform the duties of the Mayor during his absence, pursuant to ARS 9-236. The Vice-Mayor’s compensation in this instance shall be increased to match that of the compensation of the Mayor. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Vice-Mayor shall succeed to the office of Mayor until the end of the term to which the Vice-Mayor was elected or the end of the term to which the Mayor was elected, whichever comes first, and then a new Vice-Mayor shall be elected. ((O)13-20, Amended,  09/18/2013; (O)03-06, Amended,  02/19/2003; (O)01-22A, Amended,  09/19/2001; (O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001)

Section 2-1-5 Mayor Pro Tempore
In the absence of both the Mayor and the Vice-Mayor, the Council may designate another of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tempore who shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Mayor during such absence. ((O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001; (O)99-53, Amended, )

Section 2-1-6 Vacancy
A. Vacancy Defined. An office shall be deemed or considered vacant as provided for in ARS 38-291. For the purposes of the Article governing the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and Council Members, the words, terms, and phrases defined in this Article hereunder, but not limited to, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context.
B. Office of Mayor. In the event of a vacancy in the office of the Mayor, the Vice-Mayor shall succeed to the office of Mayor. Any successor to the office shall become Mayor-in-Fact and entitled to all of the emoluments, powers, and duties of Mayor upon taking the oath of office.
A special election shall not be held to elect a new Mayor, but the Vice-Mayor shall act in the Mayor’s stead until the end of the term for which the Mayor was elected or the end of the term to which the Vice-Mayor was elected, whichever comes first. If a vacancy is created in the office of Mayor due to the expiration of the Vice-Mayor’s term, the Council shall elect a Vice-Mayor for the remainder of the original Mayor’s term from among the Council.
C. Office of Vice-Mayor. In the event a vacancy is created in the office of Vice-Mayor, the Council shall elect one of its remaining members to fill the vacancy in accordance with this Article.
D. Office of Council Member. In the event of a vacancy created in the office of Council Member, the Council shall fill such vacancy, by appointment, until the next regularly scheduled Council election if the vacancy occurs more than thirty (30) days before the nomination petition deadline for that election, otherwise for the unexpired term of that vacancy. The individual appointed by the Council to fill a vacancy among the membership of the Council pursuant to ARS 9-235, must also meet the qualifications of ARS 9-232(A). ((O)11-19, Amended,  07/06/2011; (O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001)

Section 2-1-7 Compensation
The compensation of elective officers of the Town shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Council. ((O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001)

Section 2-1-8 Financial Disclosure
The Mayor and each Council Member shall file by January 31 of each year, on a form prescribed by the Clerk, a financial disclosure statement setting forth such information as determined by resolution of the Council. ((O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001)

Article 2-2 RESERVED

Article 2-3 COUNCIL ELECTION

Sections:
2-3-1        Primary Election
2-3-2        Non-Partisan Ballot
2-3-3        General Election Nomination
2-3-4        Election to Office
2-3-5        Candidate Financial Disclosure
2-3-6        Initiative and Referendum

Section 2-3-1 Primary Election
Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of votes cast, as prescribed by State statute, shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate. If more candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled then those equal in number to the offices to be filled receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. ((O)14-10, Amended,  10/01/2014; (O)98-44, Amended,  10/07/1998)

Section 2-3-2 Non-Partisan Ballot
Elections shall be non-partisan and nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the support of a candidate.

Section 2-3-3 General Election Nomination
The general election shall be held as prescribed by State statute. If at any primary election held as above provided there be any office for which no candidate is elected, then as to such office, the primary election shall be considered to be a primary election for nomination of candidates for such office, and the general municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill such office. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the general municipal election shall be those not elected at the primary election and shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office or less than that number if there be less than that number named on the primary election ballot. The persons who receive the highest number of votes for the respective offices at first election shall be the candidates at such second election, even if there were only two names on the primary ballot. Provided that if there be any person who, under the provisions of this article, would have been entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of votes therefor, then all such persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for such office at the general election. ((O)14-10, Amended,  10/01/2014; (O)98-44, Amended,  10/07/1998)

Section 2-3-4 Election to Office
Unless stated elsewhere, the candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the highest number of votes at the general election shall be declared elected. ((O)98-44, Amended,  10/07/1998)

Section 2-3-5 Candidate Financial Disclosure
Each candidate for the office of council member shall file a financial disclosure statement on a form prescribed by the clerk when such candidate files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain such information as required by resolution of the council.

Section 2-3-6 Initiative and Referendum
A. Power Reserved; Time of Election. There is reserved to the qualified electors of the town the power of the initiative and the referendum as prescribed by the state constitution. Any initiative or referendum matter may be voted on at the next ensuing primary or general election, or at a special election called by the council.
B. Number of Signatures. 
    1. The total number of registered voters qualified to vote at the last municipal election, whether regular or special, immediately preceding the date upon which any initiative petition is filed shall be the basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the town required to file an initiative petition shall be computed.
    2. The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the town required to file a referendum petition shall be as determined by state law.
C. Time of Filing. 
    1. Initiative petitions shall be filed at least one hundred twenty days prior to the election at which they are to be voted upon.
    2. Referendum petitions shall be filed within thirty days of the adoption of the ordinance or resolution to be referred. If the town clerk is unable to provide petitioners with a copy of the ordinance or resolution at the time of application for an official number or on the same business day of the application, the thirty date period shall be calculated from the date such ordinance or resolution is available.
D. Sample Ballots and Publicity Pamphlets. The following procedures relating to sample ballots and publicity pamphlets are hereby adopted for conducting elections at which an initiative or referendum is to be voted upon:
    1. A publicity pamphlet, containing the entire text of the official ballot, shall be mailed by the town clerk to each household within the town in which a registered voter resides, not less than ten days prior to the election to which the sample ballot pertains.
    2. The pamphlet shall contain the proposition as it will appear on the ballot together with a summary of each proposition. Each summary shall be followed by any arguments supporting the proposition followed by any arguments opposing the proposition.
    3. Arguments supporting and opposing propositions appearing on the ballot shall be filed with the office of the town clerk by 5:00 p.m. not less than ninety days prior to the election at which the propositions are to be voted upon. Arguments supporting or opposing propositions appearing on the ballot shall meet the following requirements:
        a. Arguments must relate to the propositions proposed by initiative or referred by referendum which will appear on the ballot.
        b. Arguments must identify the proposition to which they refer and indicate whether the argument is in support of or opposition to the proposition.
        c. Arguments may not exceed three hundred words in length.
        d. Arguments must be signed by the person submitting them. Arguments sponsored by an organization shall be signed on behalf of the organization by two executive officers of the organization authorized to take such action. All persons signing documents shall indicate their residence or post office address and give a telephone number.
        e. No person or organization shall submit more than one argument for each proposition to be voted upon.
        f. Each argument shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of $250.00 to offset a portion of the proportionate costs of the paper and printing of the argument. This requirement shall not be waived on any account. ((O)95-73, Amended, )

Article 2-4 COUNCIL PROCEDURE

Sections:
2-4-1        Regular Meetings
2-4-2        Special Meetings
2-4-3        Meetings to Be Public
2-4-4        Quorum
2-4-5        Agenda
2-4-6        Consent Agenda
2-4-7        Order of Business; Proceedings of the Council
2-4-8        Committees and Commissions
2-4-9        Voting
2-4-10       Suspension of Rules

Section 2-4-1 Regular Meetings
The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Wednesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. When deemed appropriate any regular meeting date of the Council may be changed by the Mayor or by a majority of the Council except that at least one regular meeting a month must be held and that such notice of the rescheduled meeting shall be given to the public as is reasonable and practicable under the circumstances. All regular meetings shall be held at the Town Hall or at such place as may be prescribed by the Mayor. ((O)08-18, Amended,  09/03/2008)

Section 2-4-2 Special Meetings
The Mayor or any two (2) Council Members may convene the Council for the purpose of holding a Special Meeting any time after giving at least 24 hours notice of such meeting. All notices pertaining to Special Meetings shall include the date, place, hours, and purpose of such Special Meeting in accordance with State law. In the case of an actual emergency, any Council Member may convene the council upon such notice as is appropriate to the circumstances in accordance with State law. ((O)01-24, Amended, ; (O)92-15, Amended, )

Section 2-4-3 Meetings to Be Public
All proceedings of the council shall be open to the public, except that upon approval by a majority vote of the council, the council may meet in a closed executive session pursuant to the provisions of state law. Notice of meetings shall be given in a manner consistent with state statutes.

Section 2-4-4 Quorum
A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for transacting business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members.

Section 2-4-5 Agenda
Prior to each council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the council for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier, the clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the council, prepare an agenda according to the order of business and furnish each council member, the mayor and the attorney with a copy of the agenda and any material pertinent thereto.

Section 2-4-6 Consent Agenda
A. When any item of business requires action by the council, but is of a routine and noncontroversial nature, such item may be presented at a regular meeting of the council as part of a consent agenda.
B. The consent agenda shall be introduced by a motion "To approve the Consent Agenda," and shall be considered by the council as a single item.
C. There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the council regarding any item on the consent agenda, beyond asking questions for simple clarification.
D. All items on the consent agenda which require public hearings shall be open for hearing simultaneously, and the mayor shall announce, or direct the town clerk to announce, the titles of all such items.
E. Upon objection by any member of the council to inclusion of any item on the consent agenda, that item shall be removed from the consent agenda forthwith. Such objections may be recorded at any time prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve the consent agenda. All such items shall be considered individually, in the order in which they were objected to, immediately following consideration of the consent agenda.
F. Approval of the motion to approve the consent agenda shall be fully equivalent to approval, adoption or enactment of each motion, resolution, ordinance or other item of business thereon, exactly as if each had been acted upon individually.

Section 2-4-7 Order of Business; Proceedings of the Council
A. The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in an order set forth by the council.
B. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meetings in an orderly manner. The mayor may proceed in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert’s Rules of Order.

Section 2-4-8 Committees and Commissions
The council may create such committees and commissions, standing or special, as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and shall perform such duties as the council may require and shall exist at the pleasure of the council.

Section 2-4-9 Voting
A. The mayor shall vote as a member of the council.
B. Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any question shall be taken and entered in the minutes.

Section 2-4-10 Suspension of Rules
Any of the provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of three-fourths of the members present, except that this section shall not be construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.

Article 2-5 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS

Sections:
2-5-1        Prior Approval
2-5-2        Introduction
2-5-3        Public Hearing Required
2-5-4        Reading Required
2-5-5        Requirements for an Ordinance
2-5-6        Effective Date of Ordinances
2-5-7        Signatures Required
2-5-8        Publishing Required
2-5-9        Posting Required

Section 2-5-1 Prior Approval
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been reviewed as to form by the attorney and shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters. Such person shall have an opportunity to present his comments, suggestions and objections, if any, prior to the passage of the ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the contract.

Section 2-5-2 Introduction
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the attorney, the manager or the clerk may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any member of the council may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance, resolution, matter or subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered.

Section 2-5-3 Public Hearing Required
No ordinance, except emergency ordinances, shall be passed without a public hearing. Notice of public hearing shall follow state law. ((O)96-45, Amended, )

Section 2-5-4 Reading Required
All ordinances shall be read in full unless the council, in possession of printed copies of said ordinance, shall unanimously allow reading by title only.

Section 2-5-5 Requirements for an Ordinance
Each ordinance may have only one subject, the nature of which is clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and, in such case, the title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance.

Section 2-5-6 Effective Date of Ordinances
No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative until thirty days after its passage by the council and approval by the mayor, except measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the town, but such an emergency measure shall not become immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the reason why it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the council.

Section 2-5-7 Signatures Required
Every ordinance passed by the council shall, before it becomes effective, be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk.

Section 2-5-8 Publishing Required
Only such ordinances, orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly ordered by the council. Ordinances shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in a weekly newspaper or four consecutive times in a daily newspaper of general circulation.

Section 2-5-9 Posting Required
Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment shall, after passage, be posted by the clerk in three or more public places within the town and an affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the clerk as proof of posting.

CHAPTER 3 ADMINISTRATION

Articles:
3-1          Officers in General
3-2          Officers
3-3          Personnel System
3-4          Procurement
3-5          Planning and Zoning
3-6          Advisory Boards
3-7          Settlement Authority

Article 3-1 OFFICERS IN GENERAL

Sections:
3-1-1        Officers
3-1-2        Additional Officers
3-1-3        Bond
3-1-4        Vacancies; Holding More Than One Office
3-1-5        Additional Powers and Duties

Section 3-1-1 Officers
There are hereby created the offices of Town Manager, Assistant Town Manager, Town Clerk, Planning and Zoning Director, Town Marshall/Chief of Police, Town Engineer, Town Attorney, Town Magistrate, Town Building Official, Finance Director, Human Resources Director, Water Utility Director, Parks and Recreation Director, and Information Technology Director. The Town Manager, Town Marshall/Chief of Police and Town Attorney shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. These employees may be removed by the Council by a majority vote of its members immediately for cause or pursuant to the terms of their employment agreements, without cause. The Town Clerk, Planning and Zoning Director, Town Engineer, Finance Director, Building Official, Human Resources Director, Water Utility Director, Parks and Recreation Director, and Information Technology Director shall be appointed by the Town Manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Manager. These employees may be removed by the Town Manager immediately for cause or pursuant to the terms of their employment agreements, without cause. The Town Magistrate shall be appointed by the Town Council for a term of office as provided in Section 5-2-1 of this code. ((O)10-02, Amended,  03/03/2010; (O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007; (O)04-26, Amended,  09/15/2004; (O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Section 3-1-2 Additional Officers
The Town Council may create such additional officers as it may deem necessary. Such additional officers shall be appointed by the Town Manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Manager unless otherwise decided by the Town Council. ((O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007; (O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Section 3-1-3 Bond
The Council shall require each officer of the Town to give bond for the due discharge of his/her duties in such sums and with such security as it may direct and approve as determined by resolution. The Town shall pay the costs of such bond. ((O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-1-4 Vacancies; Holding More Than One Office
A. Any vacancy that shall occur in the office of the Town Manager, Town Marshall/Chief of Police or Town Attorney shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council; provided, that one (1) person may hold more than one (1) office and that, at the discretion of the Town Council, the functions of a Town official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or other Town official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office but employed at the pleasure of the Council. Any vacancy that shall occur in the offices of the Town Planning and Zoning Director, Town Building Official, Town Finance Director, Town Clerk, Town Engineer, Human Resources Director, Water Utility Director, Parks and Recreation Director, or Information Technology Director shall be filled by appointment by the Town Manager; provided, that one (1) person may hold more than one (1) office and that, at the discretion of the Town Manager, the functions of the Town official designated may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or other Town official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office but employed at the pleasure of the Town Manager as set forth in Section 3-1-1.
B. Any vacancy that shall occur in the office of Town Magistrate shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council. ((O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007; (O)04-26, Amended,  09/15/2004; (O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Section 3-1-5 Additional Powers and Duties
In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer shall have such further powers, perform such further duties and hold such other office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance, resolution or order. ((O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007)

Article 3-2 OFFICERS

Sections:
3-2-1        Town Manager
3-2-2        Town Clerk
3-2-3        Town Marshal
3-2-4        Town Engineer
3-2-5        Town Attorney
3-2-6        Town Magistrate
3-2-7        Finance Director
3-2-8        Planning and Zoning Director
3-2-9        Building Official
3-2-10       Human Resources Director
3-2-11       Water Utility Director
3-2-12       Information Technology Director
3-2-13       Parks and Recreation Director

Section 3-2-1 Town Manager
A. Office Created. The office of the Town Manager is hereby created and established. The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of office as hereinafter set forth; and he shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the Council.
B. Eligibility. Residence in the Town, at the time of appointment, shall not be required as a condition of appointment. However, within six (6) months from the date of appointment, the Town Manager must become a resident of the Town.
C. Bond. The Town Manager shall secure a corporate surety bond to be approved by the Council in such sum as may be determined by the Council. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the Manager as prescribed in this article. The bond fee shall be paid by the Town.
D. Assistant Town Manager. The Assistant Town Manager shall be appointed by and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Town Manager. The Assistant Town Manager shall perform the duties of the Town Manager during the absence or temporary unavailability of the Town Manager. The Assistant Town Manager shall perform additional management, supervision and administrative duties as assigned by the Town Manager.
E. Removal. The Town Manager may be removed by the Town Council by a majority vote of its members immediately for cause or without cause as set forth in the Town Manager’s contract of employment.
F. Resignation. The Manager shall give in writing notice of his intention to resign before leaving the office of Town Manager, or pursuant to the terms of their employment agreement.
G. Compensation. The Manager shall receive such compensation as the Council shall from time to time determine and fix by ordinance, resolution or motion, and said compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the Town as the Council shall designate. The Town Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the Town as approved by the Council; reimbursement shall be made only when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented and approved by the Council.
H. Powers and Duties. The Town Manager shall be the administrative officer of the Town government and shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the Town under the specific direction and control of the Council. In addition to the general powers as the chief administrative officer and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the Manager’s responsibility and authority:
    1. To see that all laws and ordinances of the Town are duly enforced, and that all franchises and privileges granted by the Town are faithfully observed.
    2. To appoint and, when necessary, suspend or remove employees of the Town including the Town Planning and Zoning Director, Town Finance Director, Town Building Official, Town Clerk, Town Engineer, Human Resources Director, Water Utility Director, Parks and Recreation Director, Information Technology Director, and Legal Services Director. The Town Marshall/Chief of Police and the contract Town Attorney shall be appointed and terminated by the Town Council.
    3. To coordinate the administrative functions and operation of the various departments, boards, divisions and services of the Town government, and on its behalf to carry out policies, rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by it, relating to the administration of the affairs of such departments, boards, divisions or services. Such powers and duties to be subject to the following provisions:
        a. That the organizational structure under which municipal services are performed shall be specified in an organization chart.
    4. To attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom and to attend, or designate a representative to attend, all Board and Commission meetings.
    5. To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as are necessary.
    6. To recommend to the Council at periodic intervals changes needed in the Town Code.
    7. Repealed.
    8. To keep the Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the Town. To provide whatever reports to the Council as it may deem necessary.
    9. To prepare and submit to the Council a proposed budget for the next fiscal and subsequent four (4) fiscal years.
    10. To procure or cause to be procured all supplies and equipment and to make arrangements for contractual services for all the departments or divisions of the Town of an amount up to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), letting contracts for between one thousand dollars ($1,000) and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) on an “informal bid” process; and to receive sealed bids for procurements in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) and to present them to the council for approval. Procurements made by, through or with the Federal Government or its agencies, State of Arizona or its political subdivisions; or the Houston-Galveston Area Council (H-GAC) provided they continue to meet the requirements for bids as established by State and Federal Law, need not be submitted to the Council for approval; however, such procurements are restricted to approved budgetary items only.1
    11. To analyze the functions, duties and activities of the various departments, boards and services of the Town government and of all employees thereof, and to make such recommendations to the Council with reference thereto, as in his judgment will result, if made effective, in the highest degree of efficiency in the overall operation of the Town government.
    12. To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the Town, its utilities or enterprises.
    13. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the Council.
    14. To devote as much time to the duties of the office of Town Manager and the interest of the Town as necessary.
    15. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
    16. To settle or cause to be settled all claims against the Town of Oro Valley for greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000), but not more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), in accordance with Section 3-7-1(B) of this code.
    17. To enter into easement agreements or utility service agreements with public utility companies on behalf of the Town for the provision of utility service to public works projects located upon Town-owned real property.
I. Council to Act Through Manager. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative branch solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the Manager either publicly or privately.
However, by Council action individual Council members may be assigned specific administrative duties. In such cases the Town Manager shall make provisions for the appropriate staff members to work with such Council members. Specific authority and responsibilities shall be defined by the Council. The Town Manager shall be kept informed regarding the administrative actions in the same manner as with any staff person and shall work with the Council member to prevent duplication of effort or conflict of responsibility.
1 Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. (O)08-03 was adopted in early 2008 to add the procurement provisions of Article 3-4. The ordinance contained the standard clause repealing all inconsistent code provisions. When the Procurement Code became effective in early 2008, the inconsistent provisions of Section 3-2-1(H)(10) were repealed and are no longer effective.
((O)13-16, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)10-02, Amended,  03/03/2010; (O)08-05, Amended,  03/05/2008; (O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007; (O)04-26, Amended,  09/15/2004; (O)02-03, Amended,  01/09/2002; (O)00-28, Amended,  09/20/2000; (O)95-66, Amended,  07/12/1995)

Section 3-2-2 Town Clerk
A. Records. The Town Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain to the business of the Town or that the Town Manager directs. The Town Clerk shall plainly label and file separately all resolutions, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid vouchers, inventories, letters, orders and any other Town-related documents.
B. Public Inspection of Records. The Town Clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all public records and public documents under the Clerk’s control, as provided by State statute.
C. Monthly Reports. The Town Clerk shall collect from Town officials such monthly reports prepared in such manner and to include such information as may be directed by the Town Manager.
D. Action Minutes. The Town Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.
E. Ordinances, Resolutions, Budgets and Notices. The Town Clerk shall process, record, file, publish and, if required by State statute, post all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may be passed by the Council.
F. Duties as Treasurer. The Town Clerk shall also be Treasurer of the Town and have such duties and responsibilities as prescribed by the Arizona Revised Statutes.
G. Election Official. The Town Clerk shall be the Town Election Official and perform those duties required by Arizona Revised Statute 9-821, Title 16, and Title 19.
    1. Pursuant to Arizona Revised Statute 16-201, on the eighth Tuesday prior to a general election at which candidates for public office are to be elected, a primary election shall be held.
    2. In accordance with Arizona Revised Statute 16-204(B)(2), the Town will hold their general election on the third Tuesday in May.
    3. Pursuant to Arizona Revised Statute 16-204, a special election may be held only on the consolidated election dates prescribed by this statute.
H. Licenses. The Town Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses that may be prescribed by State Arizona Revised Statute 9-240(B)(19) or Chapter 8, Business Regulations, or the Oro Valley Town Code. No license shall be granted for more than one (1) year, and the charge for any license so issued by the Clerk shall not be less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000).
I. Administrative Duties. The Town Clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities and duties that are conferred upon the Clerk by the Town Manager in addition to those specified in this code.
J. Code Editor. The Town Clerk, in consultation with the Town Attorney, shall be designated as the Code Editor, and shall perform those duties associated with editing the Oro Valley Town Code. The Town Clerk shall not alter the sense, meaning, or effect of any code provision, but may:
    1. Renumber sections and parts of sections of newly enacted text.
    2. Rearrange sections, parts of sections, articles, chapters, and titles.
    3. Change reference numbers to agree with renumbered sections, parts of sections, articles, chapters, and titles.
    4. Change capitalization for the purpose of uniformity.
    5. Correct manifest clerical, typographical and electronic database errors in statutory and nonstatutory text.
    6. Electronically supplement the code within thirty (30) days from the date of the final passage of the ordinance, and each replacement page of the code shall then be properly identified and timely inserted into each copy of the code notebook.
K. Acceptance on Behalf of the Town. The Town Clerk is the proper party for acceptance of any and all official notices required to be served upon the Town of Oro Valley. The Town Clerk shall accept official notices in accordance with Arizona Revised Statute 12-821.01, and service of process in accordance with the Rules of Civil Procedure 4.1(c)(5)(j).
L. Appointment, Evaluation and Termination. The Town Clerk shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)12-01, Amended,  01/18/2012; (O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007; (O)02-02, Amended,  01/09/2002)

Section 3-2-3 Town Marshal
The Marshal shall be the Chief of Police, and shall perform such duties as may be required by law and as the Council may deem necessary. The Chief of Police is appointed and may be terminated by the Council pursuant to any employment agreement. An annual evaluation shall be conducted by the Council in consultation with the Town Manager. ((O)11-10, Amended,  03/09/2011; (O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-2-4 Town Engineer
The Engineer shall have charge of the Town streets and public works and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by law and such other duties as the Town Manager may deem necessary. The Town Engineer shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-2-5 Town Attorney
A. The Legal Services Director shall act as the legal counselor and advisor to the Council and Town officials and, as such, shall give an opinion in writing when requested; shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required; shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance thereof by the Council; shall return within fourteen (14) days all ordinances and resolutions submitted for consideration by the Council, with notes referencing approval or disapproval as to form, together with reasons therefor; shall supervise the prosecution and defense, or cause to be prosecuted and defended, all criminal and civil suits, actions or causes where the Town is a party and shall report to the Council, when required, the condition of any suit or action to which the Town is a party; and shall have the authority to settle all claims against the Town of Oro Valley valued at less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) in accordance with Section 3-7-1(A) of this code. Notwithstanding this section, for the purposes of the Town Code, Oro Valley Zoning Code revised and all other Town policies and procedures, wherever the term “Town Attorney” is used it shall mean the Legal Services Director.
The Legal Services Director is appointed by the Town Manager. An annual evaluation shall be conducted by the Town Manager.
B. The contract Town Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor to the Council for all Town Council meetings and special projects as set forth by contract. The contract Town Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the council under the terms of the contract. ((O)13-15, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007; (O)02-03, Amended,  01/09/2002)

Section 3-2-6 Town Magistrate
The Town Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the Magistrate’s Court and shall be selected by the Council and shall perform those functions necessary to the maintenance of the Magistrate’s Court as provided by State statute. ((O)07-37, Amended,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-2-7 Finance Director
The Finance Director shall receive and safely keep all monies that shall come to the Town and pay out the same. He shall keep a separate record and account of each different fund provided by the Council, apportion the monies received among the different funds as prescribed by the Council, and keep a complete set of books showing: every money transaction of the Town, the state of each fund, from what source the money in each fund was derived and for what purpose expended, and he shall make monthly reports to the Council of all receipts and disbursements and the balance in each fund. At the end of the fiscal year he shall make a full and detailed statement of the receipts and expenditures of the Town during the year, specifying the different sources of revenue and the amount received from each, all appropriations made by the Mayor and Council, and the object for which they were made, and the amount of money expended under each, the evidences of indebtedness issued, and what portion remains thereof outstanding, with the rate and amount of interest due thereon, and the amount of cash on hand. The Finance Director shall further oversee the financial duties and obligations of the Town and perform the necessary fiscal duties. The Finance Director shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)07-37, Amended, 09/05/07; Amended 1-19-94)

Section 3-2-8 Planning and Zoning Director
The Planning and Zoning Director shall direct the activities of the Planning Department and Zoning Enforcement and shall perform those duties necessary for operation of Town Planning and Zoning functions. The Planning and Zoning Director shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)07-37, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-2-9 Building Official
The Building Official/Building Safety Director shall direct the activities of the building permitting and safety offices and shall perform those duties necessary for operation of the building safety, permitting, and inspection functions. The Building Official shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)07-37, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-2-10 Human Resources Director
The Human Resources Director shall direct the activities of recruitment, compensation, benefits, employee relations, training and development and employee safety; and shall perform those duties necessary for operation of the human resources functions. The Human Resources Director shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)07-37, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-2-11 Water Utility Director
The Water Utility Director shall direct the activities of the water utility relating to water production, engineering, distribution, and customer service for reclaimed and potable water resources; and shall perform those duties necessary for operation of the water utility. The Water Utility Director shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)07-37, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-2-12 Information Technology Director
The Information Technology Director shall direct the activities of the Information Technology Department and shall perform those duties necessary for the operation of the Information Technology Department. The Information Technology Director shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)07-37, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 3-2-13 Parks and Recreation Director
The Parks and Recreation Director shall direct the activities of the Parks, Multimodal Trails, Aquatics, and Recreation Programs and shall perform those duties necessary for the operation of the Parks and Recreation Department. The Parks and Recreation Director shall be appointed, evaluated and terminated by the Town Manager in accordance with Town policies and procedures or pursuant to an employment agreement. ((O)07-37, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Article 3-3 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

Sections:
3-3-1        Creation and Scope
3-3-2        Rules and Regulations
3-3-3        Political Contributions

Section 3-3-1 Creation and Scope
The town council may adopt a personnel system for the employees of the town, the provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the town as set forth in the personnel policies, except elected officials, persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical services and volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the town. The town council may adopt rules and procedures pertaining to the officers of the town appointed directly by the council. ((O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Section 3-3-2 Rules and Regulations
The council may adopt by resolution rules and regulations to give effect to this article, which may be modified or changed from time to time.

Section 3-3-3 Political Contributions
No officer, official or employee of the town shall use any influence or pressure upon any employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of money or time, either direct or indirect, for any political campaign or personal gain.

Article 3-4 PROCUREMENT

Sections:
3-4-1        General Provisions
3-4-2        Procurement Organization
3-4-3        Source Selection and Contract Formation
3-4-4        Specifications
3-4-5        Procurement of Professional Design Services, Construction and Construction Services
3-4-6        Contract Terms and Conditions
3-4-7        Cost Principles
3-4-8        Materials Management
3-4-9        Legal and Contractual Remedies
3-4-10       Cooperative Procurement

Section 3-4-1 General Provisions
A. Purpose. The underlying purposes and policies of Town of Oro Valley Procurement Code are:
    1. To simplify, clarify, and modernize the law governing procurement by the Town;
    2. To permit the continued development of procurement policies and practices;
    3. To provide for increased public confidence in the procedures followed in public procurement;
    4. To ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal with the procurement system of the Town;
    5. To provide increased economy in Town procurement activities and to maximize to the fullest extent practicable the purchasing value of public funds of the Town;
    6. To foster effective broad-based competition within the free enterprise system;
    7. To provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement system of quality and integrity; and
    8. To obtain in a cost-effective and responsive manner the materials, services, and construction required by the Town to serve its citizens and businesses.
B. Applicability. 
    1. This article applies to:
        a. Every expenditure of public monies irrespective of their source, including federal assistance monies except as otherwise provided in this article, initiated after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article;
        b. The disposal of materials; and
        c. Contracts where there may be no expenditure of public monies but there is an offer of value to the business community.
    2. The following are exempt from the provisions of this article:
        a. Grants or donations awarded by the Mayor and Council;
        b. If the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract monies or is subject to state law, the Town shall comply with federal and state law and authorized regulations which are mandatorily applicable and which may not be reflected in this article;
        c. Complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, bequest, or cooperative agreement; and
        d. Development agreements, financial participation agreements, or contracts for municipal improvement districts entered into by the Town.
C. Definitions. 
    The words defined below shall have the meanings set forth below whenever they appear in this code, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires a different meaning.
    Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity.
    Change order means a written document authorized by the Procurement Agent which directs the contractor to make changes with or without the consent of the contractor.
    Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing any public facility, including any public structure, public building, or other public improvements of any kind to real property. It does not include the routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of any existing public facility, including structures, buildings, or real property.
    Contract means all types of agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement or disposal of supplies, services, or construction.
    Contract amendment or contract addendum means any written alteration in the terms and conditions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties of the contract.
    Contractor means any person who has a contract with the Town.
    Days, unless otherwise specified, means consecutive calendar days and shall be computed pursuant to A.R.S. 1-243.
    Designee means a duly authorized representative of a person holding a superior position.
    Disposal of material means sale of surplus property, Oro Valley Police Department unclaimed or seized property or obsolete property not needed by using agencies by public auction, competitive sealed bidding, small purchase procedures or any other appropriate method designated in this article.
    Electronic means electrical, digital, magnetic, optical, electromagnetic, or any other similar technology.
    Grant means the furnishing by the Town of assistance, whether financial or otherwise, to any person to support a program authorized by law. It does not include an award whose primary purpose is to procure an end product, whether in the form of supplies, services, or construction; a contract resulting from such an award is not a grant but a procurement contract.
    Manager means the Town Manager of the Town of Oro Valley, or designee.
    Materials means all property, including but not limited to, equipment, supplies, printing, insurance and buildings but does not include land, a permanent interest in land or leases of real property.
    May denotes the permissive.
    Minor informality means mistakes, or nonjudgmental errors, that have negligible effect on price, quantity, quality, delivery, or other contractual terms and the waiver or correction of such mistakes does not prejudice other bidders, offerors or respondents.
    Person means any corporation, consultant, business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization or group of individuals.
    Procurement means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any materials, services or construction. Procurement also includes all functions that pertain to the acquisition of any material, service or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation, negotiation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration.
    Procurement Agent means the person holding the position of Procurement Administrator who is the chief procurement authority for the Town, or designee.
    Public notice means the distribution or dissemination of information to interested parties using methods that are reasonably available. Such methods may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation, electronic mailing lists and a website maintained for that purpose.
    Services means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, consultant, subcontractor or subconsultant which does not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than required design documents or reports and performance. Services do not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. The definition of services includes, but is not limited to, consulting, personal, professional, legal counsel, auditing, technical, professional design and construction services.
    Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply, service, or construction item for delivery.
    Subcontractor or subconsultant means a person who contracts to perform work or render service to a contractor or consultant as defined by this section or to another subcontractor or subconsultant as a part of a contract with the Town.
    Town means the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona, a municipal corporation.
    Using agency means any organizational unit of the Town.
    Written or in writing means the product of any method for forming characters on paper, or other materials, or viewable screens, which can be read, retrieved, and reproduced, including information that is electronically transmitted and stored.
D. Public Access to Procurement Information. Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in A.R.S. Title 39 and shall be available to the public as provided in such statute.
E. Confidential Information. Confidential information shall be designated as follows:
    1. If a person believes that a bid, proposal, offer or specification contains information that should be withheld from public record, a statement advising the Procurement Agent of this fact should accompany the submission and the information shall be so identified wherever it appears.
    2. The information identified by the person as confidential may not be disclosed until the Procurement Agent makes a written determination.
    3. The Procurement Agent shall review the statement and information and may determine in writing that the information shall be withheld or disclosed.
    4. If the Procurement Agent determines to disclose the information, the Procurement Agent shall inform the person in writing of such determination. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-2 Procurement Organization
A. Authority. 
    1. The Procurement Agent shall serve as the central procurement and contracting authority for the Town.
    2. Consistent with the provisions of this code, the Procurement Agent may adopt operational procedures governing the procurement of all materials, services and construction procured by the Town and for the disposal of materials.
B. Duties. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the Procurement Agent shall, in accordance with regulations:
    1. Procure or supervise the procurement of all materials, services and construction needed by the Town.
    2. Establish guidelines for the management of all inventories of materials belonging to the Town.
    3. Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus materials belonging to the Town.
    4. Prepare, issue, revise, maintain, and monitor the use of specifications for materials, services and construction required by the Town.
The Procurement Agent may delegate procurement authority to designees or to any department or official of the Town.
The Procurement Agent may determine in writing that noncompliance with any provision of this article is nonsubstantial and may allow for correction or may waive minor informalities or irregularities. The basis for the decision shall be included in the determination. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-3 Source Selection and Contract Formation
A. Definitions. In this chapter unless the context requires otherwise:
    Best value means a technique in the competitive sealed bid process which permits the evaluation of objective criteria to determine the best overall value to the Town.
    Discussions means communication with an offeror, bidder or respondent for the purpose of:
        1. Eliminating minor irregularities, informalities, or apparent clerical mistakes in the offer or response;
        2. Clarifying any offer or response to assure full understanding of, and responsiveness to, solicitation requirements;
        3. Resolving minor variations in contract terms and conditions; or
        4. Establishing the competency or financial stability of any offeror, bidder or respondent.
    Invitation for bid means all documents, written or electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting bids in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this article.
    Negotiations means an exchange of information or any form of cooperation during which the offeror or respondent and the Town may alter or otherwise change the conditions, terms, and price, unless prohibited, of the proposed contract.
    Oro Valley business means a business which legally operates within the Town limits, has a current Oro Valley business license, and pays any applicable local business privilege tax to the Town of Oro Valley.
    Request for proposals means all documents, written or electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting proposals in accordance with procedures prescribed in this article.
    Request for qualifications means all documents, written or electronic, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting responses from qualified respondents in accordance with this article.
    Responsible bidder, offeror, or respondent means a person who has the capability to perform the contract requirements and the integrity and reliability which will assure good faith performance.
    Responsive bidder means a person who submits a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids.
    Solicitation means an invitation for bids, a request for technical proposals, a request for proposals, a request for qualifications, a request for quotations, or any other invitation or request by which the Town invites a person to participate in a procurement.
B. Methods of Source Selection. All Town procurements shall be made in accordance with one of the source selection methods identified in this article.
    1. Competitive Sealed Bidding. 
        a. Invitation for Bids. 
            i. Competitive sealed bids shall be solicited through an invitation for bids. The invitation for bids shall include specifications and any applicable evaluation criteria. Contractual terms and conditions may be included within the solicitation document or incorporated by reference.
            ii. A prequalification process may be conducted prior to the issuance of an invitation for bids in order to establish a list of qualified bidders. In the event a prequalification process is used, the Procurement Agent shall only consider bids that are submitted from prequalified bidders.
        b. Public Notice. Notice of the invitation for bids shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation or electronically posted and the invitation for bids shall be available for public inspection not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. A shorter time may be deemed necessary for a particular procurement as determined by the Procurement Agent. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening.
        c. Late Bids. A bid is late if it is received at the location designated in the invitation for bids after the time and date set for bid opening. The Town’s clock is the governing clock. A late bid shall be rejected. A late bid shall not be opened except for, if necessary, identification purposes. Such bids may be returned to the bidder. Bidders submitting bids that are rejected as late shall be so notified.
        d. Bid Opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The name of each bidder and the amount of each bid, as well as other relevant information as the Procurement Agent deems appropriate shall be recorded. Unless otherwise determined by the Procurement Agent, this record shall be open to public inspection. Unless otherwise determined by the Procurement Agent, the bids shall not be opened for public inspection until after a contract is awarded. After a notice of intent to award is issued, or in the absence of a notice of intent to award, after final execution of the contract, the bids shall be available for public inspection, except to the extent that the withholding of information is permitted or required by law. If the bidder designates a portion of its bid as confidential, it shall isolate and identify in writing the confidential portions in accordance with this article.
        e. Bid Acceptance and Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitations for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that is not set forth in the invitation for bids.
        f. Correction or Withdrawal of Bids; Cancellation of Awards.
            i. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received by the Town prior to the time set for bid opening.
            ii. Mistakes discovered after bid opening may be modified or withdrawn only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other bid provisions prejudicial to the interest of the Town or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a bidder alleging a mistake may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
                (A) The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
                (B) The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made.
                (C) All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the Procurement Agent.
        g. Contract Award. 
            i. General. The contract shall be awarded by appropriate notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid conforms in all material respects to requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.
            ii. Contract Award Based on Best Value. Contracts may be awarded on best-value analysis; provided, that the criteria for analysis were included in the invitation for bids in accordance with this article. The contract shall be awarded by appropriate written notice to the responsive, responsible bidder whose bid is determined to be the best value to the Town and that conforms in all material respects to requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.
            iii. Consideration of Taxes in Competitive Sealed Bidding. In evaluating the bids, except for procurement of construction, and for purposes of determining the low bidder, the Procurement Agent shall not include the amount of applicable business privilege tax. The amount of a city’s business privilege tax shall not be included in the evaluation except in those instances in which the award is between an Oro Valley business and an Arizona-based, non-Oro Valley business. In this event, the applicable city business privilege tax shall be included in the non-Oro Valley bidder’s price for evaluation purposes only to determine the lowest bidder.
            iv. Exceeding Available Funds. In the event the low responsive and responsible bid for a construction project exceeds available funds and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent, the Procurement Agent is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
            v. Low Tie Bids. If there are two or more low responsive bids from responsible bidders that are identical in price and other evaluation criteria and that meet all the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids, award may be made by random selection in a manner prescribed by the Procurement Agent.
            vi. Public Record. After the Town issues a notice of intent to award, or in the absence of a notice of intent to award upon final contract execution, the bids shall be available for public inspection, except to the extent that the withholding of information is permitted or required by law. If the bidder designates a portion of its bid as confidential, it shall isolate and identify in writing the confidential portions in accordance with this article.
    2. Competitive Sealed Proposals. 
        a. Request for Proposals. 
            i. Competitive sealed proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. The request for proposals shall include a scope of work and any applicable evaluation criteria. Contractual terms and conditions may be included within the solicitation document or incorporated by reference.
            ii. A prequalification process may be conducted prior to the issuance of a request for proposals in order to establish a list of qualified offerors. In the event a prequalification process is used, the Procurement Agent shall only consider proposals that are submitted from prequalified offerors.
        b. Public Notice. Notice of the request for proposals for bids shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation or electronically posted and the request for proposals shall be available for public inspection not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. A shorter time may be deemed necessary for a particular procurement as determined by the Procurement Agent. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of proposal opening.
        c. Late Proposals. A proposal is late if it is received at the location designated in the request for proposals after the time and date set for proposal opening. The Town’s clock is the governing clock. A late proposal shall be rejected. A late proposal shall not be opened except for, if necessary, identification purposes. Such proposals may be returned to the bidder. Offerors submitting proposals that are rejected as late shall be so notified.
        d. Receipt of Proposals. Proposals shall not be opened publicly. No proposals shall be handled as to permit disclosure of the contents of any proposal to competing offerors. Proposals shall be open for public inspection after a notice of intent to award is issued, or in the absence of a notice of intent to award, after final execution of the contract, except to the extent that the withholding of information is permitted or required by law. If the offeror designates a portion of its proposal as confidential, it shall isolate and identify in writing the confidential portions in accordance with this article.
        e. Evaluation of Proposals. The request for proposals shall state the criteria to be used in the evaluation of the proposals and shall include their relative importance. Specific numerical weighting is not required.
        f. Discussion with Offerors. Discussions may be conducted with offerors.
        g. Negotiations with Offerors and Revisions to Proposals. Negotiations may be conducted with offerors. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment in conducting negotiations and there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.
            i. Concurrent Negotiations. Negotiations may be conducted concurrently with offerors for the purpose of determining source selection and/or contract award.
            ii. Exclusive Negotiations. Exclusive negotiations may be conducted with the offeror whose proposal is determined in the source selection process to be most advantageous to the Town. Exclusive negotiations may be conducted subsequent to concurrent negotiations or may be conducted without requiring previous concurrent negotiations. If exclusive negotiations are conducted and an agreement is not reached, the Town may enter into exclusive negotiations with the next highest ranked offeror without the need to repeat the formal solicitation process.
        h. Contract Award. Contract award shall be made by the Procurement Agent to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the Town taking into consideration the evaluation criteria set forth in the request for proposals. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made.
    3. Contracting for Legal Counsel. 
        a. Authority. For the purpose of procuring the services of legal counsel, as defined by the laws of the state, contracts for the services of legal counsel shall be awarded with the authorization of the Town Attorney and the Town Manager except as otherwise provided by law.
        b. Conditions for Use. Unless determined by the Town Attorney and Town Manager that direct selection is in the best interest of the Town, the services of legal counsel shall be procured in accordance with this article.
    4. Small Purchases. Any contract not exceeding the formal solicitation threshold as established under the Arizona Procurement Code may be made by the Procurement Agent in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this article. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this article.
        a. Small Purchases Greater than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500). Insofar as it is practical for small purchases in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) but less than the formal solicitation threshold as established under the Arizona Procurement Code, no less than three (3) businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. Award shall be made to the responsible bidder submitting the quotation, which is most advantageous to the Town and conforms in all material respects to the solicitation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be maintained as a public record.
        b. Small Purchases Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500) or Less. The Procurement Agent shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) or less.
    5. Sole Source Procurement. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a contract may be awarded without competition when the Procurement Agent determines in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required material, service, or construction item. The using agency requesting a sole source procurement shall provide written evidence to support a sole source determination. The Procurement Agent may require that negotiations are conducted as to price, delivery, and terms. The Procurement Agent may require the submission of cost or pricing data in connection with an award under this section. Sole source procurement shall be avoided, except when no reasonable alternative sources exist.
    6. Emergency Procurements. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the Procurement Agent may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety; provided, that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. An emergency procurement shall be limited to those materials, services, or construction necessary to satisfy the emergency need. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file.
    7. Special Procurements. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the Procurement Agent may make or authorize others to make procurements above the small purchase amount specified in this article when, due to unusual or special circumstances, it would be in the best interest of the Town to accomplish the procurement without compliance with other methods of source selection contained in this article. The using agency requesting a special procurement shall provide written evidence to support a special procurement determination. Any special procurement under this section shall be limited to those materials, services, or construction necessary to satisfy the Town’s need and shall be made with sound fiscal discretion. A written determination of the basis for the special procurement and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be maintained as public record.
C. Cancellation or Rejection of Solicitations. An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, a request for qualifications or other solicitation may be cancelled, or any or all bids, proposals or statements of qualifications may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the best interest of the Town. The reason for cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file.
Notice of cancellation shall be publicly posted. The notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation, and where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation or any future procurement of similar items. Reason for rejection shall be provided upon request to the unsuccessful bidder, offeror or respondent.
D. Responsibility of Bidders, Offerors and Respondents. 
    1. Findings of Nonresponsibility. If a bidder, offeror or respondent who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found nonresponsible, a written finding of nonresponsibility, setting forth the basis of the finding, shall be prepared by the Procurement Agent or designee. The unreasonable failure of a bidder, offeror or respondent to promptly supply information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a finding of nonresponsibility with respect to such bidder or offeror. The written finding shall be made part of the contract file and be made a public record.
    Factors to be considered in determining if a prospective contractor is responsible include but are not limited to:
        a. The proposed bidder’s, offeror’s or respondent’s financial, physical, personnel or other resources, including subcontracts;
        b. The proposed bidder’s, offeror’s or respondent’s record of performance and integrity; and
        c. Whether the proposed bidder, offeror or respondent is qualified legally to contract with the Town.
    2. Right of Nondisclosure. Confidential information furnished by a bidder, offeror or respondent pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed by the Town or using agency, without prior written consent by the bidder, offeror or respondent.
    3. Bid and Contract Security, Material or Service Contracts. The Procurement Agent may require the submission of security to guarantee faithful bid and contract performance. In determining the amount and type of security required for each contract, the Procurement Agent shall consider the nature of the performance and the need for future protection to the Town. The requirement for security must be included in the solicitation. Failure to submit security in the amount and type of security required may result in the rejection of the bid or proposal.
E. Types of Contracts. Subject to the limitations of this article, any type of contract which will promote the best interests of this Town may be used.
F. Approval of Accounting System. The Procurement Agent may require that the proposed contractor’s accounting system is adequate to allocate costs in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting principles prior to award of a contract.
G. Multi-Year Contracts. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for materials, services or construction may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interest of the Town, if the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods are subject to the availability and appropriation of funds.
H. Right to Inspect. The Town may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant or place of business of a contractor, consultant or any subcontractor or subconsultant that is related to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the Town.
I. Right to Audit Records. The Town may, at reasonable times and places, audit the books and records of any person who submits cost or pricing data as provided in this article to the extent that the books and records relate to the cost or pricing data. Any person who is awarded a contract, change order or contract modification for which cost or pricing data is required shall maintain the books and records that relate to the cost or pricing data for three (3) years from the date of final payment under the contract, unless otherwise specified in the contract.
The Town is entitled to audit the books and records of a contractor, consultant or any subcontractor or subconsultant under any contract or subcontract to the extent that the books and records relate to the performance of the contract or subcontract. The books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of three (3) years from the date of final payment under the prime contractor or consultant, and by the subcontractor or subconsultant for a period of three (3) years from the date of final payment under the subcontract, unless otherwise specified in the contract.
J. Reporting of Anticompetitive Practices. When for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the Procurement Agent and the Town Attorney.
K. Retention of Procurement Records. All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules approved by the Town Clerk. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-4 Specifications
A. Maximum Practicable Competition. All specifications shall seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the Town’s needs and shall not be unduly restrictive.
To the extent practicable and unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, all specifications shall describe the Town’s requirements in a manner that does not unnecessarily exclude a material, service, or construction item.
Restrictive specifications shall not be used unless such specifications are required and it is not practicable or advantageous to use a less restrictive specification.
To the extent practicable, the Town shall use accepted commercial specifications and shall procure standard commercial materials.
B. Specifications. 
    1. Specifications Prepared by Other Than Town Personnel. The requirements of this article regarding the purposes and nonrestrictiveness of specifications shall apply to all specifications prepared other than by Town personnel, including, but not limited to, those prepared by architects, engineers, designers, and consultants for public contracts, or subcontractors. No person preparing specifications shall receive any direct or indirect benefit from the utilization of such specifications.
    2. Brand Name or Equal Specification. A brand name or equal specification may be used to describe the standards of quality, performance, and other characteristics needed to meet the requirements of a solicitation, and which invites offers for equivalent products from a manufacturer. Use of a brand name or equal is not intended to limit or restrict competition.
    3. Brand Name Specification. A brand name specification may be used to identify the sole acceptable item that meets the Town’s needs. The using agency requesting a brand name specification shall provide written evidence to support a brand name determination. A written determination by the Procurement Agent of the basis for the brand name shall be maintained as public record. Past success in the material’s performance, traditional purchasing practices, or inconvenience of drawing specifications do not justify the use of a brand name specification. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-5 Procurement of Professional Design Services, Construction and Construction Services
A. Definitions. In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
    Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. Does not include the routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.
    Construction-manager-at-risk means a project delivery method in which:
        1. There is a separate contract for design services and a separate contract for construction services.
        2. The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same time as the contract for design services or at a later time.
        3. Design and construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.
        4. Finance services, maintenance services, operations services, preconstruction services and other related services may be included.
    Construction services means either of the following for construction-manager-at-risk, design-build and job-order-contracting project delivery methods:
        1. Construction, excluding services, through the construction-manager-at-risk or job-order-contracting project delivery methods.
        2. A combination of construction and, as elected by the Town, one or more related services, such as finance services, maintenance services, operations services, design services and preconstruction services, as those services are authorized in the definitions of construction-manager-at-risk, design-build or job-order-contracting in this section.
    Design-bid-build means a project delivery method in which:
        1. There is a sequential award of two (2) separate contracts.
        2. The first contract is for design services.
        3. The second contract is for construction.
        4. Design and construction of the project are in sequential phases.
        5. Finance services, maintenance services and operations services are not included.
    Design-build means a project delivery method in which:
        1. There is a single contract for design services and construction services.
        2. Design and construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.
        3. Finance services, maintenance services, operations services, preconstruction services and other related services may be included.
    Finance services means financing for a construction services project.
    Job-order-contracting means a project delivery method in which:
        1. The contract is a requirements contract for indefinite quantities of construction.
        2. The construction to be performed is specified in job orders issued during the contract.
        3. Finance services, maintenance services, operations services, preconstruction services, design services and other related services may be included.
    Maintenance services means routine maintenance, repair and replacement of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.
    Operations services means routine operation of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.
    Preconstruction services means advice during the design phase.
    Professional design services means architect services, assayer services, engineering services, geologist services, landscape architect services, and land surveying services or any combination of those services that are legally required to be accomplished, reviewed, and approved by professionals registered to practice in the pertaining discipline in the State of Arizona.
B. Procurement of Construction. Contracts for construction shall be solicited through a competitive sealed bid process except as otherwise provided for in this article. The Procurement Agent shall award and administer contracts for construction in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. Title 34 and the Town Procurement Code.
C. Procurement of Professional Design Services. Contracts for professional design services shall be solicited through a request for qualifications except as otherwise provided for in this article. The Procurement Agent shall award and administer contracts for professional design services in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. Title 34 and the Town Procurement Code.
D. Procurement of Construction Services. Contracts for construction services shall be solicited through a design-build, construction-manager-at-risk or job-order-contracting selection process utilizing a request for qualifications except as otherwise provided for in this article. The Procurement Agent shall award and administer contracts for construction services in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. Title 34 and the Town Procurement Code.
E. Construction by Town Employees. Any building, structure, addition or alteration may be constructed either with or without the use of the Town’s regularly employed personnel without advertising for bids; provided, that the total cost of the work, excluding materials and equipment previously acquired by bid, does not exceed limits as established in A.R.S. Title 34-201. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-6 Contract Terms and Conditions
All Town contracts shall include clauses providing for adjustments in prices, time of performance, termination for default or convenience, liquidated damages as appropriate or other contract provisions as appropriate to define the rights and responsibilities of the parties to the contract. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-7 Cost Principles
A. Principles. The Procurement Agent shall establish cost principles which shall be used to determine the allowability of incurred costs for the purpose of reimbursing costs under contract provisions which provide for the reimbursement of costs.
B. Cost or Pricing Data. The submission of current cost or pricing data may be required in connection with any award, change order or contract modification. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-8 Materials Management
A. Definitions. In this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
    Property means supplies, materials, goods or fixed assets.
    Surplus property means property no longer needed by using agencies for their operations, property in poor or nonworking condition, or property that has become obsolete.
    Unclaimed, lost and confiscated property means all property used as evidence in the courts and remaining unclaimed after final disposition, property seized by a peace officer as being used unlawfully, and all property coming into the hands of any Town Officer or employee as lost or unclaimed.
B. Materials Management Guidelines. The Procurement Agent shall establish regulations governing:
    1. The sale, lease, or disposal of surplus property.
    2. The sale or disposition of unclaimed, lost or confiscated property.
C. Surplus Property Listing. Using agencies shall submit to the Procurement Agent, at such time and in such form prescribed, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or have become obsolete or worn out. A listing of surplus property shall be maintained and such property shall be transferred between departments and divisions as needed prior to pursuing any disposal method.
D. Disposal of Surplus Property. The Procurement Agent shall have the authority to dispose of any surplus property which it principally had a right to acquire. If the property cannot be used by any department or division or has become unsuitable for Town use, the Procurement Agent may pursue any disposal process which benefits the Town to include:
    1. Selling the surplus property at public auction, live or electronic.
    2. Trading the surplus property for credit against new purchases.
    3. Selling the surplus property through the competitive sealed bidding process after proper public notice.
    4. Consigning surplus property to third parties for sale upon terms advantageous to the Town. Such method may not be used unless, in the opinion of the Procurement Agent, it is the only viable disposal method available.
    5. Gifting to charity if in the opinion of the Procurement Agent the surplus property cannot otherwise be disposed of using any of the other methods described in this section.
E. Surplus Property Proceeds. All proceeds from the sale of surplus property, less selling expenses shall be deposited in the appropriate revenue account of the Town.
F. Disposition of Unclaimed, Lost or Confiscated Property. Unclaimed or lost property excluding knives, firearms, ammunition or other weapons may be transferred to using agencies upon submission of a detailed request from the using agency to the Procurement Agent.
Unless otherwise provided for, all remaining unclaimed, lost and confiscated property shall be disposed of in accordance with procedures established in this article. Proceeds of the auction, less selling expenses if applicable, will be deposited to the Town’s General Fund unless otherwise required.
G. Town Property Records. All surplus property sold at auction, traded, donated, or otherwise disposed of shall be reported to the Finance Department on the required forms for the purpose of updating applicable Town property registries. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-9 Legal and Contractual Remedies
A. Definitions. 
    Debarment means an action taken by the Procurement Agent under this article to prohibit a person from participating in Town procurements.
    Interested party means an actual or prospective bidder, respondent or offeror whose economic interest may be affected substantially and directly by the issuance of a solicitation, the award of a contract or by the failure to award a contract. Whether an economic interest exists will depend upon the circumstances of each case. An interested party does not include a supplier, subconsultant or subcontractor to an actual or prospective bidder, respondent or offeror.
    Suspension means an action taken by the Procurement Agent temporarily disqualifying a person from participating in Town procurements.
B. Protests. 
    1. Right to Protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or respondent who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the Town Manager.
    2. Authority to Resolve Protests. The Manager shall have the authority, prior to the commencement of an action in court concerning the controversy, to settle and resolve a protest of an aggrieved bidder, offeror, or contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of a contract. This authority shall be exercised in accordance with this article.
    3. Filing of a Protest. 
        a. Content of Protest. The protest shall be in writing and shall include the following information:
            i. The name, address, telephone number and email address of the protestant;
            ii. The signature of the protestant or its representative;
            iii. Identification of the solicitation or contract number;
            iv. A detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds of the protest including copies of relevant documents; and
            v. The form of relief requested.
        b. Time for Filing Protests. 
            i. A protest with respect to a solicitation shall be submitted in writing prior to the solicitation due date, unless the aggrieved person did not know and should not have known of the facts giving rise to the protest prior to the solicitation due date. In all cases the protest shall be submitted within ten (10) calendar days after such aggrieved person knows or should have known of the facts giving rise thereto. In no event shall the protest be filed later than ten (10) days following contract award.
            ii. The Manager, without waiving the Town’s right to dismiss the protest for lack of timeliness, may consider any protest that is not filed timely.
            iii. The Manager shall give notice of the protest to the successful contractor if award has been made or, if no award has been made, to all interested parties. Interested parties have the right to intervene.
    4. Stay of Procurements during the Protest. In the event of a timely protest, the Town may proceed further with the solicitation or with the award of the contract unless the Manager makes a written determination that there is a reasonable probability that the protest will be sustained or that the stay of procurement is not contrary to the substantial interests of the Town.
    5. Confidential Information. Material submitted by a protestant shall not be withheld from any interested party except to the extent that the withholding of information is permitted or required by law or as determined pursuant to this article.
    If the protestant believes the protest contains material that should be withheld, a statement advising the Manager of this fact shall accompany the protest submission in accordance with this article.
    6. Dismissal. The Manager may dismiss, upon a written determination, a protest if the protest is untimely pursuant to (citation to time for filing protests) or the protest does not contain a statement as to the legal or factual basis for protest.
    7. Decision. The Manager shall issue a written decision within twenty-one (21) days after a protest has been filed in accordance with this article. The decision shall contain an explanation of the basis of the decision.
    A copy of the decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the contractor.
    If the Manager fails to issue a decision within the time limits set forth this section, the protestant may proceed as if the Manager had issued an adverse decision.
    8. Remedies. If the Manager sustains the protest in whole or part and determines that a solicitation, evaluation process, proposed contract award, or contract award does not comply with the Town Procurement Code, the Manager shall implement an appropriate remedy. In determining an appropriate remedy, the Manager shall consider all the circumstances surrounding the procurement or proposed procurement including, but not limited to:
        a. The seriousness of the procurement deficiency;
        b. The degree of prejudice to other interested parties or to the integrity of the procurement process;
        c. The good faith of the parties;
        d. Costs to the Town; and
        e. The urgency of the procurement,
    An appropriate remedy may include one (1) or more of the following:
        a. Reject all bids, proposals or offers;
        b. Terminate the contract;
        c. Reissue the solicitation;
        d. Issue a new solicitation;
        e. Award a contract consistent with the Procurement Code;
        f. Such other relief as is determined necessary to ensure compliance with the code.
    9. Finality of Decision. Decisions issued in accordance with this article shall be final and conclusive.
C. Contract and Breach of Contract Controversies. 
    1. Applicability. This subsection applies to controversies between the Town and a contractor and which arise under, or by virtue of, a contract between them. This includes without limitation controversies based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract modification or rescission.
    2. Authority to Resolve Claims. The Procurement Agent shall have the authority, prior to the commencement of an action in court concerning the controversy, to settle and resolve a claim of a contractor as described in this article. This authority shall be exercised in accordance with this article.
    3. Content of Claim. The claim shall be in writing and shall include the following information:
        a. The name, address, telephone number and email address of the claimant;
        b. The signature of the claimant or its representative;
        c. Identification of the contract number;
        d. A detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds of the claim including copies of relevant documents; and
        e. The form of relief requested.
    4. Procurement Agent’s Decision. If a contract claim cannot be resolved by mutual agreement, the Procurement Agent shall, upon a written request by the contractor for a final decision, issue a written decision no more than sixty (60) days after the request is filed. Before issuing a final decision, the Procurement Agent shall review the facts pertinent to the contract claim or controversy and secure any necessary assistance from legal, financial, procurement, and other advisors.
        a. Decision. The decision shall include:
            i. A description of the claim;
            ii. A reference to the pertinent contract provision;
            iii. A statement of the factual areas of agreement or disagreement; and
            iv. A statement of the Procurement Agent’s decision, with supporting rationale.
        A copy of the decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the contractor.
        If the Procurement Agent fails to issue a decision within the time limits set forth this section, the protestant may proceed as if the Procurement Agent had issued an adverse decision.
    5. Finality of Decision. Decisions issued in accordance with this article shall be final and conclusive.
D. Debarment or Suspension. 
    1. Authority. The Procurement Agent has the sole authority to debar or suspend a person from participating in Town procurements.
    2. Debarment or Suspension Causes. The causes for debarment or suspension shall be limited to the following:
        a. Conviction of any person or any affiliate of any person for commission of a criminal offense arising out of obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract.
        b. Conviction of any person or any affiliate of any person under any statute of the federal government, this state or any other state for embezzlement, theft, fraudulent schemes and artifices, fraudulent schemes and practices, bid rigging, perjury, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, or receiving stolen property; or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a Town contractor and which conviction arises out of or obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract.
        c. Conviction or civil judgment finding a violation by any person or affiliate of any person under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the response to a solicitation.
        d. Violations of contract provisions within three (3) years of current debarment action, as set forth below, of a character which are reasonably deemed to be so serious as to justify debarment action:
            i. Abandonment of a contract without good cause; or
            ii. Knowingly fails without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or
            iii. Failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one (1) or more contracts, except that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment; or
            iv. Failure to pay a contractor, subcontractor or material provider as required by A.R.S. Section 32-1129.
            v. Any other cause that the Procurement Agent reasonably determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a Town contractor, including suspension or debarment of such person or any affiliate of such person by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this section.
    3. Initiation of Debarment. Upon receipt of information concerning a possible cause for debarment, the Procurement Agent may investigate the possible cause. If the Procurement Agent has a reasonable basis to believe that a cause for debarment exists, the Procurement Agent may debar a person in accordance with this article.
    4. Period of Debarment. The period of time for a debarment shall not exceed three (3) years from the date of the debarment determination.
    If debarment is based solely upon debarment by another governmental agency, the period of debarment may run concurrently with the period established by that other debarring agency.
    5. Notice of Debarment. 
        a. If the Procurement Agent implements debarment, the Procurement Agent shall notify the person in writing within seven (7) days of the debarment action.
        b. The notice of debarment shall state:
            i. The basis for debarment;
            ii. The period, including dates, of the debarment;
            iii. That bids, proposals or offers shall not be solicited or accepted from the person and, if received, will not be considered; and
            iv. That the person may request a meeting with the Procurement Agent to present additional facts pertinent to the case and request reconsideration of the decision to debar.
    6. Suspension. The Procurement Agent may suspend a person from receiving any award in order to protect the Town’s interests.
        a. Period and Scope of Suspension. The period of suspension shall not be more than sixty (60) days unless the Procurement Agent is informed of compelling reasons to extend the period of suspension.
        b. Notice of Suspension. If the Procurement Agent implements suspension, the Procurement Agent shall notify the person in writing within seven (7) days of the suspension action. The person may submit a request to the Procurement Agent for an administrative hearing within fourteen (14) days of issuance of the Procurement Agent’s suspension action. If a hearing is granted, it shall be conducted in accordance with this article.
        The notice of suspension shall state:
            i. The basis for suspension;
            ii. The period, including dates, of the suspension;
            iii. That bids or proposals shall not be solicited or accepted from the person and, if received, will not be considered; and
            iv. That the person may request a meeting with the Procurement Agent to present additional facts pertinent to the case and request reconsideration of the decision to suspend.
            v. If a debarred or suspended party requests reconsideration by the Procurement Agent, the Procurement Agent shall issue a decision to reinstate or uphold the prior decision within fourteen (14) days of the meeting.
    7. Reinstatement. The Procurement Agent may at any time after a final decision on debarment or suspension reinstate a debarred or suspended person or rescind the debarment or suspension upon a determination that the cause upon which the debarment or suspension is based no longer exists.
    Any debarred or suspended person may request reinstatement by submitting a petition to the Procurement Agent supported by documentary evidence showing that the cause for debarment or suspension no longer exists or has been substantially mitigated.
    The Procurement Agent may require a hearing on the request for reinstatement.
    The decision on reinstatement shall be in writing and specify the factors on which it is based.
E. Judicial Review of Protests, Claims, Debarments or Suspensions. Any final decision of the Procurement Agent of a protest, claim, debarment or suspension under this article is subject to special action review by any party to the proceeding. Exhaustion of the procedures set forth in this code shall be a condition precedent to seeking judicial review and the party seeking review shall file the complaint within thirty (30) days of a final decision by the Procurement Agent.
F. Exclusive Remedy. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, this article shall provide the exclusive procedure for asserting a claim or cause of action against this Town arising in relation to any procurement conducted under this article. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Section 3-4-10 Cooperative Procurement
A. Definitions. In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
    Cooperative procurement means procurement conducted by, or on behalf of, more than one (1) public procurement unit.
    Public procurement unit means any state, county, city, town, and any other political subdivision, public authority, educational, health or other institution, and to the extent provided by law, any other entity which expends public funds for the procurement of supplies, services and construction, and any not-for-profit entity.
B. Cooperative Procurement Authorized. The Town may participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative procurement agreement for the procurement of any materials, services, or construction with one (1) or more public procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Parties under a cooperative procurement agreement may:
    1. Sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative agreement for the procurement or disposal of any materials, services, or construction.
    2. Cooperatively use materials or services.
    3. Commonly use or share warehousing facilities, capital equipment and other facilities.
    4. Provide personnel, except that the requesting eligible procurement unit may pay the public procurement unit providing the personnel the direct and indirect cost of providing the personnel, in accordance with the agreement.
    5. On request, make available to other eligible public procurement units informational, technical or other services that may assist in improving the efficiency or economy of procurement. The public procurement unit furnishing the informational or technical services has the right to request reimbursement for the reasonable and necessary costs of providing such services.
    6. All payments received by a public procurement unit supplying personnel or services shall be available to the supplying public procurement unit to defray the cost of the cooperative program.
The activities described in subsections (B)(1) through (6) of this section do not limit the activities of parties under a cooperative procurement agreement. ((O)08-03, Enacted,  02/20/2008)

Article 3-5 PLANNING AND ZONING

Sections:
3-5-1        Planning and Zoning Commission
3-5-2        Town Zoning Code
3-5-3        Planning and Zoning Director
3-5-4        Repealed
3-5-5        Board of Adjustment

Section 3-5-1 Planning and Zoning Commission
There is hereby established a planning and zoning commission for the Town of Oro Valley to consist of not less than five nor more than seven members, each of whom shall be a resident of the town, to be appointed by the council. The members of the planning commission shall serve at the pleasure of the council for two-year terms providing nothing herein shall affect the expiration of the current terms of said planning commission. The members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation; however, members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties upon authorization or ratification by the commission and approval of such expenditures by the council.

Section 3-5-2 Town Zoning Code
That certain document entitled the “Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised” as adopted by Ordinance No. 58, 12 March, 1981 and amendments thereto is made a part of this chapter the same as though specifically set forth in full herein; and at least three copies of which shall be filed in the office of the town clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.

Section 3-5-3 Planning and Zoning Director
There is hereby created the office of planning and zoning director. The planning and zoning director shall be appointed by the town manager and shall be charged with responsibility for enforcement of the zoning code. The town manager may appoint assistants to the planning and zoning director with or without specific duties. ((O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Section 3-5-4 Repealed
Repealed by (O)17-05. ((O)12-18, Amended,  10/17/2012; (O)11-17, Added,  06/01/2011)

Section 3-5-5 Board of Adjustment
A. The Town of Oro Valley Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members. Members shall serve two year terms. Members must be Oro Valley residents. Members will be appointed to the Board of Adjustment by the Town Council as per the adopted policy for “Appointments to Boards, Commissions and Advisory Bodies of the Town.” ((O)01-22, Amended,  09/19/2001)

Article 3-6 ADVISORY BOARDS

Sections:
3-6-1        Creation and Duties
3-6-2        Term of Office and Membership
3-6-3        Reserved
3-6-4        Officers Designated, Meetings, and Rules of Procedure
3-6-5        Limitation of Authority
3-6-6        Liaison
3-6-7        Powers and Duties of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
3-6-8        Oro Valley Water Utility Commission
3-6-9        Repealed

Section 3-6-1 Creation and Duties
The Town Council may create from time to time advisory boards of three (3), five (5), or seven (7) members who are residents of the Town for the purpose of examining areas dealing with subject matters as defined by the Council by board name and Council designation of areas for board study. The board shall submit recommendations for the Council’s information and possible action. ((O)11-04, Amended,  02/02/2011)

Section 3-6-2 Term of Office and Membership
Members of a board shall serve at the pleasure of the Council for a term not exceeding three (3) years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the Council for an unexpired term. Members shall serve without compensation and shall be residents of the Town and not members of any other Town body. ((O)11-04, Amended,  02/02/2011)

Section 3-6-3 Reserved
((O)11-04, Amended,  02/02/2011)

Section 3-6-4 Officers Designated, Meetings, and Rules of Procedure
The board shall elect its own officers annually and shall conduct its meetings in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order and Town Council parliamentary rules and procedures and code of conduct as may be amended by the Council for the use of all commissions and boards and shall adhere to all open meetings laws of the State of Arizona. Board meetings shall be regularly scheduled, legally noticed, and held once a month. Special meetings may be called by the chair with at least twenty-four (24) hours’ notice or by any three (3) board members with at least forty-eight (48) hours’ notice under the same conditions as set forth for the Mayor and Council under Section 2-4-2. Agendas shall be posted and meeting minutes taken and both shall be filed with the Town Clerk. ((O)11-04, Amended,  02/02/2011)

Section 3-6-5 Limitation of Authority
Advisory boards shall not have authority to commit the Town of Oro Valley to any agreements with public or private organizations or discuss financial arrangements. ((O)11-04, Amended,  02/02/2011; (O)95-11, Amended,  03/01/1995)

Section 3-6-6 Liaison
The Town Manager or his or her designee from the Town staff shall serve as an ex officio non-voting member of the board to facilitate reports to the Council and shall attend such meeting as he or she deems necessary or as a function of the board’s agenda. ((O)11-04, Amended,  02/02/2011)

Section 3-6-7 Powers and Duties of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
A. To act in an advisory capacity to the Town Council in matters pertaining to parks and recreation, parks design, open space and trail use (prior to the review comments being submitted to other boards, commissions or the Council). The board’s powers shall be limited to an advisory role with the Parks and Recreation Director and/or the Town Council and shall not provide directions to Town employees regarding the activities of staff, parks operations or recreation programs.
B. As with any board, commission or committee, all requests for use of any Town staff time and resources must be approved by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
C. Give advice to the Town Council and the Parks and Recreation Director for general priorities at budget time for those items (other than administrative functions as determined by the Town Manager and the Department Head) relating to park development and recreation programs. This involves a yearly review and update of the five (5) year plan for park land acquisition and capital improvements as prepared by the Parks and Recreation Director.
D. Give due attention and study to the recreation, open space, trails and park services as they affect the residents of Oro Valley.
E. Make policy recommendations, keeping in mind that the final adoption of the policy is the prerogative of the Council. ((O)13-17, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)11-04, Amended,  02/02/2011; (O)95-30, Amended,  05/17/1995; (O)95-30, Amended,  05/17/1995)

Section 3-6-8 Oro Valley Water Utility Commission
The Oro Valley Water Utility Commission is created and defined by Article 15-4. It will operate in accordance with all provisions of Article 15-4 and the Water Policies as adopted by Town Council. ((O)98-04, Amended,  01/21/1998)

Section 3-6-9 Repealed
Repealed by (O)11-17. ((O)08-17, Added,  09/03/2008)

Article 3-7 SETTLEMENT AUTHORITY

Sections:
3-7-1        Settlement Authority In General

Section 3-7-1 Settlement Authority In General
No settlement of any kind or description, payment of which is to be made from funds of the Town or which settlement would result in the Town receiving services or compensation less than owed to the Town, shall be made by any officer, employee, or agent of the Town, except in the manner set forth in this Article.
A. Under $10,000. Whenever any contemplated settlement of a claim by or against the Town is for the sum of not more than $10,000, after due consideration and in the best interest of the residents of the Town, the Town Attorney, in consultation with the Town’s Risk Manager, is authorized to settle said claim.
B. Greater than $10,000 but not more than $20,000. Whenever any contemplated settlement of a claim by or against the Town is for greater than $10,000 but not more than $20,000, after due consideration and in the best interest of the Town, the Town Manager, in consultation with the Town Attorney and the Town’s Risk Manager, is authorized to settle said claim.
C. Greater than $20,000. No settlement of more than $20,000 shall be entered into except with the approval of the Council. ((O)02-03, Enacted,  01/09/2002)

CHAPTER 4 PUBLIC SAFETY

Articles:
4-1          Police Department

Article 4-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:
4-1-1        Created; Composition
4-1-2        Appointment of Officers
4-1-3        Compensation of Officers
4-1-4        Departmental Rules and Regulations
4-1-5        Duties of Police Department
4-1-6        Answering Calls Outside the Town
4-1-7        Official Recognition of the F.O.P. Lodge No. 53
4-1-8        Public Employee Relations and Processes

Section 4-1-1 Created; Composition
There is hereby created a Police Department for the Town which shall consist of a Chief of Police who shall also serve as Town Marshal, and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the Council for the safety and good order of the Town.

Section 4-1-2 Appointment of Officers
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Council shall appoint police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the Town.

Section 4-1-3 Compensation of Officers
The Chief of Police and the police officers of the Town shall be compensated as determined by the Council. The Chief of Police shall not receive any perquisites, commissions or compensation for his services as Chief of Police, Town Marshal or Tax Collector except as the Council may prescribe.

Section 4-1-4 Departmental Rules and Regulations
The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the Council.

Section 4-1-5 Duties of Police Department
It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the Chief of Police, to:
A. Enforce this code and the statutes of the State of Arizona within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and charge the violators thereof.
B. Take charge of the Town jail, if any, and all prisoners confined therein, and all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public works of the Town and to see that orders and sentences with reference to such are fully executed and complied with.
C. Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail upon conviction of a crime committed under the jurisdiction of the magistrate’s court to any authorized officer of the Town who shall at any time demand such prisoners. Any such authorized person so demanding and receiving such prisoners shall work such prisoners on the streets or alleys of the Town or on any and all authorized work as may be determined by the Council.
D. Render such account of the Police Department, its duties and receipts as may be required by the Council, and keep records of the office open to inspection by the Council at any time.
E. Direct traffic and ensure the orderly flow thereof and investigate and make reports of traffic accidents.
F. Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic control devices of every description which have been erected within the Town on the authority of the Council and to notify the Council of any defects found therein.
G. Perform such additional duties as may be required by the Council.

Section 4-1-6 Answering Calls Outside the Town
The members of the Police Department of the Town are duly authorized to answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the Town pursuant to mutual aid agreements and State statutes.

Section 4-1-7 Official Recognition of the F.O.P. Lodge No. 53
Public Safety Employee Associations are formally recognized as non-exclusive representatives of commissioned Oro Valley police officers with a rank of Sergeant or lower. ((O)03-27, Amended,  08/20/2003; (O)99-33, Amended, )

Section 4-1-8 Public Employee Relations and Processes
A. Preamble. The citizens of Oro Valley have a fundamental interest in the development of harmonious and cooperative relations between management, elected officials, administrators and public safety employees of the Town.
Public safety employees have the right to join employee associations which comply with the laws of Arizona and to present proposals and testimony to the Town Council, and not to be discharged, disciplined or discriminated against because of the exercise of those rights.
The Town of Oro Valley, its public safety employees and employee associations have a basic obligation to the public to assure the orderly and continuous operations and functions of government.
Strikes, work stoppages, slowdowns, and other concerted efforts designed to disrupt Town of Oro Valley services, are contrary to the public good and are strictly prohibited.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to obligate the Town management, public safety employees and their representatives, acting within the framework of law, to enter into discussions with an affirmative willingness to communicate and resolve issues that significantly impact working conditions. It is also the purpose of this section to promote harmonious employer-employee relations by providing a uniform basis for recognizing the right of public safety employees to join, or to refrain from joining, an association of their own choice. Also, it is their right to be represented by such association(s) in their dealings with the Town in accordance with the provisions of this section. Additionally, this section provides that the results of agreements between the employer and its public safety employees shall be drafted into written Memorandums of Understanding.
C. Public Safety Employee Group. The employees eligible to participate in determining annual representation, in accordance with subsection (D) of this section, include: police officers with the rank of sergeant and below who are not in the academy, in field training or on reserve status, and/or the bailiff, as of August 1st of each year.
D. Representation. Employee associations wishing to represent public safety employees shall submit a memorandum to the Town Manager by August 1st of each year, indicating their desire to represent the public safety employee group.
In the event that only one employee association seeks to represent the public safety employee group, the Town Manager shall designate that employee association as the official organization for representation purposes provided for by this section.
In the event there is more than one employee association seeking to represent the public safety employee group, authorized representation for the group shall be determined by the presentation of a petition to the Town Manager containing the signatures of at least fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the employees in the public safety employee group by September 1st. The petition shall identify the employee association designated to represent those employees. Upon verification of the signatures by the Town Clerk and Human Resources Department, the Town Manager shall designate the named employee association as the official organization for representation purposes provided for by this section.
After the representative association is designated, the public safety employee group shall designate a Public Safety Negotiation Committee (“PSNC”) comprised of four (4) members of the public safety employee group.
E. Meeting and Conferring. By October 1st, the Town Manager or his/her designee shall notify the association and the PSNC of the selection and names of the Management Negotiation Committee (“MNC”) members. The PSNC shall submit proposals relating to wages, benefits, hours, safety regulations and other working conditions by November 30th of each year to the Town Manager or his/her designee.
Upon receiving a proposal from the PSNC, the Town Manager or his/her designee shall submit a written response to the proposal within a reasonable time thereafter which shall be not more than forty-five (45) days after the receipt of the proposal.
Within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the Town Manager’s response, the PSNC and the MNC shall begin “meeting and conferring” at mutually agreed upon locations and times, for the purpose of entering into a written Memorandum of Understanding. The process shall be conducted in good faith by both parties. Meetings shall take place until an agreement is reached, or impasse is declared. Time spent by the PSNC in meet and confer-related meetings shall be regular duty hours. Regular duty hours time spent in non-negotiation meet and confer-related meetings shall be reasonable and require prior approval by Police Department Command Staff.
Any final agreement reached by the MNC and the PSNC shall be in writing and signed by authorized persons. Those areas not agreed to shall be outlined as matters in dispute.
Not later than April 15th, all areas of agreement, as well as those matters in dispute shall be brought forward at the next practical Town Council meeting. With due consideration of all matters, the Town Council may accept, reject, or modify those areas of agreement. The Town Council may also take whatever actions they feel appropriate with regard to those matters in dispute. Final action by the Town Council shall constitute the Memorandum of Understanding for the following fiscal year only.
All time limits in this section may be waived by mutual agreement of the MNC and the PSNC.
F. Conflict with Arizona State Law.  In the event that any provision of this section is in conflict with Arizona State law, including the Arizona Constitution, statutes, or court decisions, then to the extent of the conflict Arizona state law shall prevail over this section. Any such conflict shall not impair the validity of all other provisions herein not in conflict with Arizona State law. ((O)14-03, Amended,  03/05/2014; (O)05-44, Amended,  11/02/2005; (O)04-28, Amended,  10/06/2004; (O)03-27, Amended,  08/20/2003; (O)99-34, Amended,  04/21/1999)

CHAPTER 5 MAGISTRATE

Articles:
5-1          Magistrate Court Established; Jurisdiction
5-2          Presiding Officer
5-3          Proceedings of Court
5-4          Jury
5-5          Magistrate Court Fees

Article 5-1 MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION
(Reserved)

Article 5-2 PRESIDING OFFICER

Sections:
5-2-1        Town Magistrate
5-2-2        Pro-Tempore Magistrates
5-2-3        Powers and Duties of Town Magistrate
5-2-4        Hearing Officer

Section 5-2-1 Town Magistrate
The presiding officer of the magistrate’s court shall be the town magistrate who shall be appointed by the town council. The town magistrate shall serve an initial term of two (2) years and subsequent terms of four (4) years, if reappointed, with the beginning and end of each term to be specified at the time of appointment/reappointment. During such term, the Town Magistrate may be removed only for cause by a majority vote of the Town Council. ((O)03-10, Amended,  04/16/2003; (O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Section 5-2-2 Pro-Tempore Magistrates
Special Magistrates shall be appointed in accordance with Administrative Order No. 2002-66 of the Arizona Supreme Court, and Administrative Order 2002-1 of the Oro Valley Magistrate Court, whereby Administrative Order 2002-1 of the Oro Valley Magistrate Court was made a public record of the Town of Oro Valley by Resolution No. (R)03-09. ((O)03-04, Amended,  02/19/2003; (O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Section 5-2-3 Powers and Duties of Town Magistrate
The powers and duties of the magistrate shall include:
A. The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him under the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this code and the ordinances and resolutions of the town.
B. The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and the proceedings of the court therein.

Section 5-2-4 Hearing Officer
The town council may appoint one or more hearing officers to preside over civil traffic violation cases when, in their opinion, the appointment of such hearing officers is necessary to assure prompt disposition of civil traffic violation cases. Hearing officers may hear and dispose of civil traffic violation cases. Hearing officers shall be supervised by the presiding officer of the Oro Valley Magistrate’s Court. ((O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Article 5-3 PROCEEDINGS OF COURT

Sections:
5-3-1        Proceedings of Court

Section 5-3-1 Proceedings of Court
The proceedings of the court shall be conducted in accordance with the state constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the state supreme court pertaining to police courts.

Article 5-4 JURY

Sections:
5-4-1        Jury

Section 5-4-1 Jury
A. The formation, summoning, drawing, disposition of names and the impaneling of jurors in the police court of the town shall be accomplished in the same manner as provided for in courts of record as more fully set forth in Title 21, Chapter 3, of the Arizona Revised Statutes (Section 21-301 through Section 21-351), and as hereafter may be provided.
B. For the selection of potential jurors, the list of registered voters shall be furnished by the clerk of the Board of Supervisors of Pima County.

Article 5-5 MAGISTRATE COURT FEES

Sections:
5-5-1        Fees

Section 5-5-1 Fees
A. Fees. The Oro Valley Magistrate Court is authorized to impose the following fees and allocate charges to the parties who have caused the charges to be incurred.
    1. Default Judgment Fee. The Court shall order the payment of a $50.00 fee by each defendant who fails to appear on a civil traffic violation filed in the Court or fails to pay the civil sanction as ordered, unless the default is set pursuant to the Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases.
    2. Warrant Administrative Fee.  The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $65.00 by each defendant for whom the Court enters an arrest warrant for failure to appear, or for failure to pay any fine, restitution, or other Court imposed fee or obligation, or failure to comply with any other Court order. This fee shall be added to any amounts owed by the defendant.
    3. Order to Show Cause Fee.  The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $65.00 by any defendant for whom the court issues an Order to Show Cause to enforce any Court order.
    4. NSF Check Fee.  The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $25.00 by any person paying the Court with a check that is dishonored by a financial institution for insufficient funds. This fee will be in addition to any fees imposed on the Court by the bank or financial institution for processing the dishonored check or financial instrument.
    5. Probation Monitoring Fee.  The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $30.00 per month by all defendants who are placed on monitored probation. The fee shall be paid to and collected by the probation monitor. The probation monitor in his/her discretion may waive or reduce the fee. The fee may be terminated if the probation becomes unsupervised.
    6. Collection Fees.  A defendant who fails to fulfill his/her obligation to pay to the Court any fines, sanctions, restitution, surcharges, assessments, jail costs, court appointed attorneys fees, shall be liable for any fees and/or costs associated with the collection of those obligations to the Court, including, but not limited to, any fees and charges of a collection agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 9, Article 2 of Title 32 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, that may be retained by the Town to collect those monies, and any attorney’s fees incurred by the Town or its agents in its efforts to collect unpaid amounts.
    7. Jail Cost Fee. The Court may, pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 28-1444, as a part of a sentence imposed by the Court order a person sentenced to serve time in jail to reimburse the Town of Oro Valley for all or part of the actual cost of his/her incarceration incurred by the Town as a result of that incarceration at the daily rates charged to the Town by the jail.
    8. Debt Setoff Fee. A fee of $9.00 shall be assessed to each defendant when the defendant’s case is entered into the Debt Setoff System.
    9. Diversion Monitoring Fee.  Each defendant who is allowed to enter a diversion program or deferred prosecution agreement, will be charged a $25.00 fee to cover the added cost of monitoring his/her compliance with the diversion program or agreement. This shall not apply to those entering the Defensive Driving School or the Suspended Driver License Diversion Program.
    10. Community Service Monitoring Fee.  Each defendant allowed to complete community service in lieu of paying any fine, fee or surcharge shall be charged a fee of $5.00 to cover part of the cost of monitoring his or her progress on completing the community service.
    11. Repealed.
    12. Reserved.
    13. Jury Cancellation Fee.  The Magistrate Court may, in its discretion, order payment of a $200 Jury Cancellation Fee by a person (as defined in Town Code, Article 1-3) who cancels or whose conduct results in the cancellation of a jury trial after the jury pool has been summoned if the Court determines that the cancellation was reasonably avoidable.
    14. Court Security Fee.  The court shall order the payment of a $13.66 court security fee by each defendant at the time the fine or sanction on a case is assessed. The court may waive the fee in cases where the defendant is indigent or in the interests of justice.
B. Waiver of Fees.  A Judge or Hearing Officer may waive part or all of any fee imposed by this Article if the Court finds the defendant is indigent, it would cause a hardship on the defendant or his/her family, or if the Judge or Hearing Officer is of the opinion such waiver would be in the interests of justice.
C. Collection of Fees. In addition to any other remedies, which may be allowed by law, the Town Attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the fee(s) referred to in this Article. ((O)11-29, Amended,  11/16/2011; (O)10-03A, Amended,  03/24/2010; (O)07-17, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)06-08, Amended,  05/03/2006; (O)05-47, Amended,  12/21/2005; (O)03-05, Enacted,  02/19/2003)

CHAPTER 6 BUILDING

Articles:
6-1          Building Code
6-2          Electrical Code
6-3          Mechanical Code
6-4          Plumbing Code
6-5          Swimming Pool Code
6-6          Building Official
6-7          Repealed
6-8          Fire Code
6-9          Building Safety Board of Appeals
6-10         Historic Preservation Code

Article 6-1 BUILDING CODE

Sections:
6-1-1        Building Code
6-1-2        Conformance with Zoning Ordinance
6-1-3        Adoption of Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
6-1-4        Building Valuation Data Schedule and Construction Permit Fee Schedules
6-1-5        Repealed
6-1-6        Repealed
6-1-7        Residential Code
6-1-8        Fuel Gas Code
6-1-9        Energy Conservation Code
6-1-10       Property Maintenance Code

Section 6-1-1 Building Code
A. The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted building code is the “2018 International Building Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona.
B. The use of minimum requirements specified in this Code does not guarantee, implicitly or explicitly, the safety of any building or structure subject to this Code. All buildings or structures subject to this Code shall submit to a commonly accepted rational analysis and shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements stated herein. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-05, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-03, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)06-04, Amended,  03/15/2006; (O)04-39, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-31, Amended,  02/01/2001; (O)95-85, Amended,  12/06/1995)

Section 6-1-2 Conformance with Zoning Ordinance
Whenever a building permit is issued and a building inspection performed, such building must conform to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town in addition to the provisions of this chapter.

Section 6-1-3 Adoption of Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
That certain document known as the “Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1994 Edition,” three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona, which documents were made a public record by Resolution No. 95-53, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, any provisions thereof to become effective on the January 1, 1996.

Section 6-1-4 Building Valuation Data Schedule and Construction Permit Fee Schedules
Those certain documents known as the “Oro Valley Building Valuation Data Schedule and Construction Permit Fee Schedules,” three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona, which documents were made a public record by Resolution No. (R)04-79, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, any provisions thereof to become effective on January 20, 2005. “Valuation Data Schedule and Construction Permit Fee Schedules” are located under the Community Development website under Building Safety. ((O)04-42, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-24, Amended,  06/21/2000; (O)95-85, Amended,  12/06/1995)

Section 6-1-5 Repealed
Repealed by (O)08-23. ((O)99-56, Enacted,  10/27/1999; (O)97-28, Enacted,  09/03/1997)

Section 6-1-6 Repealed
Repealed by (O)05-09. ((O)00-18, Added, )

Section 6-1-7 Residential Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted residential code is the “2018 International Residential Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-06, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)09-12, Amended,  06/17/2009; (O)09-11, Amended,  06/17/2009; (O)07-04, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)04-33, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-32, Enacted,  02/01/2001)

Section 6-1-8 Fuel Gas Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted fuel gas code is the “2018 International Fuel Gas Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-09, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-05, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)04-37, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-35, Enacted,  02/01/2001)

Section 6-1-9 Energy Conservation Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted energy conservation code is the “2018 International Energy Conservation Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-12, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-06, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)04-35, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-36, Enacted,  02/01/2001)

Section 6-1-10 Property Maintenance Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted property maintenance code is the “2018 International Property Maintenance Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-11, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-07, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)04-40, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-37, Enacted,  02/01/2001)

Article 6-2 ELECTRICAL CODE

Sections:
6-2-1        Electrical Code

Section 6-2-1 Electrical Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted electrical code is the “2017 National Electrical Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-14, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-08, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)04-41, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-40, Amended,  02/01/2001)

Article 6-3 MECHANICAL CODE

Sections:
6-3-1        Mechanical Code

Section 6-3-1 Mechanical Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted mechanical code is the “2018 International Mechanical Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-08, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-09, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)04-34, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-34, Amended,  02/01/2001; (O)95-85, Amended,  12/06/1995)

Article 6-4 PLUMBING CODE

Sections:
6-4-1        Plumbing Code

Section 6-4-1 Plumbing Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted plumbing code is the “2018 International Plumbing Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-07, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-10, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)04-38, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)00-33, Amended,  02/01/2001; (O)95-85, Amended,  12/06/1995)

Article 6-5 SWIMMING POOL CODE

Sections:
6-5-1        Swimming Pool Code

Section 6-5-1 Swimming Pool Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted swimming pool code is the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-13, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)08-19, Amended,  09/17/2008)

Article 6-6 BUILDING OFFICIAL

Sections:
6-6-1        Building Official
6-6-2        Extended Construction Hours Work Permit

Section 6-6-1 Building Official
The Building Official shall review all residential and commercial building plans and make inspections for compliance with the Town Building Codes and applicable state and government requirements. He shall perform other related duties as required. The Building Official shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Manager. ((O)93-06, Amended,  03/17/1993)

Section 6-6-2 Extended Construction Hours Work Permit
A. Construction, demolition, excavation or grading may be extended beyond the hours specified in Section 10-1-4(B)(6) with an Extended Construction Hours Work Permit (ECHWP).
B. To receive an ECHWP, an application must be filed with the Building Official and the Town Engineer at least seven (7) days prior to commencement of work.
C. The ECHWP application must include:
    1. An application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00);
    2. Explanation of circumstances that justify the issuance of the permit;
    3. Supplementary documentation demonstrating need for permit (i.e., a Critical Path Method Schedule or any other scientific documentation);
    4. An explanation of any mitigation measures that will be taken to reduce the impact of the off-hours construction work; and
    5. A detailed schedule of proposed dates and times that work will be performed.
D. An ECHWP may only be granted if the Building Official and Town Engineer determine that all of the following conditions are met:
    1. Circumstances exist that justify the issuance of the permit to include, but not limited to:
        a. Weather or other environmental conditions interfere with completing the necessary work during allowed construction hours;
        b. Obstruction or interference with traffic would improve public safety or be less objectionable at night than during the daytime;
        c. Construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed work site would be less objectionable at off hours than during the allowed hours because of different population levels or different neighboring activities;
        d. The proposed construction activities need to be executed in a continuous, uninterrupted manner to ensure satisfactory completion;
        e. Economic hardship is not the primary justification given by the applicant.
    2. The application presents the least intrusive means of completing the necessary work; and
    3. The application has provided sufficient mitigation measures.
E. An approved ECHWP shall specify the dates and hours when off-hours construction work will be allowed and any mitigation measures that must be taken including, but not limited to:
    1. Restrictions on lighting;
    2. Limitations as to the amount, intensity and duration of noise created by the construction;
    3. Measures to lessen the impact of any vibration that may be caused by the off-hours construction.
F. Notice. 
    1. In the event an ECHWP is approved, the holder of the permit has the responsibility to notify all property owners within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the site where off-hours construction will occur. Notification shall be made to all property owners for which any portion of their property falls within the notification radius.
    2. The Building Official and Town Engineer may specify that notice be given to property owners outside the five hundred (500) foot radius.
    3. Notification shall occur in the form specified by the Building Official either through the use of door hangers or by first class mail.
    4. Regardless of the method of notification used, all required property owners shall be notified no less than forty-eight (48) hours of the time off-hours construction is due to begin.
    5. The permit holder shall bear all costs associated with notification.
G. An ECHWP shall only be valid for those dates and times specified within the permit. Any work completed outside the approved dates and times shall be deemed a violation of this section.
H. A copy of an approved ECHWP shall be maintained at the construction site where the permitted work is to be performed and shall be presented upon request of any Town official.
I. Any violation of the conditions specified within the ECHWP shall result in an immediate revocation of the permit.
J. Violation of this section is a civil infraction carrying a potential penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Additionally, the Town may pursue injunctive relief against any person or company acting in violation of this section.
K. Appeals. 
    1. An applicant may appeal the decision of the Building Official and Town Engineer to deny an ECHWP application to the Town Council.
    2. Appeals must be filed with the Town Clerk within ten (10) business days of initial decision. ((O)08-09, Enacted,  05/07/2008)

Article 6-7 none
Repealed.

Article 6-8 FIRE CODE

Sections:
6-8-1        Adoption of Fire Code
6-8-2        Repealed
6-8-3        Repealed
6-8-4        Repealed
6-8-5        Repealed
6-8-6        Repealed
6-8-7        Repealed
6-8-8        Repealed
6-8-9        Repealed
6-8-10       Repealed

Section 6-8-1 Adoption of Fire Code
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted fire code is the “2018 International Fire Code,” as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)18-16, Amended,  12/05/2018; (O)13-10, Amended,  05/15/2013; (O)07-11, Amended,  02/21/2007; (O)04-36, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)02-31, Amended,  09/18/2002; (O)98-42, Amended,  10/07/1998)

Section 6-8-2 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11. ((O)04-36, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)98-43, Amended,  11/18/1998; (O)98-39, Amended,  09/02/1998)

Section 6-8-3 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11.

Section 6-8-4 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11. ((O)04-36, Amended,  10/20/2004)

Section 6-8-5 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11. ((O)04-36, Amended,  10/20/2004)

Section 6-8-6 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11. ((O)04-36, Amended,  10/20/2004)

Section 6-8-7 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11. ((O)04-36, Amended,  10/20/2004; (O)98-52, Amended,  12/16/1998)

Section 6-8-8 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11.

Section 6-8-9 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11.

Section 6-8-10 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-11. ((O)97-08, Enacted,  03/05/1997)

Article 6-9 BUILDING SAFETY BOARD OF APPEALS

Sections:
6-9-1        Organization
6-9-2        Meetings
6-9-3        Official Records
6-9-4        Powers and Duties
6-9-5        Application and Appeals
6-9-6        Hearings
6-9-7        Findings and Decisions
6-9-8        Rules

Section 6-9-1 Organization
A. Membership; Term of Office. The Town of Oro Valley Building Safety Board of Appeals shall be composed of a total of five members who shall be residents of Pima County, with preference given to Oro Valley residents; but not employees of the Town. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council, and hold office at its pleasure. The members shall be qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters addressed by the Board as more specifically described hereunder:
    1. Registered design professional with architectural experience, a builder, a superintendent of building construction, or such individual with comparable experience.
    2. Registered design professional with structural engineering experience, or such individual with comparable experience.
    3. Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing engineering experience, a mechanical contractor, or such individual with comparable experience.
    4. Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience, an electrical contractor, or such individual with comparable experience.
    5. Registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience, a fire protection contractor, or such individual with comparable experience. The term of office shall be for a period of two (2) years each ending on July 31 of even numbered years. Vacancies for any reason shall be filled by appointment by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The term of all members shall extend until their successors are appointed. If a member misses three (3) consecutive regular, or five (5) unexcused meetings within one (1) year, the Board may request that the Council appoint a new person to complete the term. In addition, the Board shall recommend an individual to serve as the representative of the consuming public.
B. Officers. The Board shall at the first regular meeting of each calendar year elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from among its members who shall serve for one (1) year.
    1. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the usual rights, duties, and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The Chairman may designate members of the Board to make personal inspections when necessary and, unless otherwise directed by a majority of the Board, shall appoint such sub-committees as may be found necessary.
    2. The Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties of the Chairman in the absence of the Chairman. If both Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent from a meeting, the senior member of the Board shall preside. Vacancies created by any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by a new election.
    3. The Presiding Officer, subject to these rules, shall decide all points of order unless otherwise directed by a majority of the members in attendance on motion duly made and approved.
C. Secretary. The Building Safety Administrator shall act as Secretary to the Board. The Secretary shall provide only administrative support to the Board but will not be a member of the Board.
    1. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or designee, to conduct all official correspondence of the Board, send out all notices required by law; to keep the minutes of the Board’s proceedings; to perform all the customary duties of the office; to be the custodian of the records of the Board; to supervise the clerical work and technical preparations necessary to the disposition of business before the Board; and to perform all other duties required by law, ordinance, or these Rules of Procedure.
    2. Agenda. The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for each Board meeting, listing the matters of business in the following order:
        a. Call to order; recording of members present and absent.
        b. Minutes; submitted for approval and subject to changes as directed.
        c. Continued Hearings.
        d. New Hearings.
        e. Old Business; matters pending Board action or further report.
        f. Other Business; new business not part of a hearing.
        g. Adjournment.
    3. Docket. The Secretary shall maintain a docket and minute book posted to date. In the docket book, the Secretary shall enter the number of the case, the name of the applicant, short description of appeal, street address and/or legal description of the premises in question, and the decision of the Board. All continuances, postponements, dates of sending notices, and other action shall be noted on the docket. The minutes for each case shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk. The minutes shall reflect the decision relating to each case acted on together with the vote of each member on divided votes, those absent so marked, together with all other official actions of the Board.
D. Town Attorney. The Town Attorney, or designee, shall attend all meetings of the Board and shall serve as legal counsel for the Board. The Town Attorney shall advise the Board on its jurisdiction, and give aid in interrogating witnesses. The Town Attorney shall also give legal advice to the Board which shall be received and entered in the minutes before disposition of any question or law or matter requiring legal interpretation. ((O)02-34, Enacted,  11/06/2002)

Section 6-9-2 Meetings
A. Regular Meetings.  The Town of Oro Valley Building Safety Board of Appeals may hold regular meetings, when necessary, at the Oro Valley Town Hall on the third (3rd) Tuesday of each calendar month and shall be duly noticed, in accordance with State law, as to the exact date and time. If there are not applications, hearings, or other agenda items to consider, the meeting may be omitted although the Board shall meet at least once annually. If it is a necessary to change the meeting, a notice of such change shall be posted at the official Town posting areas. All meetings shall be recorded and accurate minutes shall be approved by the Board.
Upon receipt of a Notice of Appeal, the Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties of interest and to the public.
B. Special Meetings.  Special meetings for good cause may be held by the Board on call of its Chairman or of a quorum of members, which call shall be filed with the Secretary, or as may be scheduled by a majority of the members at any previous meeting. Notice to the public shall comply with the Arizona Open Meeting Law.
C. Public Meetings.  All meetings and hearings of the Board, except Executive Sessions, shall be open to the public. Any action calling for a formal vote shall take place only at a public meeting.
D. Site Inspections.  The Secretary shall conduct a site inspection for the Board members on all abatements and other matters deemed appropriate by the Chairman. The Board members who are unable to attend the group site inspection may visit the site individually. The notices of such inspections shall be as provided by law.
E. Quorum and Voting. Three Board members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members voting shall be required for passage of any matter before the Board. The minutes of the meetings shall reflect the matter before the Board. The minutes of the meetings shall reflect the “ayes” and “nays” cast on a particular measure and shall reflect the vote of each member present or if absent, or if failing to vote, shall indicate that fact. If a member declares a conflict of interest relative to a particular issue, the member will abstain both from voting and from the deliberations of the matter in question.
If a quorum is not present at a regular or special meeting, such meeting will be continued to a specific time. If hearings are pending, the continuance will be limited to one week or to the earliest date that a quorum can be obtained. ((O)02-34, Enacted,  11/06/2002)

Section 6-9-3 Official Records
A. Definitions.  The official records shall include the Town of Oro Valley Building Safety Board of Appeals Rules of Procedure, minutes of the Board, together with all findings, decisions, and other official actions and records.
B. Files; Retention.  All matters before the Board shall be filed in the Town Building Safety division of the Community Development department in accordance with the department’s general filing system. The Secretary shall keep all official records as provided by the State’s Building Safety Records Retention Schedule. The Secretary shall keep all documents filed with, or issued by, the Board. ((O)02-34, Enacted,  11/06/2002)

Section 6-9-4 Powers and Duties
A. The Board has the authority to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Building Safety Administrator relative to the application and interpretation of the technical codes and to determine the suitability of materials and methods or types of construction alternate to those allowed by the provisions of the technical codes enforced by the Town. No such alternate shall be permitted unless at least equivalent to the requirement or requirements concerned in such codes and ordinances of the Town in regard to suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety, and sanitation.
B. The Board has the authority to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of the technical codes enforced by the Town; to conduct such investigations, including but not limited to, tests of equivalency as the Board may deem proper and desirable; and to submit such recommendations and reports to the Mayor and Council as the Board deems necessary.
C. The Board shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of the Administrative Code or the technical codes, nor shall the Board be empowered to waive requirements of either the Administrative Code or technical codes.
D. The Board has and shall exercise all power and jurisdiction reasonably implied by or necessarily inferred from the sources of express power identified herein. Such powers include, but are not limited to, power to determine whether a person, requested decision, subject matter, or issue falls within its jurisdiction; to determine the necessary form, extent, and detail of evidence to be received; to determine the extent and detail of its written findings and decisions or other legal actions taken; and to hear and determine appeals. ((O)02-34, Enacted,  11/06/2002)

Section 6-9-5 Application and Appeals
A. Applications and/or appeals to the Board may be filed by any person aggrieved or affected by a decision or an interpretation by the Building Safety Administrator in enforcing the various technical codes adopted by the Town or to request a variance denied by the Building Safety Administrator.
B. Applications and appeals must be filed within thirty (30) days from the date the Building Safety Administrator decides not to grant the permit requested or makes a decision from which the appeal is taken. Any communication purporting to be an application or an appeal shall be deemed a mere notice of intention to file and shall not be deemed a filing to comply with the requirements of timely filing.
C. Applications and appeals shall be made on forms provided by the Board through the Building Safety Administrator and shall specify the nature of the matter. Copies of such forms are attached hereto, which by this reference are incorporated as part of these Rules of Procedure.
D. Each case shall be numbered serially and shall be the number of the last two digits of the year number plus the number of the case filed for that calendar year. Example for the third case filed in the year 1992: 92-3.
E. Materials and applications for the Board must be received at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the next Board meeting. A case may be heard out of order upon motion of a Board member.
F. Failure to supply the required information within the time indicated may be considered by the Board as a failure to comply with these Rules of Procedure and the case may be dismissed for failure of timely filing.
G. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board, that by reason of the fact stated in the certificate, the stay could cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by a restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. ((O)02-34, Enacted,  11/06/2002)

Section 6-9-6 Hearings
A. The Secretary shall send notices of a hearing to the applicants as well as parties of interest. Said notices shall be mailed not less than five (5) days prior to the hearing date. Notices of a hearing shall be advertised once in the local newspaper of general circulation not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing date and posted as required by law.
B. The applicant and any person that may be affected by the decision may appear on their own behalf or be represented by counsel.
C. If no appearance is made at the hearing by the applicant, the Board may continue the hearing or dispose of the matter on the record before it and hear those who have appeared in response to the notice of hearing.
D. Hearings on cases shall normally follow this order: Building Safety Administrator report; Advice from and questions to Town Attorney; Jurisdiction determination; Hearing of the Applicant; Hearing of those in support of Applicant; Hearing of protests; Rebuttals as permitted by the Board; and Closing Hearing.
E. In determining jurisdiction, the opinion of the Town Attorney may or may not be recorded in the case. Whenever it appears of record that the Board may lack jurisdiction, the Chairman shall so advise interested parties present. If there is objection to the Town Attorney’s opinion that jurisdiction is lacking, the Board may hear argument on the jurisdictional issues and may require the filing of written statements or briefs thereon. The Board may proceed with the hearing and reception of evidence in any event, and may reserve its determination of the jurisdictional issue until after the hearing is closed, and make a decision on the merits as if it had jurisdiction. If there is no objection to the Town Attorney’s opinion that jurisdiction is lacking, the Board may make an immediate determination and close the hearing upon find that it lacks jurisdiction. If the Board determines by motion that it lacks jurisdiction, the Secretary shall record the motion as a decision to deny the appeal.
F. Orderly procedure requires that each side shall proceed without interruption by the other, that all arguments and pleadings shall be addressed to the Board, and that there be no questioning or argument between individuals.
G. During the hearing, the Chairman, Board members, and members of the Staff may ask questions and make appropriate comments pertinent to the case; however, no member should debate or argue an issue with the applicant.
H. The Chairman and Board members may direct any question to the applicant or any person speaking in order to bring out all relevant facts, circumstances, and conditions affecting the case and may call for questions from members of the Staff.
I. All supporting evidence for and against each case shall be presented to the assembled Board. The applicant shall be responsible for the presentation of all information supporting the case.
J. The burden of proof for satisfying the findings made by the Board shall rest with the prevailing party.
K. The Board may take a case under advisement for later consideration and determination, or may defer action whenever it concludes that additional evidence is needed or further study is required.
L. Cases may be postponed by prior arrangement with the Secretary. ((O)02-34, Enacted,  11/06/2002)

Section 6-9-7 Findings and Decisions
A. The Board shall decide any application or appeal immediately after the hearing or within a reasonable time thereafter at a Special meeting called for that purpose, but in no event shall the Board keep an appeal under consideration more than five (5) days after the meeting in which the hearing was conducted. After such notice and hearing, the decision of the Board shall be filed with the Community Development department as elsewhere provided in these Rules of Procedure by the Secretary of the Board. The Board shall render its decision and all findings of fact in writing, which shall be final, and shall transmit a copy to the Building Inspector involved, and a copy to the applicant.
B. A majority of legal votes cast by those members present and voting, a quorum being present, shall be required in order to carry all motions, except as provided for herein.
C. A member may refrain from voting whenever there is a personal or monetary interest, or if it is believed that any conflict of interest exists, in the subject property. A member may refrain from voting whenever any applicant, or agent, has sought to influence the vote of the member, other than in the public hearing, on such case.
D. Alternate materials or alternate methods or types of construction requested by applicants or appellants shall not be granted unless the Board shall find in writing upon sufficient evidence that such alternate is at least equivalent to the requirements of the technical codes concerned in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety, and sanitation.
E. The interpretation of any technical code provisions made subject of an application or appeal shall not be decided unless the Board shall find in writing, upon sufficient evidence, that the provision in question is in fact ambiguous, and in what regard, and why the proposed interpretation will be reasonable.
F. The Board may prescribe any reasonable conditions or limitations in connection with the granting of any appeal, or in connection with its decision in any Order to Show Cause, which it may deem necessary to fully carry out its duties and to implement the provisions and intent of the technical code in question. At the same time, the Board may set forth the effect of a failure to comply with any of said conditions or limitations, including but not limited to declaring the grant of appeal or application void upon such failure.
G. No informal requests for advice or moot or hypothetical questions will be considered by the Board. Any advice, opinion, or information given by any Board member or the Secretary, or any other official or employee of the Town shall not be binding on the Board.
H. No action of the Board shall set a precedent. Each case shall be decided upon its merits and upon the circumstances attendant thereto.
I. Any person aggrieved of any decision of the Board may file an action concerning the same in the Superior Court of Pima County. The complaint or petition therein shall allege that the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or otherwise unreasonable. Such action shall be commenced within thirty (30) days following delivery of the Board’s decision to the office of the Building Safety Administrator and not afterward. ((O)02-34, Enacted,  11/06/2002)

Section 6-9-8 Rules
A. Amendments, if any, to the Town of Oro Valley Building Safety Board of Appeals Rules of Procedure may be recommended by the Board and approved by Town Council. Any such amendment shall be proposed or submitted in writing at a meeting of the Board, and recorded in the minutes of such meeting or meetings. Action to recommend approval of such amendments may not be taken until the meeting following the proposal or submission in writing. Amendments adopted as above shall become effective at the next regular meeting of the Board.
B. Roberts Rules of Order shall govern actions of the Board where they are not covered by these Rules of Procedure. ((O)02-34, Enacted,  11/06/2002)

Article 6-10 HISTORIC PRESERVATION CODE

Sections:
6-10-1       Purpose, Mission and Objectives
6-10-2       Relation to General Plan
6-10-3       Definitions
6-10-4       Historic Property Register
6-10-5       Historic Preservation Commission
6-10-6       Incentives
6-10-7       Historic Landmark Designation Process
6-10-8       Historic District Designation
6-10-9       Certificate of Appropriateness
6-10-10      Maintenance and Repair
6-10-11      Economic Hardship
6-10-12      Appeals
6-10-13      Violations and Enforcement
6-10-14      Severability

Section 6-10-1 Purpose, Mission and Objectives
A. Purpose.  It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the Town of Oro Valley joins with the United States of America and the State of Arizona in promoting the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of properties, areas, documents and artifacts of historic, cultural, archaeological and aesthetic significance as being necessary for the economic, cultural, educational and general welfare of the public. This is done pursuant to the provisions of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended, the Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 9-462.01, and the establishment of this Historic Preservation Ordinance by the Oro Valley Town Council.
B. Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded on its past, and inasmuch as Oro Valley has many historic, archaeological and cultural resources which constitute its heritage, this article is intended to:
    1. Identify and preserve the historic properties that represent distinctive elements of Oro Valley’s historic, archaeological, architectural and cultural heritage; maintain and foster their unique identities, which in turn helps to make the community a desirable place to live, work and visit.
    2. Promote the use of historic properties for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the Town.
    3. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
    4. Protect and enhance Oro Valley’s attractiveness to visitors which also provides support and stimulus to the economy.
    5. Stabilize and improve property values of rehabilitated and protected sites.
    6. Provide incentives for restoration by owners of landmarks or historic properties.
    7. Provide standards for restoration of designated properties and for new construction within Historic Districts.
C. Mission.  The mission of the Oro Valley Historic Preservation Code is to promote the educational, cultural and economic welfare of the Town of Oro Valley by ensuring the preservation of historic buildings, districts, landmarks, structures, documents, photographs and other artifacts that represent the historic background and development of the greater Oro Valley area.
D. Objectives of the Oro Valley Historic Preservation Commission. 
    1. To maintain a code providing for the designation and preservation of historic buildings, districts, landmarks, structures, documents, photographs, and other artifacts;
    2. Under the terms of the code, to promote the designation of historic landmarks and districts;
    3. To keep a register of all historic landmarks and districts;
    4. To conduct an ongoing survey to identify significant buildings, districts and structures within the town;
    5. To inform and educate citizens concerning the history and heritage of Oro Valley; and
    6. To create an appropriate design of historical markers for identification of historic landmarks and districts. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-2 Relation to General Plan
The administration of this article shall be pursued in accordance with the policies set forth in the Oro Valley General Plan. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-3 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, certain words, phrases and terms used herein shall have the meaning assigned to them by this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include the singular. The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive.
Alteration: Any aesthetic, architectural, mechanical or structural change to the exterior surface of any part of a designated property as defined herein.
Archaeological site: A site containing any structure, articles or remains resulting from prehistoric human life, habitation or activity, including but not limited to petroglyphs, pictographs, paintings, pottery, tools, ornamentation, jewelry, textiles, ceremonial objects, weapons, armaments, vessels or vehicles.
Building: A structure created to shelter any form of activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. “Building” may also refer to a historically related complex, such as a courthouse and jail, or a farmhouse and barn.
Cemetery: Any site, which contains at least one burial, marked or previously marked, considered a dedicated cemetery under Arizona State Statutes, even though it may be currently suffering neglect and abuse.
Certificate of Appropriateness: A document issued by the Commission, following prescribed review procedures, certifying that proposed work on a designated property is compatible with the historic character of the property, and therefore (1) may be completed as specified in the Certificate of Appropriateness, and (2) any building permits needed to do the work specified in the Certificate may be issued.
Chair: The Chair of the Historic Preservation Commission or his/her designee.
Chief Building Official: The Chief Building Official of the Town of Oro Valley, or his/her designee.
Commission: The Historic Preservation Commission of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona as described in this article.
Construction: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action (excluding demolition) for or of sites, structures, public or private rights-of-way, utilities or other improvements.
Contributing: A classification applied to a building site, structure or object within a Historic District or landmark property signifying that it contributes to the defining characteristics of the Historic District or landmark.
Demolition: Any intentional act or process, which totally or partially destroys a designated property.
Designated Property: A property which has received Town designation as a landmark, or as a contributing property within a Historic District, according to the provisions of this article.
Director: The Planning and Zoning Director of the Town of Oro Valley or his/her designee.
Historic District: A geographical area whose boundaries are defined by a Historic District zoning designation which contains properties, structures, sites or objects which are considered to have historic or cultural value.
Historic Property Register: The listing and defining of designated properties of Oro Valley as provided in this article.
Historic Resource Survey: The official historic resource survey book of the Town as produced by the Commission, listing and describing properties, structures, sites or objects (whether designated or not) which are considered by the Commission to have historic or cultural value.
Integrity: A measure of the authenticity of a property’s historic identity, evidenced by the survival of physical characteristics that existed during the property’s historic or prehistoric period in comparison with its unaltered state. For example, a historic building of high integrity has few alterations or ones that can be easily reversed, and an archaeological site with high integrity is one that is relatively undisturbed; criteria evaluated include association, design, feeling, location, and materials.
Landmark: A designation, as a result of processes provided in this article, applied by the Commission to an individual property, structure, site or object, which has a historic value or expresses a distinctive character worthy of preservation.
Maintenance: Regular, customary or usual care for the purpose of preserving a property and keeping it in a safe, sanitary and usable condition, without causing any alteration to the distinctive exterior character of the property.
Noncontributing: A classification applied to a property, site, structure or object within a Historic District or landmark property signifying that it does not contribute to the defining characteristics of the Historic District or landmark.
Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona.
PRAB: The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona.
Preservation: The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity and material of a structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover of a site. It may include stabilization work where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic materials.
Preservation Covenant: A deed restriction filed with Pima County, which identifies the property as a landmark or a contributing property within a Historic District.
Reconstruction: The act of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a vanished structure or object, or part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time.
Rehabilitation: The act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use, while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural values.
Removal: Any relocation, in part or whole, of a structure on its site or to another site.
Renovation: See Rehabilitation.
Repair: Any physical change that is not alteration, construction, removal or demolition.
Restoration: The act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time, by the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work.
Review Criteria: The standards, tests, norms or guidelines applied by the Commission during any review process, including but not limited to surveys, designations, or Certificates of Appropriateness.
Secretary of Interior Standards: Standards which pertain to historic buildings of all materials, construction types, sizes and occupancy, and encompass the interior and exterior, developed and published by the office of the United States Secretary of the Interior, as part of the Department of the Interior regulations.
Stabilization: The act or process of applying measures designed to re-establish a weather-resistant enclosure and the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated property, while maintaining the essential form as it exists at present.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent or semi-permanent location on or in the ground, including but not limited to bridges, dams, water distribution systems, buildings, garages, fences, gazebos, advertising signs, antennas, satellite sending or receiving dishes, paved parking or circulation areas, landscapes, sculpture, and recreational facilities.
Town: The Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. ((O)08-16, Amended,  09/03/2008; (O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-4 Historic Property Register
A Historic Property Register is hereby established for the purpose of listing and defining landmarks and Historic Districts designated under the provisions of this article.
This register may be periodically amended by the Commission, and shall be available for public reference and historical study. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-5 Historic Preservation Commission
Pursuant to Ordinance Number (O)04-45, there is created a commission to be known as the Oro Valley Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Membership. 
    1. The Historic Preservation Commission shall be composed of seven (7) members and appointed by the Town Council.
    2. Prospective members should have demonstrated significant interest in and commitment to the field of historic preservation, evidenced either by involvement in a local historic preservation group, current non-conflicting or previous employment or volunteer activity in the field of historic preservation, or other serious interest in the field. To the extent possible, it is desirable that two (2) members be current or previous professionals in the areas of architecture, history, planning or archaeology.
    3. Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each member shall take and subscribe to the oath of office.
    4. All Commission members shall serve without pay, except that members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties, upon authorization.
B. Term of Office. 
    1. Membership appointment to the Commission shall be for a period of three (3) years. Terms shall be staggered so that no more than three (3) members’ terms shall expire in any given year. All terms shall begin on July 1st and shall end on June 30th or until a successor is appointed and qualified.
    2. In the event of a resignation, removal or death of a member, the Council shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term.
    3. The Council may remove any member of the Commission by a majority vote of the majority of the Council, or as otherwise provided by ordinance or Town Code.
    4. Repealed.
C. Officers. 
    1. The members of the Commission shall elect from among themselves a Chair and a Vice Chair, who shall serve for one (1) year or until their successors are elected. Officers may serve successive terms, if so chosen by the Commission.
    2. The Chair shall preside at meetings and exercise the usual rights, duties and prerogatives as the head of similar organizations. The Chair shall serve as Commission liaison with the Town staff, and shall also be responsible for other duties as described in this article.
    3. The Vice Chair shall perform the duties of Chair in the Chair’s absence or disability.
    4. The members shall fill a vacancy in either office for the unexpired term through a new election.
D. Meetings. 
    1. The Commission shall meet monthly, unless otherwise provided.
    2. A majority of members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of the majority of members present shall be required for passage of any matter before the Commission. Any member may abstain from voting on a matter by declaring a conflict of interest, in which case such member shall step down and take no part in discussions or deliberations on that matter.
E. Rules. 
    1. The Commission shall make and publish rules to govern its proceedings, subject to approval by the Town Council. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and noticed as provided by Arizona law.
    2. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings. The minutes shall include all issues considered, and shall record the individual votes of members on each action item.
F. Powers and Duties. The responsibility of the Commission is to promote the purposes and objectives of this article and shall include, but not be limited to the following:
    1. Maintain and periodically update, as needed, a plan for historic preservation.
    2. Maintain review criteria to assure fair and impartial evaluation and designation of properties as landmarks and Historic Districts. The Commission shall periodically review these criteria, and make such adjustments or updates as may be required.
    3. Maintain criteria to assure fair and impartial review of applications for Certificates of Appropriateness.
    4. Review properties proposed for designation as landmarks, explain to the owners thereof the potential effects of designation as known to the Commission at that time and make a decision to designate, conditionally designate, or deny designation.
    5. Review property nominations for designation as a Historic District, explain to the owners thereof the potential effects of designation as known to the Commission at that time and make recommendations regarding rezoning to a Historic District to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    6. Propose design guidelines appropriate to individual Historic Districts.
    7. Review and approve, conditionally approve or deny applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness.
    8. Maintain the Historic Property Register.
    9. Determine and cause to be created a system of markers for designated properties.
    10. Recognize the owners of designated properties. Issue commendations to owners of historical properties who have rehabilitated their property in an exemplary manner.
    11. When Town Council approval is appropriate, make recommendations to the Town Council regarding the acquisition of property suitable for preservation.
    12. Make recommendations to the Town Council regarding the utilization of federal, state, Town or private funds to promote historic preservation.
    13. Make recommendations to Town Council to accept gifts, grants, funds, contributions, and bequests from individuals and public and private entities, agencies, foundations, trusts, corporations, and other organizations or institutions.
    14. Cooperate with and enlist the assistance of persons, organizations, foundations and public agencies in matters involving historic preservation, rehabilitation and reuse, with Town Council approval as appropriate.
    15. Increase public awareness of the values of historic, cultural, archaeological and architectural preservation, by developing and participating in public education programs.
    16. Annually prepare written reports of Commission activities; submit such reports to the Town Council and the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO). These reports shall be available for public review.
    17. Conduct detailed studies and surveys of properties and areas and assess their potential for designation.
    18. Periodically review the Historic Resource Survey and consider the inclusion of any properties, which may have come to meet the requirements herein, and the deletion of any properties which may no longer exist.
    19. Work with and assist departments of the Town in matters affecting historic preservation.
    20. Assist property owners, on request, on the restoration, rehabilitation, alteration, decoration, landscaping, or maintenance of any historic property.
    21. Encourage and assist property owners of historic properties on procedures for inclusion on State historic listings and the National Register of Historic Places.
    22. Work collaboratively with PRAB in the design and use of parks and park-like areas which have a historic or archeological significance.
    23. Establish liaison with groups and organizations as appropriate.
    24. Carry out such other duties as may be determined by the Town Council, and present other such recommendations as may be deemed pertinent.
G. Committees. Advisory committees may be created by the Chair or by the Commission to study and report on pertinent matters. Such committees may include citizens who are not members of the Commission, but shall include at least one Commission member who shall serve as Chair of the committee. Committees appointed for a specific task shall dissolve when the task is completed and its report has been presented to the Commission. ((O)08-16, Amended,  09/03/2008; (O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-6 Incentives
It is the intent of the Town to make ownership of a landmark or contributing property within a Historic District as beneficial as possible. In addition to the intangible benefits of owning a property recognized as an important community resource, the Council and Commission may, when applicable and possible, provide such owners with one or more of the following:
A. Recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Department that an alternate or transitional use be considered;
B. Advice in locating potential sources of financial assistance and tax credits;
C. Advice in preparing grant applications and potential third party sponsorship;
D. Technical information and referrals;
E. Assistance in locating buyers and/or sellers;
F. Assistance in the formulation of a neighborhood association;
G. Assistance in obtaining other benefits as may become available. ((O)08-16, Amended,  09/03/2008; (O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-7 Historic Landmark Designation Process
The Commission may designate as a landmark an entire property, an identified portion of a property, or one or more individual structures on a property.
A. Application Submittal and Review Requirements. An application for a landmark designation shall be submitted by the owner of the subject property or agent and involves the following steps:
    1. Pre-Application Consultation. Prior to the submittal of an application for a landmark designation, the applicant should consult with the Director to explain the application submittal requirements.
    2. Application Submittal Requirements. An application for a landmark designation shall contain at a minimum the following, any of which may be waived by the Director, as authorized by the Commission:
        a. Completed application form.
        b. Location and description of property.
        c. Filing fee.
        d. Statement or letter of authorization from the property owner, if different from the applicant.
        e. An ownership map of property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property as shown on the last assessment of the property. A list of these property owners shall also be provided on mailing labels and keyed to the map showing the location of the identified properties.
        f. A written description of the proposed property. Description should include special aesthetic, cultural, architectural, archaeological or engineering interest or value of a historic nature, including information about the architecture, notable construction features and other information indicating the historical significance of the property. Sketches, drawings, photographs, or other descriptive materials may be included.
        g. A written statement of condition of property and/or structure(s) including any known threats thereto.
        h. Other information as may be requested.
    3. Incomplete applications may be returned to the applicant and not processed until all materials have been submitted. If all the required materials have been submitted, the application shall be considered complete and shall be accepted by the Director. Following acceptance of a complete application, the Director shall conduct a formal review and prepare a comprehensive report which shall be submitted to the Commission and made available to the applicant, media and general public at least seven (7) days prior to the Commission’s public hearing on the landmark application.
    4. Upon acceptance of a complete application, no building or demolition permits affecting the proposed landmark shall be issued by the Town until the process as described herein has been completed and the Commission has made its decision.
B. Notice of Commission Hearing. 
    1. Upon receipt of a complete application for a landmark designation, the Chair shall place it on the agenda for a public hearing within thirty (30) days. Public notice of this hearing shall be given as prescribed herein.
    2. The Town shall give notice of the date, time, and place of a public hearing for consideration of a proposed landmark, including general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing in the following manner:
        a. Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
        b. Posting on the affected property so that the words “Public Hearing” and the date and time of the hearing are visible from a distance of one hundred (100) feet. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the posting once erected.
        c. Notification by first class mail shall be sent to each real property owner as shown on the last assessment of the property within three hundred (300) feet of the property to be landmarked.
        d. In addition to notice by the means set forth above, the Town may give notice of the hearing in a specific case in such other manner as it deems necessary or appropriate.
        e. As provided in A.R.S. 9-462.04(A)(7), or any successor statute, the failure of any person or entity to receive notice as set forth in the statute shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the actions of the Town.
    3. Persons with specific issues or concerns regarding a proposed landmark are encouraged to contact the Planning and Zoning Department in writing, by phone or in person prior to the hearing.
C. Landmark Designation Criteria. The Commission shall evaluate each structure, site, building or property within an area that is included in an application and may designate it as a landmark if it is determined to have historical or other cultural significance or integrity, and is suitable for preservation, using the following criteria:
    1. Association with events that have made significant contributions to the broad patterns of our history.
    2. Association with the lives of persons significant in our past.
    3. Embodiment of distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction, or representing the work of a master, or high artistic values or representing a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinctions.
    4. Yielding information important in the understanding of the pre-history or history of our community.
    5. Being at least fifty (50) years old, or having achieved significance within the past 50 years if the property is of exceptional importance.
    6. Possessing integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling or association.
D. Commission Public Hearing and Designation. 
    1. The Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each landmark application. At the public hearing, the Commission shall review the proposal with consideration given to the review criteria. Approval, conditional approval or denial of a landmark application shall be based on the findings of the Commission as they relate to the criteria.
    2. The Commission’s decision shall be final unless appealed to the Town Council as provided for in this article. A recommendation for approval may be subject to conditions as the Commission deems applicable.
E. One (1) Year Bar on Refiling. If the Commission denies an application, the Commission may refuse to accept another application for the same or substantially the same landmark on the same property or any part of it within one (1) year of the date the original application was filed on the same property or a portion of it.
F. Removal of Landmark. The procedure to remove a landmark status from a property shall be the same as the procedure to designate. However, in the case of removal of a landmark designation, the Commission may initiate the application.
G. Effect of Landmark Designation. 
    1. Upon approval of a landmark designation, the affected property shall be included in the Historic Property Register and on any other applicable documents as appropriate for its preservation.
    2. Once approved, the historic landmark designation and applicable restrictions shall be recorded in the office of the Pima County Recorder as notice to all future owners of the designated property.
    3. No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration, renovation, reconstruction, new construction, demolition or removal, in whole or in part, on any landmark, without first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission.
    4. No person shall make any material change in the exterior appearance of any landmark, its color, materials, light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other elements which affect the appearance of the property without first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness.
    5. Each property designated as a landmark shall be maintained in good condition and faithful to its historic character.
    6. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repair, which does not involve change in the exterior design, material, color or appearance. ((O)08-16, Amended,  09/03/2008; (O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-8 Historic District Designation
A. A rezoning approval is required in order to receive a Historic District designation.
B. The Historic District is an overlay zone in which designated properties retain the uses of and are subject to the regulations of the underlying zoning. The underlying zoning which relates primarily to land use and density, continues to be administered by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission administers the regulations as they relate to the Historic District designation.
C. The Commission, the Planning and Zoning Commission, Town Council, a property owner or agent of property owner of the area subject to the request may initiate a request to rezone to a Historic District.
D. Application Submittal and Review. 
    1. Pre-Application Consultation. A pre-application consultation between the applicant and the Director is required in order for the Director to explain the rezoning review process and application submittal requirements.
    2. Application Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements set forth in Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised Section 22.3, all Historic District rezoning applications shall include the following:
        a. Written description of the proposed Historic District. Description should include approximate construction dates, special aesthetic features, cultural, architectural, archaeological or engineering interest or value of a historic nature, including information about the architecture, notable construction features, and other information indicating the historical significance.
        b. Identification of prospective Contributing Properties and how they each meet one or more of the Historic District criteria.
        c. Current sketches, photographs or drawings.
        d. Statement of condition of all structures.
        e. Explanation of any known threats to any property or structures involved.
E. Notice of Public Hearing. 
    1. Notice of the Commission’s public hearing shall be the same as set forth in the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised Section 22.3.
    2. Upon publication of notice required above, no person shall make any material change in the exterior appearance of any property affected by said notice, its color, materials, light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other elements which affect the appearance of the property until the finalization of the designation process described in this article; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repair that does not involve changes in exterior design, material, color or appearance.
F. Historic District Designation Criteria. Each structure, site, building or property within an area that is included in a Historic District rezoning application will be evaluated using the following criteria to determine if it has historical or other cultural significance or integrity and is suitable for preservation:
    1. Association with events that have made significant contributions to the broad patterns of our history.
    2. Association with the lives of persons significant in our past.
    3. Embodiment of distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction, or representing the work of a master, or high artistic values or representing a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinctions.
    4. Yielding information important in the understanding of the pre-history or history of the community.
    5. Being at least fifty (50) years old, or having achieved significance within the past fifty (50) years if the property is of exceptional importance.
    6. Possessing integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling or association.
G. Adoption of Historic District. 
    1. Action by the Historic Preservation Commission. Upon completing its public hearing on the Historic District application, the Historic Preservation Commission shall transmit its recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    2. The Historic Preservation Commission’s recommendation shall include the following:
        a. A map showing the proposed boundaries of the Historic District and identifying all structures within the boundaries, including classification as contributing or noncontributing.
        b. An explanation of the significance of the proposed district and description of the cultural resources within the proposed boundaries.
        c. A set of findings documenting the recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission.
        d. Proposed design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of Certificate of Appropriateness to the nominated Historic District.
        e. The recommendations of the Historic Preservation Commission may include reasonable additional conditions and/or modifications to the proposed district property boundaries as deemed necessary to promote the purpose of the District.
    3. Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the Historic Preservation Commission’s recommendations. Following conclusion of its public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its recommendation and the recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission to Town Council.
    4. Action by the Town Council. The Town Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the recommendations of the Historic Preservation and Planning and Zoning Commissions. Following conclusion of its public hearing, the Council may approve the Historic District as recommended or in a modified form, stipulating those conditions it deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this district and this code.
    5. Documentation. The appropriate supporting statements, design guidelines and documents submitted with the application for a Historic District shall be considered by the Council and included in any ordinance establishing the Historic District.
    6. Recordation. Once approved, the Historic District designation and applicable restrictions shall be recorded in the office of the Pima County Recorder as notice to all future property owners within the Historic District.
H. Effect of Historic District Designation. 
    1. Upon approval of a Historic District designation by the Town Council, the affected property(ies) shall be included in the Historic Property Register and on any other applicable documents as appropriate for its preservation. The Town’s zoning map shall be updated to reflect the new zoning district boundaries. The Town’s parcel information database shall be updated to include those properties identified within the Historic District as contributing and noncontributing.
    2. No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration, renovation, reconstruction, new construction, demolition or removal, in whole or in part, without first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission.
    3. No person shall make any material change in the exterior appearance of a designated property, its color, materials, light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other elements which affect the appearance of the property without first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness.
    4. Each property designated as a contributing property shall be maintained in good condition and faithful to its historic character.
    5. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repair that does not involve change in exterior design, material, color or appearance.
    6. In addition to any other required review and/or approval, any proposed construction within a Historic District shall also be subject to Commission review according to any design guidelines which may have been applied to that District and other applicable criteria. ((O)08-16, Amended,  09/03/2008; (O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-9 Certificate of Appropriateness
A Certificate of Appropriateness is required before commencing any exterior improvements or development, including alteration, restoration, renovation, reconstruction, new construction, demolition or removal, in whole or in part, of a landmark or property located within a Historic District, whether or not the work will require a building permit. Building permits for exterior work on landmarks or properties within Historic Districts shall not be issued without first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness. If a building permit is sought from the Town without a Certificate of Appropriateness, the issuance of the permit shall be deferred until after a Certificate of Appropriateness is issued by the Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Application Submittal and Review Procedure. An application for Certificate of Appropriateness shall be submitted by the owner of the subject property or agent and involves the following steps:
    1. Pre-Application Consultation. Prior to the submittal of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the applicant should consult with the Director to explain the application submittal requirements.
    2. Application Submittal Requirements. An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall contain at a minimum the following:
        a. Completed application form.
        b. Location and description of property with photographs of areas affected by proposed project.
        c. Filing fee.
        d. A letter of intent describing the overall project specifically addressing architectural style, its compatibility within its context area, building materials, colors, exterior lighting, signage and landscaping if applicable.
        e. Site plan identifying all existing and proposed structures.
        f. Scaled illustrations showing all existing and proposed site improvements and conditions, landscaping, signage and building elevations.
        g. Samples of all proposed exterior paints or stains and colors and samples of roof and other exterior materials to be used, with an explanation on how they relate to existing colors and materials.
        h. If the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing dimensions, lettering, colors, materials and any illumination.
        i. Any additional information which the Commission may require to visualize the proposed work.
    3. Acceptance of Application. Upon receipt of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Director shall complete a preliminary review within five (5) working days to ensure that all the required materials have been submitted. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant and not processed until all materials have been submitted. If all the required materials have been submitted, the application shall be considered complete and shall be accepted by the Director.
B. Notice of Public Hearing. 
    1. Upon receipt of a complete application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Chair shall place it on the agenda for a public hearing within thirty (30) days. Public notice of this hearing shall be given as prescribed herein.
    2. The Town shall give notice of the date, time and place of a public hearing for consideration of a Certificate of Appropriateness, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing in the following manner:
        a. Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
        b. Posting on the affected property in accordance with Town posting requirements.
        c. Notification by first class mail shall be sent to each real property owner as shown on the last assessment of the property within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property.
    3. Following acceptance of a complete application, the Director shall conduct a formal review and prepare a comprehensive report, which shall be submitted to the Commission and made available to the applicant, media and general public seven (7) calendar days prior to the Commission’s public hearing. Commission members shall make every effort to inspect the property prior to the hearing.
    4. At the hearing, concerned persons may present testimony and/or documentary evidence that will become part of the record of the hearing and the deliberations of the Commission.
C. Commission Review and Decision. 
    1. It is the intent of this article to ensure, insofar as possible, that properties designated as a landmark or a property within a Historic District shall be in harmony with the architectural and historical character of the property or district.
    2. When reviewing an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny a Certificate of Appropriateness based on the following:
        a. The proposed work does not detrimentally alter, destroy or adversely affect any architectural or landscape feature; and
        b. The proposed work will be compatible with the relevant historic, cultural, educational or architectural qualities characteristic of the structure, or district and shall include but not be limited to elements of size, scale, massing, proportions, orientation, surface textures and patterns, details and embellishments and the relationship of these elements to one another; and
        c. The proposed work conforms to review guidelines and/or other applicable criteria; and
        d. The exterior of any new improvement, building or structure in a designated Historic District or upon a landmarked site will not adversely affect and will be compatible with the external appearance of existing designated buildings and structures on the site or within a Historic District.
    3. Review Guidelines and Criteria. The Commission may utilize the following documents and criteria as guidelines when considering an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness:
        a. Approved design guidelines for a designated Historic District.
        b. Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation.
        c. Secretary of the Interior’s Preservation Briefs and other information developed by U.S. Department of Interior Park Service, Arizona Historic Preservation Office, National Trust for Historic Preservation, National Alliance of Preservation Commissions, Association of Preservation Technology, and the Old House Journal.
        d. Any other guidelines as adopted by the Town.
    4. No change shall be made in the approved plans of a project after issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness without resubmittal to the Commission and approval of the change in the same manner as provided for issuance.
    5. A Certificate of Appropriateness expires six (6) months from the date of issuance unless substantial work is started within that time.
    6. If work exceeds that specified in the Certificate of Appropriateness, the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed to be revoked, a stop work order issued, and no further building activities shall be allowed until another Certificate of Appropriateness is applied for and issued by the Commission.
    7. The Certificate of Appropriateness required by this article shall be in addition to any other permit(s) or review required for the proposed project.
D. Demolition of Historic Landmark or a Contributing Property within a Historic District. 
    1. No person shall demolish a landmark or contributing property within a Historic District or cause or permit such demolition to be done, nor shall any permit for such demolition be issued unless the demolition is approved by the Commission and a Certificate of Appropriateness is issued.
    2. A landmark or contributing property may be demolished if:
        a. The Chief Building Official has determined that an imminent safety hazard exists and that demolition of the structure is the only feasible means to secure the public safety; or
        b. The Commission finds, after review, that maintenance, use and/or alteration of the designated property in accordance with the requirements of this article would cause immediate and substantial hardship on the property owner(s) because rehabilitation in a manner which preserves the historic integrity of the resource:
            i. Is infeasible from a technical, mechanical, or structural standpoint; and/or
            ii. Would leave the property with no reasonable economic value because it would require an unreasonable expenditure taking into account such factors as current market value, permitted uses of the property, and the cost of compliance with applicable local, state and federal requirements. Costs necessitated by the neglect or failure of the current owner(s) to maintain the property need not be considered in making this finding; or
            iii. The Commission finds that the demolition of a contributing property would not have a substantial adverse impact on the historic significance or integrity of a Historic District.
    3. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof for all findings required for approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness for demolition.
    4. If demolition is approved, the Commission may require the property owners to publish notice at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled demolition date, in a newspaper of general circulation, of the availability of materials for salvage. Upon request, the Commission may make this information available to persons who may be interested in contacting the owner(s) to arrange for possible salvage of historic building materials. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-10 Maintenance and Repair
Each property designated as a landmark, and properties designated as contributing properties within a Historic District shall be maintained in good condition and faithful to its historic character. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repair of any exterior feature of any structure designated as a landmark or contributing property within a Historic District which does not involve change in design, material, color or outward appearance. The Commission shall not consider the interior arrangements or alterations to the interior of a building, unless authorization would impact the exterior. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-11 Economic Hardship
A. An application for demolition or removal of a landmark or property within a Historic District may, if appropriate, be accompanied by a request for relief from economic hardship.
B. Before granting such request, the Commission shall study the historic or cultural value of the property, and shall review options including incentives to the owner for restoration, or recommendation to Council that the Town purchase the property.
C. Separate standards and application requirements may be established by the Town for granting economic hardship relief for income-producing properties and for non-income producing properties.
    1. Investment or income producing properties: Economic hardship relief may be granted if the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates that a reasonable rate of return cannot be obtained from a property which retains features which contribute to its distinctive character in its present condition nor if rehabilitated, either by the current owner or a potential buyer.
    2. Non-income producing properties: Economic hardship relief may be granted if the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates that the property has no reasonable use as a single-family dwelling or for institutional use in its present condition or if rehabilitated, either by the current owner or a potential buyer.
D. Economic hardship relief shall not be granted due to any of the following circumstances: willful destructive acts committed or caused by the owner; purchase of the property for substantially more than its fair market value; failure to perform normal maintenance and repair; or failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants or provide normal tenant improvements. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-12 Appeals
Any person or group of persons aggrieved by a decision of the Commission may appeal to the Town Council within ten (10) working days of the Commission’s action, by filing with the Town Clerk written notice of appeal and any applicable fee as may be adopted. The Council shall render a decision to sustain, conditionally overrule or overrule the Commission decision. The Council may choose to hold a public hearing. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-13 Violations and Enforcement
A. All work performed pursuant to a Certificate of Appropriateness under this article shall conform to requirements thereof. Compliance shall be confirmed by inspections made by the Chief Building Official and the Commission Chairman or his/her designee. Certain requirements of the Certificate, such as signs, lighting, landscaping and site development shall be reviewed for compliance.
B. Any action regarding a violation of any provision of this article shall be brought to the Town Attorney. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity found to be in violation of any provision of this article shall be charged, at a maximum, with a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day in violation shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Any person who causes unauthorized demolition, alteration, construction, or permits degradation or disrepair of a designated property as defined in this article, or property proposed to be included in a Historic District, may be required to restore the property and site to its condition prior to the violation. The civil remedy shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal prosecution and penalty. Until completion of restoration, no permits for anything other than restoration shall be issued for the property by the Town. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

Section 6-10-14 Severability
This article and its sections are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, subsection, clause, word or phrase of this article is held to be void, unlawful or unconstitutional, such holdings shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this article or of the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised. ((O)06-20, Enacted,  10/04/2006)

CHAPTER 7 STREETS, HIGHWAYS, PUBLIC WAYS - SUBDIVISIONS

Articles:
7-1          Standard Specifications
7-2          Definitions
7-3          Fees and Assurances Required
7-4          Permits
7-5          Standards and Procedures
7-6          Golf Cart Paths Crossing Public Rights-of-Way
7-7          The Vacating of Easement and/or Public Rights-of-Way
7-8          Acceptance of Existing Private Streets, Sidewalks, Trails, Drainage and Utility Easement as Public Domain
7-9          Acceptance of Deeded or Dedicated Streets, Drainageways and Rights-of-Way

Article 7-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS

Sections:
7-1-1        Standard Specifications

Section 7-1-1 Standard Specifications
A. The latest editions of the following documents are hereby adopted as Town of Oro Valley standards and specifications and are made a part of this chapter the same as though said documents were specifically set forth in full herein:
    1. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Construction Standards, Structures Standard Drawings, Traffic Signals and Lighting Standard Drawings, signing and Marking Standard Drawings, Urban Highway Details and Traffic Control Manual for Highway Construction and Maintenance, all published by the Arizona Department of Transportation, and
    2. "Work Zone Traffic Control Standard and Guidelines" published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, and
    3. "Pima County/City of Tucson Standard Specification for Public Improvements", and
    4. "Oro Valley Subdivision Street Standards"
B. The Town Engineer is hereby authorized to amend the Oro Valley Subdivision Street Standards as he/she may deem appropriate. Said amendments shall be recorded in a journal kept by the Town Engineer. (Amended 6/6/92)

Article 7-2 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
7-2-1        Definitions

Section 7-2-1 Definitions
See Division 1, General Provisions, Section 101 entitled "Definitions and Terms" of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.

Article 7-3 FEES AND ASSURANCES REQUIRED

Sections:
7-3-1        Fees and Assurances Required

Section 7-3-1 Fees and Assurances Required
Refer to Article 4-9, Assurances, of the Oro Valley Zoning Code, Revised.

Article 7-4 PERMITS

Sections:
7-4-1        Permit Required
7-4-2        Applications
7-4-3        Fees (Permit and Impact)
7-4-4        Conditions
7-4-5        Exceptions to Permit Requirements
7-4-6        Permit Expiration

Section 7-4-1 Permit Required
A. No street, alley, public right-of-way or other public property shall be cut, trenched, excavated, improved, repaired or any object placed therein by any person without first having a written permit from the town. A permit shall cover only contiguous construction and the work to be done as one continuous operation.
B. If a trench for joint use by more than one utility company is to be constructed, then the agency that will be contracting for or making the trench excavations shall be responsible for the permit and for the completed construction and safety. Only one permit is required.
C. The applicant shall be responsible for contacting all utility companies in the area and obtaining information on existing utilities.

Section 7-4-2 Applications
Applications for permits shall be made on forms furnished by the town and shall be submitted a minimum of forty-eight hours before work is anticipated. Applications may be made by mail or telephone at an additional charge of one dollar per permit. Such applicants must have a cash deposit with the town sufficient to cover fees, or include fees with the mailed application. Mail applications must arrive a minimum of forty-eight hours before work is anticipated. In no case can work begin prior to filing the application and approval of the application by the town engineer.

Section 7-4-3 Fees (Permit and Impact)
A. Permit fees, impact fees and any necessary deposit must be paid in advance of commencing work in a public right-of-way. A permit penalty fee of two hundred and fifty dollars shall be charged if work is commenced prior to obtaining a permit. Paying the permit fee does not waive any other penalties.
B. Permits and impact fees are required for any construction, alterations, changes which include, but are not limited to, the following items: clearing and grubbing, earth work, pavement, curbs, sidewalks, drainage structures not covered by the town building code, street lighting, landscaping, gas, water, sewer, electrical, telephone and TV cable.
C. Permit fees, impact fees and any necessary deposit shall be determined by resolution of the council and kept on file with the town clerk.

Section 7-4-4 Conditions
Applicant for a permit or his agent or the contractor doing the work may be required, before the issuance of the permit, to:
A. Furnish bond or insurance to hold the town harmless and free of liability arising out of said work.
B. Prove he is not delinquent in payments due the town on prior similar work.
C. Prove he is competent and equipped to do the proposed work.
D. Show he has proper licenses to do the work.
E. Submit a plan of subject property and adjacent properties showing all of the existing and proposed improvements and obtain the town engineer’s written approval.
F. Agree to submit an as-built plan showing all the improvements. The as-built plans shall include dimensions tying the improvement down to existing improvements or property lines.

Section 7-4-5 Exceptions to Permit Requirements
A. When the work is done for municipal purposes, as directed by the town engineer, a permit will be required, but the fee may be waived.
B. When, in an emergency, it is impractical to obtain a permit before the work is done, the police department must be immediately notified and a permit shall be obtained within forty-eight hours thereafter.

Section 7-4-6 Permit Expiration
A. A permit shall expire for work not started within thirty days after issuance of a permit. At the time of issuance of the permit, a completion date for the work will be designated by the applicant. If the work is not completed by the designated completion date, the permit shall expire unless the applicant has requested an extension in writing. An extension may be granted one time for a period not to exceed one hundred and eighty days. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall submit plans and pay a new permit fee equal to the amount of the original permit fee.
B. All work must be covered by assurances and must be in compliance with Article 13-6 of the Oro Valley Zoning Code, Revised entitled "Site Grading and Covering Requirements".

Article 7-5 STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES

Sections:
7-5-1        Construction Standards
7-5-2        Inspection of Work
7-5-3        Barricades; Notice
7-5-4        Private Roads, Driveways and Parking Lots
7-5-5        Special Requirements in Residential Developments
7-5-6        Special Requirements in Business Developments
7-5-7        Variance from Curb Cuts and Driveway Requirements
7-5-8        Driveways May Be Denied
7-5-9        Curb Cut Replacements
7-5-10       Reserved
7-5-11       Backfilling, Filling and Temporary Pavement Patches
7-5-12       Beautification Within Public Right-of-Way
7-5-13       Brush Cutting and Clearing in the Town Rights-of Way

Section 7-5-1 Construction Standards
All construction shall be in accordance with the Town Standard Specifications adopted in Article 7-1 of this chapter. The town engineer may authorize variances from approved standard provisions where unusual topographical conditions exist; where, in the opinion of the town engineer, the proposed variances are equal to or better than the approved standard provisions or where other factors would make adherence to standard provisions unreasonable.

Section 7-5-2 Inspection of Work
A. All work will be subject to inspection. The town may require that the engineer of record provide all inspections at the expense of the owner. The engineer of record must provide the town a letter certifying that all work is built in compliance with the town code. The town reserves the right to oversee and perform inspections at any time with the power of stopping construction if work is being performed in a manner not in keeping with plans or town codes and regulations.
B. When work is being inspected by only the town, the requests for inspection must be made twenty-four hours in advance of all work being inspected.
C. All construction will be subject to a series of acceptance tests at permittee’s expense and removal and replacement by permittee at his expense if the construction was not inspected and approved by the inspector and the inspector deems it necessary to do so to insure that the construction is properly done.
D. Inspection fees shall be as determined by resolution by the council and paid at the time of securing permits as provided in Section 7-4-3. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made.

Section 7-5-3 Barricades; Notice
A. Applicant shall barricade his work and install warning lights and signs all in accordance with "Work Zone Traffic Control Standard and Guidelines" by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration and the "Traffic Control Manual for Highway Construction and Maintenance", published by the Arizona Department of Transportation.
B. Applicant shall notify the chief of police and Rural Metro Fire Department before barricading any street or public right-of-way.

Section 7-5-4 Private Roads, Driveways and Parking Lots
All private roads, driveways and parking lots must meet all the minimum safety requirements as may be set by the council and the town engineer and must be constructed so as to be dust free at all times. Private road rights-of-way cannot be opened as temporary dirt roads unless dust control methods have been approved by the town engineer.

Section 7-5-5 Special Requirements in Residential Developments
A. Access from street areas across or over a curb, curb and gutter or wedge curb, etc. to gain access to the property shall be in accordance with applicable town standards.
B. Curb cuts and driveways shall conform to the following requirements in all residential zoned developments:
    Minimum curb cut width - 10 feet
    Maximum curb cut width - 20 feet
    Maximum curb cut width for two adjoining properties - 30 feet
    Minimum distance between curb cuts - 12 feet
    Minimum distance of curb cut from street light standards or catch basins - 5 feet
    Minimum distance of curb cut from a fire hydrant or town water hydrant - 20 feet
    Minimum distance of curb cut from end of a curb return or from a curb line on a cross street at a street intersection, whichever is more restrictive - 20 feet

Section 7-5-6 Special Requirements in Business Developments
A. Access from street areas across or over a curb, curb and gutter or wedge curb, etc. to gain access to the property shall be in accordance with applicable town standards.
B. Curb cuts and driveways shall conform to the following requirements in all business zoned developments:
    Maximum curb cut width - 35 feet
    Maximum driveway width at the property line - 30 feet
    Maximum distance between curb cuts or driveway - 30 feet
    Maximum number of curb cuts or driveways per 100 feet of street frontage - 2
    Minimum distance of curb cuts from street light standards or catch basins - 5 feet
    Minimum distance from a fire hydrant or town water hydrant - 20 feet
    Minimum distance from end of a curb return or from a curb line on a cross street at a street intersection, whichever is more restrictive - 20 feet

Section 7-5-7 Variance from Curb Cuts and Driveway Requirements
The town engineer may grant written variances from the minimum and maximum requirements set forth for the location of curb cuts and driveways in Sections 7-5-5 and 7-5-6 provided:
A. The area has peculiar, visible conditions not ordinarily existing in similar areas, or
B. The nature of the business on the property is exceptional, or
C. The nature of the abutting property is exceptional, and the variance is not against the public interest, safety, convenience or general welfare.

Section 7-5-8 Driveways May Be Denied
A. No property owner shall be denied a reasonable driveway access to his property. However, where there is not an adequate extension of a driveway within the private property to park a vehicle entirely off the right-of-way, a curb cut shall be denied.
B. Where there is not adequate parking area for the use to which the property is developed to park off the right-of-way, or where there is not adequate area to maneuver safely in and out, and to preclude backing into the street unsafely, a curb cut may be denied.
C. No property owner may build a ramp of dirt, concrete, asphalt or any other material to gain access over a curb. Permission may be granted by the town engineer to make a curb cut for a driveway or other access as long as all the requirements of Sections 7-5-5, 7-5-6 and 7-5-7 are met.

Section 7-5-9 Curb Cut Replacements
Where private property use has been modified so that an existing curb cut is no longer needed or where provisions do not permit curb cuts at existing locations, the town engineer, for the promotion of traffic safety and public convenience, may require the abutting property owner to replace the curb at his expense as follows:
A. The town engineer shall order the abutting property owner to replace the curb stating the reason.
B. The owner shall either protest and show cause in writing why the curb should not be replaced within thirty days or commence the work within sixty days.
C. The protest shall be reviewed by the mayor and council, who may uphold the town engineer or revoke or modify his order.
D. If the abutting owner fails to comply with the order, the town may do the work and bill the owner for the total charges of the work. The town may assess a lien on the subject property for the total charges including permit fees, inspection fees, attorney’s fees and court costs for any bill which remains unpaid for a period of thirty days.

Section 7-5-10 Reserved

Section 7-5-11 Backfilling, Filling and Temporary Pavement Patches
A. Backfill and fill material and the methods of filling and backfilling shall meet town specifications. Excavated material not suitable for backfilling shall be removed from the site.
B. Immediately after backfill and compaction of any trench, hole or other excavation has been completed in areas where the pavement has been cut, a permanent patch should be installed. However, where arrangements cannot be made to install the permanent patch, and if permission is granted by the town engineer, a temporary patch utilizing a cold mix asphalt may be made. This patch must be compacted leaving the surface level and drivable. The final permanent patch must be made within fourteen calendar days after installation of the temporary patch. The final patch in the paving area shall be as prescribed in the town standards and specifications.
C. The job site shall be cleaned up; all waste materials shall be removed, and the general condition of the site shall be as good or better than before construction, including replacing any objects such as trees, curbs, sidewalks, grader ditches, signs, etc., that were in existence prior to construction. This clean-up work shall be done no later than forty-eight hours from completion of the backfill. Final approval of clean-up shall be given by the town engineer or his authorized representative.
D. It is the responsibility of the applicant or his contractor to maintain the trench and temporary patch until such time as the permanent patch has been installed.

Section 7-5-12 Beautification Within Public Right-of-Way
A. The town encourages all property owners to beautify the parkway areas adjacent to their property. The improvements include, but are not limited to: Portland cement concrete sidewalks, trees and shrubs, planters and gravel or rock.
B. When consideration is being given to beautify a parkway area, the property owner must consider the safety of the pedestrians, possibility of underground utilities (present and future), vehicular traffic and obstructions to traffic signs as well as line-of-sight (as with corner lots). Accordingly, a property owner wishing to beautify the adjacent parkway area shall submit a plan or sketch showing the proposed improvement (with distances and dimensions indicated) to the town engineer together with a notarized statement saving the town harmless from damages and, if required, an insurance policy covering any injury or liability which might occur due to these improvements. Upon approval by the town engineer, the owner will then obtain the necessary permits to do the work.
C. By this chapter, it is the duty of such property owners seeking to beautify parkway areas adjacent to their property as provided for in this section, to keep trees, bushes or plants trimmed in such manner that the same will not interfere with reasonable vehicular use of such street, alley or parkway. Maintenance of said parkway areas shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner who has sought to beautify said adjacent parkway areas.

Section 7-5-13 Brush Cutting and Clearing in the Town Rights-of Way
A. Brush, trees and any other vegetation whose root base is in either private property or in the town right-of-way which protrudes into the public right-of-way and in any way impedes the health, safety and welfare of traffic, whether vehicular or on foot, shall be prohibited.
B. In the event that the adjacent property resident or owner does not keep the growth free from encroaching upon the public right-of-way, the town may trim and clear all growth protruding on, and projecting vertically over, the public right-of-way in a manner which, as determined by the town, provides clearance and sight distance for all types of traffic.

Article 7-6 GOLF CART PATHS CROSSING PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:
7-6-1        Golf Cart Paths Crossing Public Rights-of-Way

Section 7-6-1 Golf Cart Paths Crossing Public Rights-of-Way
A. Golf cart paths on certain public or private streets may be allowed provided approval has been obtained from the town engineer.
B. The town engineer can only give approval after he has obtained a report or plan which completely identifies the crossing location, the traffic analysis, the location and sizes of all traffic control devices and any other pertinent data. The report or plan must be prepared by an Arizona registered professional traffic engineer and must be stamped and signed by the engineer.
C. The company or person requesting the golf cart path must retain the professional engineer to do the design work and must pay for and install all signing, striping and any other required traffic control devices.

Article 7-7 THE VACATING OF EASEMENT AND/OR PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:
7-7-1        Application Required
7-7-2        Review of Application
7-7-3        Application Fees
7-7-4        Verification of Easement Status by Town Manager
7-7-5        Notice of Hearing
7-7-6        Time Limits

Section 7-7-1 Application Required
Any person may apply to the Town Engineer’s Office for the vacating by the Town of all or a portion of any public street, alley or easement which is subject to being vacated by the Town pursuant to Arizona State Law. All such applications for vacating shall be submitted for project review upon forms prepared and available from the Town Engineer’s office and shall be accompanied by the following information:
A. An accurate legal description and map of the street, alley or easement, or part thereof, sought to be vacated. The map must include an accurate list of properties abutting the property to be vacated along with current property owners’ names and addresses including all persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities owning abutting property. A current title report shall be submitted at the time of the application showing all current owners of the abutting properties.
B. Permission and authorization for the requested vacating from all affected public utilities.
C. A complete, written explanation by the applicant why the vacating is sought, and why it is felt that the Town no longer requires the use of said property for public purposes.
D. Applicant shall furnish at time of the application appropriate Quit Claim Deed forms setting forth accurate legal descriptions of the property proposed to be conveyed by the Town pursuant to the request of vacating for vacating. The Quit Claim Deeds shall be in a form sufficient to convey title in the manner set forth in ARS 28-1902 et seq.

Section 7-7-2 Review of Application
All applications for the vacating of streets, alleys or easements shall be reviewed by the appropriate Town staff. On the basis of such review, the Town Manager shall have reports and recommendations submitted to the Town Council. If the application has been found to be complete, the Town Manager shall set a date for the hearing of the application. All applications other than those referred to in Section 7-7-4 shall be heard and decided upon by the Town Council. The decision to grant the request for vacating shall be solely at the discretion of the Town Council.

Section 7-7-3 Application Fees
A. At the time of filing an application for the vacating of a public utility easement or of any street, alley or an easement for right-or-way, the applicant shall pay a fee of seven hundred and eighty dollars ($780.00) to cover legal and administrative costs incurred by the Town. This fee may be reduced or waived by the Town Council. The request for waiver or reduction shall be in writing and shall specify the reasons for the request. The request for waiver or reduction may be submitted prior to the application submittal or at the public hearing on the application.
B. Separate applications must be filed for each street, alley or easement which the Town is being requested to vacate except in cases where the street, alley or easement is contiguous.
C. No application fee is required if:
    1. The application is made by Town staff or upon Town Council initiative.
    2. The application is no more than a request for a verification of a condition that has already occurred and which terminates an easement in accordance with Section 7-7-4.
    3. Upon hearing by the Town Council, the Town Council has granted a waiver of the application fees.

Section 7-7-4 Verification of Easement Status by Town Manager
A request that the Town verify the conditions which vacated a street, alley or easement shall not be subject to the requirements for vacating of easements and public rights-of-way. The Town Manager shall review the verification request and confirm the prior status, as reflected by Town records.

Section 7-7-5 Notice of Hearing
Upon receipt of a complete application for vacating as described in Section 7-7-3, the Town Clerk shall cause to be published and posted a notice of a hearing upon said application before the Town Council. Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than five days prior to the hearing by publication of the notice at least once in the official newspaper used for legal publications by the Town. Also, the notice of public hearing shall be given to all adjacent property owners by first class mail. In addition, notice of the public hearing shall be posted a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the public on the affected property in at least three (3) locations, one at each end and one centrally located on the public easement and/or public right-of-way. The posted notice shall be printed so that the following are visible from a distance of 100 feet:"Public Hearing, Request for Vacating." All of the above-described notices shall contain the nature of the request, a legal description of the property to be vacated, the time and place of hearing and a statement that anyone wishing to protest the proposed vacating may do so at the hearing in person or by writing. Upon passage of a resolution of vacating the easement and/or public right-of-way, such vacating shall become final and the Town Clerk shall be authorized to provide any party with a copy of the resolution.

Section 7-7-6 Time Limits
The vacating shall be effective upon approval by the Town Council, however, if additional requirements or conditions have been placed upon the approval, the vacating shall not be effective until the conditions or requirements has been satisfied. The applicant shall have sixty (60) days from the time of the Council hearing to complete the additional requirements for conditions placed upon the approval period. By action of the Council, one time extension of not more than sixty (60) days may be granted as long as a formal written request has been submitted to the Council before the expiration date. If the conditions imposed by the Town Council are not met, or the time limit has expired, the approval will automatically become null and void.

Article 7-8 ACCEPTANCE OF EXISTING PRIVATE STREETS, SIDEWALKS, TRAILS, DRAINAGE AND UTILITY EASEMENT AS PUBLIC DOMAIN

Sections:
7-8-1        Acceptance of Existing Private Streets, Sidewalks, Trails, Drainage and Utility Easement as Public Domain

Section 7-8-1 Acceptance of Existing Private Streets, Sidewalks, Trails, Drainage and Utility Easement as Public Domain
An existing private street, sidewalk, trail, drainageway, utility and other easement shall not be accepted for designation under public domain until the Town Council has formally accepted by a public vote, the private streets, sidewalks, trails, etc. The satisfaction of the procedures and conditions set forth herein does not guarantee or obligate acceptance by the Town.
A. Whenever areas must be platted or re-platted in order to dedicate street rights-of-way, sidewalk, drainage and utility easements and other easements, the platting or re-platting shall conform to current Town Standards at the time of the request for acceptance
B. Where easement, liens, other property rights, rights to any person, utility or corporation have been previously dedicated, granted or otherwise conveyed, within the proposed rights-of-way, a release must be obtained from each person, utility or corporation agreeing to the change in ownership. A comprehensive title report showing all property interests in the property sought to be considered for acceptance shall be furnished to the Town at the time of the application.
C. A marketable title subject only to necessary public utility easements, must be deeded to the Town. Proof that no liens or taxes are due on the property to be deeded must be provided to the Town. Further, a warranty deed subject only to necessary public utility easements shall be provided. Upon acceptance by the Town, a title insurance policy shall be furnished by the applicant showing the title is vested in the Town, subject only to necessary public utility easements.
D. An environmental audit shall be prepared by a qualified environmental professional certifying that no known or potential environmental hazards exist with respect to the properties being considered for acceptance as public domain. This audit shall be submitted prior to consideration by the Town Council of the request for acceptance.
E. Only those streets, drainageways and rights-of-way for which an environmental audit certifies there are no known or potential environmental hazards on any of the property to be deeded or dedicated to the public may be considered for acceptance for maintenance by the Town; and
F. When appropriate, the Town Engineer may require a map and plat showing proposed right-of-way widths, building setbacks, sidewalk locations, easement widths and locations, curve data and other pertinent geometric details. This map or plat must be drawn to a scale of 1" - 50' (pr 1" =100' of receiving prior written approval form the Town Engineer) by licensed professional engineer or land surveyor. A complete legal description of the area being proposed for acceptance must also be submitted with the map or plat.
G. An hydrology report must be submitted showing all drainageways, drainage structures and 100 year storm (Q 100) flows on, crossing and/or impacting the private streets, sidewalks, trails, easements, etc. This hydrology report must include maps showing the source of the water, how the water flows over, and crosses, the property described for Town acceptance and how the waters flow into the major drainageways (such as Big Wash, Cañada del oro, etc).
H. The existing street construction details must be certified by a professional civil engineer licensed and registered in the State of Arizona. This certification must be accompanied by surveys, sketches, existing cross-sections and test borings for all streets giving the pavement material and drainage data including storm drainage analysis or current conditions. The design shall be one that met all reasonable engineering standards at the time of construction. The applicant shall furnish documents certified by a registered professional engineer stating that engineering design and construction standards, at the time of construction, were met. Further, in the event that streets were redesigned and/or reconstructed, the engineer shall certify that such redesign and/or reconstruction complied with Engineering Design and Construction Standards at the time of re-engineering or reconstruction.
I. The date of the construction of the street, trail, easement, etc. was completed and a history of maintenance including types of maintenance treatment and dates must be furnished.
J. After review of the submitted data by the Town Engineering and Planning and Zoning staffs, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing to consider acceptance, with notice of such hearing being published in one issue of the official newspaper used by the Town for publishing of legal advertisements, in accordance with the Town’s publication requirements for non-zoning matters, not less than 15 full calendar days prior to the date of such hearing.
K. The above requirements may be reduced or waived by the Town Council. The request for waiver or reduction shall be in writing and shall specify the reasons for the request. This request for waiver may be submitted prior to, or in conjunction with, the application. The request for waiver will be acted upon at a regularly scheduled Council meeting at which time the applicant, or the applicant’s representative, shall be present to respond to any Council inquiries.
L. The Town Council, after the public hearing, may render a decision as to whether it will accept, or not accept, the street, trail, easement, etc. Such decision shall be at the Town Council’s sole discretion. Formal approval of the Town Council shall be required to accept any street, trail, easement, etc.

Article 7-9 ACCEPTANCE OF DEEDED OR DEDICATED STREETS, DRAINAGEWAYS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:
7-9-1        Acceptance of Deeded or Dedicated Streets, Drainageways and Rights-of-Way

Section 7-9-1 Acceptance of Deeded or Dedicated Streets, Drainageways and Rights-of-Way
A. In accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the Town of Oro Valley Subdivision Street Standards and Policies and/or sound engineering practices, the Town Engineer shall accept for full maintenance by the Town such streets, drainage-ways and rights-of-way intended to be deeded to the public whether depicted on a recorded final plat or on an approved development plan.
B. The final recorded plats and development plans pertaining to such streets, drainage-ways and rights-of-way must have been reviewed and approved by all appropriate agencies of the Town. The approved streets, drainage-ways and rights-of-way shall become property of the Town at the time of recordation.
C. The final recorded plats and development plans pertaining to such streets, drainageways and rights-of-way must have been reviewed and approved by all appropriate agencies of the Town.
D. Improvement plans and construction details must be certified by a professional civil engineer licensed and registered in the State of Arizona. This certification must be accompanied by surveys, sketches, existing cross-sections and test borings for all streets giving the pavement material and drainage data including storm drainage analysis.
E. All street name signs, traffic control/pedestrian control signs and their appurtenant supports must conform to the Town of Oro Valley specifications or, in the case of no specifications, those of Pima County or the State of Arizona or Federal Government. In the case of such signs and posts having been installed prior to the passage of this ordinance, the Town of Oro Valley disclaims all responsibility to maintain any special signs and/or posts which are not in conformance to the appropriate specifications, the responsibility being that of the developers, their successors and/or assigns. The Town may at any time install or replace such signs and posts with standard specification signs and posts which shall thenceforth remain under Town control.
F. Prior to the release of subdivision assurances, the developer shall post a cash assurance or other assurance acceptable to the Town Engineer in an amount determined by the Town Engineer, to ensure that construction defects are repaired and an acceptable surface treatment is performed upon cessation of new home construction within the subdivision. If improvements are phased, the amount of the assurance shall be based upon the phase under construction. The cash assurance and accrued interest will be returned to the developer upon completion of repairs of deficiencies identified and a surface treatment acceptable to the Town Engineer is provided. In the event that issuance of building permits for new homes at the subdivision is discontinued for six months, or immediate repairs not performed by the developer are necessary, the Town may utilize the assurance to perform required maintenance.
G. Prior to consideration for acceptance, a letter of certification from the Professional Engineer of Record stating that all construction within the streets, drainageways and rights-of-way have been build in substantial conformance with the accepted plans and specifications and that all materials utilized are in conformance with the accepted plans and specifications, shall be furnished to the Town. Any deviations from the accepted improvement plans shall be documented in As-Built Drawings certified by a qualified registrant.
H. A complete construction history of the streets from the date of plat to the date of a request for acceptance of the street, easement, etc., including a history of maintenance, and types of maintenance treatment and dates, must be furnished.
I. The above requirements may be reduced or waived by the Town Council. In addition such other requirements as may be necessary to ensure the public safety, to reduce the economic impact of street acceptance upon the citizens of the Town may be required by the Town Council.
J. The developer, his successors or assigns shall be responsible for street sweeping until new construction activities have ceased. ((O)02-38, Amended, )

CHAPTER 8 BUSINESS REGULATIONS

Articles:
8-1          Peddler/Solicitor/Transient Merchant/Canvasser/Demonstrator
8-2          Business License Tax
8-3          Special Events Permit
8-4          Sexually Oriented Businesses
8-5          Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and Scrap Metal Dealers

Article 8-1 PEDDLER/SOLICITOR/TRANSIENT MERCHANT/CANVASSER/DEMONSTRATOR

Sections:
8-1-1        Definitions
8-1-2        Licensing Required
8-1-3        Application to Town Clerk
8-1-4        Investigation of Applicant; Issuance of License
8-1-4.1      Repealed
8-1-4.2      Repealed
8-1-5        Fees
8-1-6        Revocation, Restriction or Suspension of License
8-1-7        Appeals Process
8-1-8        License Required; Prohibited Activities
8-1-9        Penalties
8-1-10       Signs to be Observed
8-1-11       Charitable, Religious and Educational Organizations; Exemption
8-1-12       Bond Required
8-1-13       License Expiration
8-1-14       Transfer of Registration Prohibited
8-1-15       Hours of Solicitation

Section 8-1-1 Definitions
A. “Peddler” means any person, corporate or individual, firm or other entity, whether resident of the Town or not, who travels or whose agent travels from place to place, from house to house, from street to street or business to business for the purpose of selling, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, edible foodstuffs or other provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering such articles to purchasers. It is further provided that a person who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes delivery to purchasers as a part of the scheme or design to evade the provisions of this title shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions contained in this chapter; provided, that the definition shall include any person or firm who, for himself or itself or for another person or firm, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, permanent or temporary structure, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any street, alley, sidewalk or other place within the Town.
B. “Solicitor” means any person, corporate or individual, firm or other entity, whether resident of the town or not, who travels, or whose agents travel, from place to place, from house to house, from street to street or from business to business taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, edible foodstuffs, or other personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether collecting advance payments on those sales or not; provided, that the definition shall also include any person or firm who, for himself or itself or for another person or firm, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, permanent or temporary structure, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any street, alley, sidewalk or other place within the Town.
C. “Transient merchant” means any person, corporate or individual, firm or other entity, whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident of the town or not, who engages or whose agents engage in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise, edible foodstuffs, services or provisions within the town, and who, in furtherance of that purpose, shall include any person or firm who, for himself or itself or for another person or firm, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, permanent or temporary structure, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any street, alley, sidewalk or other place within the Town.
D. “Canvasser” means any person, corporate or individual, firm or other entity, whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident of the Town or not, who travels or whose agents travel from place to place, from house to house, from street to street or business to business to solicit orders, or who conducts a survey of public opinion and who, in furtherance of that purpose, shall include any person or firm who, for himself or itself or for another person or firm, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, permanent or temporary structure, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any street, alley, sidewalk or other place within the Town.
E. “Demonstrator” means any person, corporate or individual, firm or other entity, whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident of the Town or not, who travels or whose agents travel from place to place, from house to house, from street to street or business to business demonstrating products for sale, and who, in furtherance of that purpose, shall include any person or firm who, for himself or itself or for another person or firm, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, permanent or temporary structure, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any street, alley, sidewalk or other place within the Town. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-2 Licensing Required
Subject to the provisions of ARS § 3-563, any person operating as a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser or demonstrator within the Town shall register with the Town Clerk and obtain a license showing that registration. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-3 Application to Town Clerk
Applicants under this article must file with the Town Clerk a notarized application in writing on a form furnished by the Town Clerk, which shall contain, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information:
A. Name and physical description of applicant.
B. Complete business address and complete permanent home address of the applicant. In the case of a transient merchant, the local address from which the proposed sales will be made or facilitated.
C. A description of the product(s) to be sold in the Town, along with information regarding sales methods to be used. Applicants shall provide the names of, and a means of contacting, at least two property owners residing in Pima County, who will certify as to the applicant’s good character and business reputation, or, in lieu of the names of such references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business reputation of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate the applicant’s character and business responsibility. Initial investigation by the Chief of Police under the provision of this article shall be completed within fifteen (15) business days after the applicant has submitted the required information. This time may be extended if information obtained during the initial investigation necessitates additional investigation. The applicant shall furnish information relating to other licenses obtained by the applicant, including whether such licenses have been revoked.
D. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with proof establishing the employment relationship. No post office boxes will be accepted.
E. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
F. A description of any vehicles, including license number and valid vehicle registration to be used in conducting business in the Town.
G. The applicant shall furnish two photographs of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, measuring one and one-half inches (1-1/2") by two inches (2"), and showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. One shall be attached to the applicant’s identification card and the other shall be retained by the Police Department.
H. The Chief of Police shall require the applicant to file his/her fingerprint identification with the Police Department.
I. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of: (1) any criminal offense, whether felony or misdemeanor, other than minor traffic violations; and (2) any violation of any municipal laws. As to any such offense, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed must be provided as part of the application.
J. The most recent counties, cities or towns, if any, where the applicant carried on business preceding the date of application and the address from which the business was conducted in those municipalities.
K. If the applicant is under the age of eighteen (18), such applicant shall not be fingerprinted but no license shall be issued unless the minor’s parent(s) or guardian(s) appear personally before the Town Clerk or the authorized designee and provide the following:
    1. Satisfactory evidence that the person or persons are in fact the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the particular applicant.
    2. A written statement signed by the parent(s) or guardian(s) and witnessed by the Town Clerk, or his/her designee, giving permission for the applicant to be licensed upon the meeting of the provisions of this article. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-4 Investigation of Applicant; Issuance of License
A. Upon receipt of an application, the Town Clerk’s office shall forward a copy of the application to the Chief of Police or his/her designee, who shall conduct a background check on the applicant, as deemed necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
B. If, as the result of investigation regarding the business reputation and the criminal record of the applicant, the Town Clerk and/or Chief of Police find that issuance of a license will endanger the public health, safety or general welfare, the Town Clerk’s or Chief of Police’s denial and the reasons for denial shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified by the Town Clerk that his/her application is denied and that no license shall be issued. Examples of instances in which denial may occur include, but are not limited to, the following: applicant has criminal convictions whether misdemeanors and/or felonies involving crimes of dishonesty, deceit, trickery, fraud and/or assault or violent crimes; applicant is associated with a company that has engaged in fraudulent dealings; the proposed or previous sales of applicant include or have included some element of trickery, fraud, dishonesty or deceit. Notice of denial of a license shall be mailed, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant’s last known address. The applicant may request a review of such denial pursuant to Section 8-1-7.
C. If, as the result of investigation, both the business reputation and the criminal record of the applicant are found to be satisfactory by both the Town Clerk and the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall endorse his/her approval on the application and shall return the application to the Town Clerk who shall endorse his/her approval on the application. Upon such endorsement and payment of the prescribed business license fee, the Town Clerk shall issue the required license/identification card to the applicant. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-4.1 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-01.

Section 8-1-4.2 Repealed
Repealed by (O)07-01.

Section 8-1-5 Fees
A. Before issuing a license, the applicant shall pay a fee which is due and collected on or before January 31st of each year. The fee for such license is eighty dollars ($80.00).
B. Any annual business license fee unpaid after it is due and payable is delinquent. The Town Clerk shall, on the day the business license fee becomes delinquent, add thereto a penalty in the sum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total unpaid fee. If a delinquent business license fee remains unpaid for a period of fifteen (15) days, the licensee shall be guilty of the civil violation or operating a business as defined by this chapter without a license.
C. Prorating Annual Fees. Annual business license fees shall be diminished by one-twelfth (1/12) of the full annual license fee for each month of the business license period which has fully lapsed at the date of the license application. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-6 Revocation, Restriction or Suspension of License
A. A license under this article may be revoked, restricted or suspended by the Town after notice by the Town Clerk for any of the following causes: (1) fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application; (2) fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the applicant in the course of carrying on the business of peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser or demonstrator; (3) conviction of any assault or violent crime(s); (4) violation of any provision of this article; (5) conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude; (6) conducting the business of peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser or demonstrator in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or pose a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; (7) failure to pay any license fee or sales tax; (8) violation of licensing or other ordinances; (9) unlawful business practices; (10) unlawful conduct of employees of the licensee; (11) violation of regulations of a federal administrative agency; (12) cancellation of the licensee’s bond by a surety; (13) unlawful conduct by the licensee; and (14) as deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and protection.
B. If a license is revoked, the revocation shall be effective immediately and the applicant shall not conduct any business activity within the Town. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-7 Appeals Process
At the time of denial or revocation, the Town Clerk shall give written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person in control of the business that the license has been denied or revoked. The notice shall also advise that the applicant or licensee shall have ten (10) business days to file and appeal to the Town Manager or his/her designee for the purpose of determining whether the license should have been denied or revoked. Any appeal shall be in writing, on a form provided by the Town Clerk, and shall set forth all facts and arguments concerning whether the license should have been denied or revoked. If the appeal is not timely made, the Clerk’s decision is final. The decision of the Town Manager and/or his/her designee is final and binding. The written decision shall be sent by regular mail to the business address. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-8 License Required; Prohibited Activities
When displaying the license issued by the Town, only the original license shall be displayed. It is unlawful for:
A. Any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, or demonstrator to act in furtherance of the commercial activity described in Section 8-1-1 by entering upon private residential property, public or Town property without having first obtained a license and identification card; without having the Town Clerk-issued identification card in their possession; or failing to exhibit such identification card when request is made for the card by the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises.
B. Any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, or demonstrator to erect or maintain any moveable booth, stand or counter on any sidewalk, street or alley in the Town for the carrying, conveying or transporting of goods, wares, merchandise, edible foodstuffs, services or provisions in any wagon, cart, wheel, vehicle, moveable booth or stand for the purpose of carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, edible foodstuffs, services or provisions and/or canvassing and demonstrating.
C. Any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, or demonstrator to operate in a congested area where the operation may impede or inconvenience the public use of the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, is conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the public is impeded or inconvenienced.
D. Any child or children under the age of eighteen (18) years to be a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, or demonstrator within the Town pursuant to a permit granted under this chapter unless supervised by a responsible adult holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-9 Penalties
A. Criminal. Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be guilty of committing a Class 1 misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. Civil. In the alternative, the Town may pursue enforcement of this article by filing a civil action. In such instance, if a violation of any portion of the article occurs, a complaint shall be filed with the Town Magistrate Court and served upon the defendant by certified mail. At the violation hearing, the Town is required to prove the violation charged by a preponderance of the evidence. Technical rules of evidence do not apply except for statutory provisions relating to privileged communications. If the defendant is found to have violated any provision of this article, the magistrate shall impose a civil penalty of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In the event the defendant should fail to appear, the Town may seek judgment by default. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-10 Signs to be Observed
It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, or demonstrator, while conducting the business of peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, or demonstrator, to enter upon any residential premises in the Town to ring the doorbell or knock at any building where the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises has posted in plain view at the entry to the premises, on or near the doorway of the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises a sign bearing the words “No Peddlers,” “No Solicitors,” “No Canvassers” or a similar message. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-11 Charitable, Religious and Educational Organizations; Exemption
A. Any organization, society, association or corporation or other entity desiring to solicit, or have solicited in its name, money, donations of money or property, or financial assistance of any kind, or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from persons, other than members of such organization, upon the streets, in office or business buildings, by house-to-house canvass, or in public places for a charitable, religious, educational, or similar nonprofit purpose, shall be exempt from the payment of fees as provided in Section 8-1-5, provided there is filed a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk which shall give the following information:
    1. Name and purpose of the cause for which permit is sought.
    2. Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization.
    3. Period during which solicitation is to be carried on.
    4. Names and addresses of all persons who will engage in solicitation activities.
    5. Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or emoluments are to be expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount thereof.
    6. Exempt applicants shall cite to the Town Clerk the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall provide proof of qualification for such exemption.
    7. Before commencing any fund drive, the organization shall file with the Town Clerk the dates of solicitation and a verified statement or a declaration under the penalty of perjury, signed by the president or other duly authorized officer of the organization, indicating that the organization qualifies as tax exempt under Federal or State income tax laws.
B. Upon being satisfied that such organization, association or corporation is a religious, educational, charitable, or similar nonprofit organization, the Town Clerk shall issue a permit without charge to such organization, association or corporation to solicit in the Town. Such organization, association or corporation shall furnish all of its members, agents or representatives conducting solicitation written credentials stating the name of the organization, name of the agent and purpose of solicitation.
C. Notwithstanding the provision of this section, individuals soliciting for nonprofit, charitable and religious purposes must refrain from soliciting if the premises is posted in the manner set forth in Section 8-1-10 with a sign bearing the words “No Peddlers,” “No Solicitors,” “No Canvassers” or words of similar import and shall be subject to the prohibitions set forth in Section 8-1-8. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-12 Bond Required
Any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, or demonstrator, before any license is issued to any person, corporate or individual, firm or other entity, pursuant to this article, shall file with the Town Clerk a good and sufficient bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) payable to the Town executed by two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties or by a surety company authorized to become surety on such bonds in the State or in lieu thereof shall file a cash deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with the Town Clerk. Such bond or cash deposit shall be conditioned that the whole or any part of such sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be paid to any person failing to receive a delivery of goods ordered or services to be performed in accordance with the terms of any order given, for the amount such person has advanced as payment in whole or in part on any such order, and such bond or cash deposit shall be conditioned further that any person aggrieved by the action of any such person shall have a right of action against such bond for the recovery of money or damages or both. Every business, firm, company or corporation, which has employees or agents acting in the capacity of peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, or demonstrator, shall file with the Town a blanket surety bond or cash deposit covering all such employees or agents and payable to the Town in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such bond shall be retained by the Town for a period of ninety (90) days after the expiration of the license granted at the time of the filing of such bond and shall be paid to any person failing to receive a delivery of the goods ordered or services to be performed in accordance with the terms of any order given for the amount such person has advanced as payment in whole or in part on any such order, and such bond or cash deposit shall be conditioned further that any person aggrieved by the action against such bond for the recovery of money or damages or both. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-13 License Expiration
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it was issued unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the license. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-14 Transfer of Registration Prohibited
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be assigned or transferred to any other person, corporation, partnership or other entity without first obtaining permission from the Town Clerk. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-1-15 Hours of Solicitation
It is unlawful for any person, while conducting the business of a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser or demonstrator, to enter upon any residential premises between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. ((O)07-01, Enacted,  01/17/2007)

Article 8-2 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX

Sections:
8-2-1        Definitions
8-2-2        License
8-2-3        Collection and Payments
8-2-4        Officers
8-2-5        Penalties
8-2-6        Schedule
8-2-7        Exemption
8-2-8        Repealed

Section 8-2-1 Definitions
In this article unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Business” means all activities or acts including any occupation, trade, calling, or profession, whether personal or corporate.
B. “Peddler” means a person who sells merchandise from a location other than a permanent location whether as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, salesman or vendor of goods, wares, merchandise, magazines or services.
C. “Transaction of business” means to practice, carry on, engage in, or operate a business with the object of profit, gain, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirect, whether or not profit is actually generated.
D. “Public market” means any group or groups of persons brought together by a central organizing body at a single event, or periodically, for the purpose of selling or reselling goods or merchandise for profit at a public location including, but not limited to, farmers’ markets and other similar events.
E. “Mobile food unit” means a food establishment that is licensed by this State, that is readily movable and that dispenses food or beverages for immediate service and consumption and other incidental retail items from any vehicle as defined in A.R.S. 28-101. ((O)18-13, Amended,  10/03/2018; (O)16-14, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)03-39, Amended,  12/03/2003; (O)95-87, Amended,  01/01/1996)

Section 8-2-2 License
A. Requirement for License. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, practice, transact or carry on any business, as set out in this article, without first having procured a license from the Town to do so, or without complying with any and all regulations of such trade, calling, profession, occupation or business. The granting of a license is not to be deemed as evidence or proof that the licensee has complied with the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of the Oro Valley Town Code, nor shall it estop prosecution by the town for any violation of its Town Code.
B. Issuance by Town Clerk; Contents. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or designated person, to prepare and issue a license under this article for each person required to be licensed hereunder. The license shall contain on its face the license fee, the time period covered, the name of the licensee, the business licensed and the location or the place of business licensed.
C. Compliance with Article. The license tax shall be as provided hereunder and each license shall be issued for the period of time provided in this article.
D. Exemptions. License taxes levied by the Town of Oro Valley shall not be presumed to apply to any part of a business which is a part of interstate commerce, or in which such business is conducted as an agency or department of the United States Government for which such government has failed to make provisions allowing states and municipalities to so tax.
E. Exemptions for Occupations Paying Privilege Tax. This article shall not apply to, or be deemed to impose an occupational license tax from, any person licensed and taxed pursuant to Chapter 8A; provided, however, such exemption shall only apply to that portion of his business activities for which the tax levied pursuant to Chapter 8A must be paid; and further provided, that such person shall pay an occupational license tax pursuant to this chapter as to any portion of his business activities for which the tax levied pursuant to Chapter 8A is not applicable.
F. Separate Licenses Required for Separate Places of Business. A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate place of business. The person licensed shall conduct only the business described in the license and only at the location or place of business therein described.
G. Licenses To Be Displayed; Exhibition Upon Demand. Every person having a license under the provisions of this article carrying on a business at a fixed place of business shall keep such license posted and exhibited in a conspicuous place within the business. Persons having a license but without a fixed place or location of business shall carry such license at all times while conducting the business for which the license was granted. Licensee shall produce and exhibit the license whenever requested by any police officer or any person authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses.
H. When Certificate or Permit from Health Department Required. A license for any business subjected to a certificate of health or sanitary examination will not be issued until the requisite inspection or examination is completed and a certificate or permit has been issued by the Pima County Health Department.
I. Transferability, Assignability. Licenses are nontransferable and nonassignable; except, the Town Clerk may, upon receipt of a transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00) and an updated application, authorize the transfer or assignment of any license to another person by written endorsement thereon, when satisfied that the original applicant sold or otherwise disposed of all interest in the business for which such license was issued and that the transferee or assignee has complied with all other provisions of this article.
J. Applicability to Business, Occupations Located Outside Town. Persons who conduct an established business, profession, trade or calling outside the Town limits, but solicit, canvass or advertise within the Town and deliver products or perform a service within the Town shall pay a license tax.
K. Notice of Termination of Business Required. Notification of termination of the licensed business shall be made to the Town in writing no later than ten (10) days after termination of the business. ((O)06-21, Amended,  10/18/2006)

Section 8-2-3 Collection and Payments
A. Mistake Does Not Prevent Collection of Correct Amount. The Town shall not be prejudiced or estopped from collecting the correct amount of license tax due as provided by this article regardless of whether a mistake occurred by the Town in stating, fixing or collecting the tax.
B. Time, Place of Payment Generally. All taxes required by this article shall be paid in advance to the Town Clerk at the Oro Valley Town Hall.
C. When Taxes Due. The license tax shall become due and be collected commencing at the time business begins within the Town limits and thereafter shall be due prior to January 31st of each year.
D. Prorating Annual Taxes. Annual license taxes shall be diminished by one-twelfth (1/12) of the full annual license tax for each month of the tax period which has fully lapsed at the date of the license application.

Section 8-2-4 Officers
A. Appointment of License Inspectors; General Duties. The Oro Valley Police Department shall be appointed as license inspectors. It shall be the duty of the license inspectors to inspect all places of business subject to the provisions of this article and report all violations to the Town Clerk.
B. Right of Entry of Town Clerk, License Inspectors, Police; Arrest Authority. The Town Clerk, license inspectors and police officers shall have and exercise the power to enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for which a license is required by this article, and to demand the exhibition of the license for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business.
Denial of right of entry by the licensee, his agents or employees shall be a misdemeanor. Police officers may make arrests in the discharge of their duties for violations of any provisions of this article.
C. Town Clerk, Inspectors To File Complaints. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, license inspectors or others to whom the duty is given, to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of this article.
D. Monthly Report of Town Clerk Required. The Town Clerk shall report the total amount of all licenses collected to the Mayor and Council.
E. Records. The Town Clerk shall keep such records and accounts as shall be necessary to adequately show separately the taxes collected under each of the classifications and amounts collected from businesses taxed by this article. The Town Clerk shall keep full and accurate records of all monies received and shall preserve all reports and tax returns filed pursuant to the terms hereof for a period of four (4) years.
F. Rules and Regulations. The Town Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to formulate rules and regulations and prescribe forms and procedures necessary to the efficient enforcement of this article. When approved by the Mayor and Council, such rules and regulations, forms and procedures shall be binding upon and obeyed by all persons taxed by this article, after three (3) copies of any such rules and regulations shall have been filed in the office of the Town Clerk and there kept for the use of any such taxpayer and the public at any time during regular office hours of that office. A printed copy of all rules and regulations shall be furnished to any person taxed by this article upon request.

Section 8-2-5 Penalties
A. Operating Without a License. It shall be a civil violation to operate a business as defined by this article without a license.
B. Delinquent License Tax. Any annual license tax unpaid after it is due and payable is delinquent. The Town Clerk shall, on the day the license tax becomes delinquent, add thereto a penalty in the sum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total unpaid tax. If a delinquent tax remains unpaid for a period of fifteen (15) days, the licensee shall be guilty of the civil violation of operating a business as defined by this article without a license.
C. Procedure. If a violation of any portion of this article occurs, a complaint shall be filed with the Town Magistrate Court and served upon the defendant by certified mail. At the violation hearing, the Town is required to prove the violation by a preponderance of the evidence. Technical rules of evidence do not apply, except for statutory provisions relating to privileged communications. If the defendant is found to have violated any provision of this article, the Magistrate shall impose a civil penalty of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In the event the defendant should fail to appear, the Town may seek judgment by default. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Revocation. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may, for good cause, be revoked.
E. The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any business without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license tax due or unpaid at the time of such conviction. ((O)07-01, Amended,  01/17/2007)

Section 8-2-6 Schedule
The license tax set out in the following schedule is hereby established for businesses and shall be paid by all persons who carry on or engage in any such businesses. The license tax set out herein shall become due and be collected commencing at the time business begins within the Town limits and thereafter shall be due prior to January 31st of each year.
+-----+----------------------+--------+
| (1) | Business License Tax | $80.00 |
+-----+----------------------+--------+
(Any and all businesses, occupations, trades, callings and professions not otherwise specifically listed separately in this schedule)
+-----+--------------------+--------+
| (2) | Liquor License Tax | $80.00 |
+-----+--------------------+--------+
LICENSE REQUIRED: Persons who have been licensed by the State of Arizona to deal in spirituous liquor within the town shall pay to the town an annual license fee.
+------+----------------------------+---------+
| (2a) | Application Processing Fee | $500.00 |
+------+----------------------------+---------+
Applications for liquor licenses, whether for an original or a transfer, shall be made on forms furnished by the State and shall be accompanied by all information furnished to the State with the application to the State Department of Liquor Licensing and Control. Every application shall be accompanied by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) application processing fee which shall be retained by the Town.
+-----+----------------------------+--------+
| (3) | Peddlers License Tax, each | $80.00 |
+-----+----------------------------+--------+
Bond required for transient merchants, Section 8-1-12
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------+
| (4) | Public Market License Tax (Operator)    | $80.00 |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------+
| (5) | Public Market License Tax (Participant) | $20.00 |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------+
Prior to the issuance of a mobile food unit license, each mobile food unit operator shall:
a. First provide proof of inspection by any city or town fire department in this State within the previous twelve (12) months from the time of application;
b. Pass inspection by any city or town fire department in this State;
c. Provide evidence supplied by any city or town fire department in this State that the mobile food unit passed inspection to the Town Clerk;
d. Provide evidence of a valid health permit issued by any county health department within this State to the Town Clerk;
e. Submit a complete business license application, pay all applicable business license fees and obtain final approval.
+-----+-------------------------------------------+--------+
| (6) | Mobile food vendor license tax (based in  | $80.00 |
|     | Oro Valley)                               |        |
+-----+-------------------------------------------+--------+
| (7) | Mobile food vendor license tax (not based | $20.00 |
|     | in Oro Valley)                            |        |
+-----+-------------------------------------------+--------+
((O)18-13, Amended,  10/03/2018; (O)16-14, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)11-16, Amended,  06/01/2011; (O)03-39, Amended,  12/03/2003; (O)98-06, Amended,  03/04/1998)

Section 8-2-7 Exemption
Persons engaged in any business listed in Section 8-2-6(1) who are subject to an annual license tax shall be exempt from one-half (1/2) of the license tax set out therein if gross income or gross revenue, whichever is greater, derived from the business licensed does not exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) during the calendar year immediately preceding the year for which the tax is collected. The licensee shall have the burden of applying for the exemption and of establishing the level of gross income or gross revenue, whichever is greater, derived during that year, on forms prescribed by the Town Clerk.

Section 8-2-8 Repealed
Repealed by (O)06-21.

Article 8-3 SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT

Sections:
8-3-1        Purpose; Definitions
8-3-2        Permit Required
8-3-3        Application
8-3-4        Grounds For Denial
8-3-5        Violations, Penalties

Section 8-3-1 Purpose; Definitions
A. The purpose of this article is to establish a process for permitting and regulating certain temporary activities conducted on public property or private property when public safety is potentially impacted. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of A.R.S. § 9-240, as amended, and is intended to provide fair and reasonable regulations governing the time, place, and manner in which a special event may take place and, in doing so, provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and assist the Town and its appropriate officers in enforcing the applicable provisions of A.R.S. Title 9 and Title 36.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
    1. “Special use”:
        a. Means any commercial function as defined in the Oro Valley Zoning Code revised which:
            i. May or may not comply with the underlying zoning district; or
            ii. Is seasonal or holiday-related; or
            iii. Is the temporary and attached expansion of an existing commercial use; or
            iv. Is permitted under the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised.
        b. Repealed.
    2. “park use”:
        a. Means any commercial or private function held at an Oro Valley owned public park which:
            i. Does not exceed the parking capacity of the park; or
            ii. Is not publicly advertised as open to the public; or
            iii. Employs no more than two pre-authorized food vendor for food services at the function (see Section 8-6-2 for licensing); or
            iv. Employs or otherwise requests to install no more than two (2) inflatable child play device at the function; or
            v. Unless otherwise provided in this section, the parks and recreation department is required to employ the expertise of other Oro Valley departments to approve the function.
        b. Does not require review as a special event as outlined below, may be approved under this section.
    3. “Special event”:
        a. Means any public or private function which:
            i. Requires temporary parking areas; or
            ii. Exceeds the parking capacity of the facility; or
            iii. Is held in a public park or on public right-of-way; or
            iv. Is advertised as open to the public; or
            v. Has amplified sound which can be heard outside of the event location; or
            vi. Requires temporary traffic control to provide for safe ingress or egress to the event venue; or
            vi. Requires a special event liquor license; or
            viii. Requires temporary sanitation facilities; or
            ix. Requires the installation of temporary structures or tents of more than one hundred (100) square feet; or
            x. Has other adverse impact on public health, safety and welfare.
        b. Shall not include:
            i. School functions at school facilities, unless spillover (as defined below) is anticipated; or
            ii. Repealed.
    4. “Major event” means a special event that also requires the following:
        a. Extra-duty law enforcement officers or other security services; and
        b. Temporary traffic control.
    5. “Spillover” occurs when participants of, or spectators to, a special event congregate on, park, or move to any property or right-of-way not associated with the event venue. ((O)16-13, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)10-06, Enacted,  07/07/2010)

Section 8-3-2 Permit Required
Any person wishing to operate, maintain or conduct any activity defined in Section 8-3-1 within the Town must first obtain a permit to do so. No permit shall be valid unless all permit conditions have been met and fulfilled. The maximum number of people permitted at any event will be based upon the nature of the event and the physical capacity of the site where the event will take place. ((O)10-06, Enacted,  07/07/2010)

Section 8-3-3 Application
An application on forms to be provided by the Town is required for any special event in Oro Valley. The application must be submitted to the Economic Development Division at least one hundred eighty (180) days before the first day of the proposed major special event. Applications for a special event must be submitted to the Economic Development Division at least sixty days (60) days in advance of the first day of the proposed special event. ((O)16-13, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)10-06, Enacted,  07/07/2010)

Section 8-3-4 Grounds For Denial
A. After reviewing the application material, the Economic Development Division may deny or revoke the issuance of a permit if any of the following apply:
    1. The applicant has failed to meet the permit conditions imposed.
    2. The proposed event is intended to be conducted in a manner or location not meeting the health, zoning, fire or safety standards established by rules or regulations of the Town, the laws of the State of Arizona or rules and regulations adopted by any of its agencies.
    3. The applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for permit or in any other document required pursuant to this section.
    4. The applicant, his or her employee, agent or any person associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final judgment, of an offense:
        a. Involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an obscene production, motion picture or play, and/or of selling obscene matter; or
        b. Involving lewd conduct; or
        c. Involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another; or
        d. Involving misconduct with children; or
        e. An offense against the provisions of Arizona law respecting narcotics and dangerous drugs, or of any equivalent offense under the law of any other state which if committed in Arizona would have been a violation of the Arizona statutory provisions.
    5. For any health, safety and/or welfare issues that will not be remedied or otherwise addressed in time for the event.
    6. The scheduled date of the event conflicts with other previously scheduled events such that it will result in an undue impact on the Town’s resources and staff.
B. If the application is denied, the Economic Development Division shall mail to the applicant written notice of denial within ten (10) days of the action. The notice shall include a statement of the reason(s) the application was denied. The applicant may request a review of this denial by the Town Manager who will schedule a meeting during which the applicant may present evidence in support of the application. ((O)16-13, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)10-06, Enacted,  07/07/2010)

Section 8-3-5 Violations, Penalties
A. Failure to comply with the conditions of a special event permit shall be a civil offense.
B. Each violation of any condition of a special event permit shall constitute a separate offense.
C. A person convicted of conducting a special event without a permit shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona.
D. Any violation cited under this section shall allow the Town to recoup all administrative costs associated with prosecution of the violation in addition to any imposed fines. ((O)10-06, Enacted,  07/07/2010)

Article 8-4 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES

Sections:
8-4-1        Definitions
8-4-2        Classification
8-4-3        License required; non-transferability; exceptions
8-4-4        License application
8-4-5        Issuance of license; denial; annual renewal required
8-4-6        Fees
8-4-7        Inspection
8-4-8        Expiration of license
8-4-9        Suspension
8-4-10       Revocation
8-4-11       Administrative appeal
8-4-12       Judicial review
8-4-13       Change of employment
8-4-14       Sale, transfer or expansion
8-4-15       Notices
8-4-16       Reserved
8-4-17       Additional regulations for escort agencies
8-4-18       Additional regulations for nude model studios
8-4-19       Solicitation of gratuity prohibited
8-4-20       Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and videos
8-4-21       Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses
8-4-22       Signage
8-4-23       Sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
8-4-24       Persons younger than eighteen prohibited from entry; attendant required
8-4-25       Hours of operation
8-4-26       Applicability to existing businesses
8-4-27       Violations, penalty and abatement

Section 8-4-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this Section:
A. “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to regularly show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B. “Adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store” or “adult video store” means a commercial establishment that, regardless of any other purposes it may have, and as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
    1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
    2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
C. “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
    1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
    2. Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities;
    3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
D. “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right of way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; and
    1. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours; or
    2. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours.
E. “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
F. “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity and/or semi-nudity, and/or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
G. “Adult vending machine” means any mechanical device that, regardless of any other purposes it may have, regularly publicly dispenses for any form or consideration any books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
H. “Employee” means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full time, part time, contract basis, or independent basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the said person is paid a salary, wage, commission or other compensation by the operator of said business. A person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises, as well as a person exclusively on the premises as a patron or customer is not an employee within the meaning of this article.
I. “Escort” means a person who, for pecuniary or other consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
J. “Escort agency” means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
K. “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
    1. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
    2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
    3. The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
    4. The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
    5. A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented business is located.
L. In assessing whether a particular business is a “family-oriented entertainment business,” the town clerk shall consider the following factors related to the business:
    1. Whether a primary business purpose is related to the sale of food or food services;
    2. Whether a primary business purpose relates to the sale or use of entertainment or educational products, services, facilities or activities;
    3. The age of patrons for or by which the services, facilities or activities of the business are primarily appropriate and utilized; and
    4. Whether the business is primarily a retail establishment.
A business determined to be primarily retail or a food services establishment is presumed to not qualify as a family-oriented entertainment business unless articulable reasons to the contrary are established by the town clerk.
M. “Licensee” means a person in whose name a license has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
N. “Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is regularly provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for consideration. For the purposes of this Section, “Nude model studio” does not include any business, school, institute or organization which regularly offers classes or workshops of photographic and fine art techniques and materials led by instructors trained or experienced in art techniques and materials handling, which employs or provides nude or seminude models for classes, workshops and open studio sessions, so long as such classes, workshops and sessions constitute no more than fifty (50%) of the combined annual total of instructional and open studio session hours provided.
O. “Nudity” or a “state of nudity” means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
P. “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Q. “Premises” means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, use or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant to this article.
R. “Principal Business Purpose” means anything greater than 10% of the floor area and greater than 5% of revenues attributable to sexually oriented business.
S. “Regularly,” “regularly features,” or “regularly shown” shall be construed to apply the provisions of this article only activities that take place outside the context of some larger form of expression.
T. “School” means a child care facility licensed pursuant to the Arizona Revised Statutes, title 36, chapter 7.1, or any public or private institution established for the purposes of offering instruction to pupils in programs for preschool children with disabilities, kindergarten programs or any combination of grades one through twelve, including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools; schools includes the school ground but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
U. “Semi-nude” or “semi-nudity” means the appearance of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breasts, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
V. “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration for:
    1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between any two persons of the opposite sex when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or
    2. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
W. “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult vending machine, adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, adult novelty store and sexual encounter center.
X. “Specified anatomical area” means:
    1. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely covered; or
    2. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Y. “Specified criminal activity” means any of the following offenses:
    1. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or any sex-related offenses similar to those described under the criminal code of Arizona, other states, or other countries;
    2. For which:
        a. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense;
        b. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
        c. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period.
    3. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
Z. “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following:
    1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
    2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
    3. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
    4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above.
AA. “Substantial enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than five (5%) percent.
BB. “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
    1. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
    2. The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
    3. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possession the ownership or control. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-2 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores, adult novelty shops or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion picture theaters;
F. Adult theaters;
G. Adult vending machines;
H. Escort agencies;
I. Nude model studios; and
J. Sexual encounter centers. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-3 License required; non-transferability; exceptions
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without first obtaining and maintaining a valid sexually oriented business license issued pursuant to this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually oriented business, if such employee is on the premises for any reason and is not displaying on their person in a clear visible manner a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such employee pursuant to this article.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such person pursuant to this article.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation licensed as provided in this article to operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in such license.
E. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be nontransferable except as provided in this article.
F. The license required by this section shall be in addition to any other licenses or permits required in order to engage in the business or occupation, as applicable, by either the town, the county or the state, and persons engaging in activities described by this article shall comply with all other ordinances and laws, including the town zoning ordinance, as may be required to engage in a business or profession.
G. It shall be a defense to subsections (B) and (C) of this section if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-4 License application
A. An application for a sexually oriented business license, including a renewal application, must be made on a form provided by the town. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The town clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
B. Prior to applying for an original sexually oriented business license, all applicants for such a license must have the premises inspected and approved by the health department, fire department, building department, and zoning department. Written certification of such inspections and approvals by each inspecting agency must be submitted with each sexually oriented business license application. A licensee who has not submitted such certifications within the five previous years or a licensee for an establishment which expanded since the time of the previous license application must also have the respective premises inspected and submit written certification of such inspections and approvals by each inspecting agency with the licensee’s next application for the renewal of a sexually oriented business license. Agencies responsible for inspecting the premises of an existing or anticipated sexually oriented business must complete the requested inspections within thirty (30) days of applicant’s request; in the event one or more agencies fails to timely inspect the requested premises, the requirements of this subsection as they relate to that one or more inspection are waived by the town.
C. The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such information (including fingerprints) as the town may require enabling the town to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under this article. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement a pending application with new information received subsequent to the date the application was deemed completed.
D. All applications to own or operate a sexually oriented business must be submitted by a natural person who must sign the application. If a legal entity wishes to own or operate a sexually oriented business, each natural person who owns or controls a twenty (20%) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a business license as an applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a twenty (20%) percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a business license as an applicant. In all cases, any person involved in the day-to-day operation of the business or has the capacity to significantly influence the operation of the business must sign the application as an applicant.
E. Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by the following:
    1. Payment of the application fee in full;
    2. The name of the applicant or organization applying for the license and the name under which the sexually oriented business will operate.
    3. If the establishment is a State of Arizona corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto and a signed statement that the corporation is in good standing in the State of Arizona;
    4. If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this State, together with all amendments thereto and a signed statement that the corporation is in good standing in the state of incorporation;
    5. If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the State of Arizona, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto and a signed statement that the corporation is in good standing in the State of Arizona.
    6. If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto and a signed statement that the corporation is in good standing in the state of incorporation;
    7. Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed;
    8. If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land in item (6) are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the applicants to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the establishment;
    9. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within 1,500 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, public park or recreation area, or family-oriented entertainment business within 1,500 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any school established within 1,500 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted;
    10. Any of items (2) through (8), above, shall not be required for a renewal application or for an application for a secondary classification of sexually oriented business operated within the same establishment as the primary application or license if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the town clerk with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current.
F. Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services in a sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal, must be made to the town clerk by the person to whom the employee license shall issue. Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the town clerk. Applications must be submitted to the office of the town clerk or the town clerk’s designee during regular working hours and contain the following information:
    1. The applicant’s given name, and any other names by which the applicant is or has been known, including “stage” names and/or aliases;
    2. Age, date and place of birth;
    3. Height, weight, hair color, and eye color;
    4. Present residence address and telephone number;
    5. Present business address and telephone number;
    6. Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver’s license, or other state issued identification card information;
    7. Social Security number; and
    8. Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years old.
All information submitted to the Town pursuant to this paragraph is confidential and will not be released except as pursuant to a valid law enforcement investigation, court order or as otherwise may be required by law.
G. Each person signing an application as an applicant shall attach to the application form the following:
    1. Two (2) identical, passport-quality color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face and taken within the preceding month, and two (2) sets of the applicant’s complete fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
    2. A statement detailing the sexually oriented business license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in this or any other town, city, county, state, or country, has ever had any sexually oriented business license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought and/or issued, the name(s) of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason(s) for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application.
    3. A statement whether the applicant or any person over the age of eighteen (18) years with whom the applicant resides has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a specified criminal activity and, if so, the nature of the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
    4. A statement made under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article.
H. A separate application and sexually oriented business license shall be required for each sexually oriented business classification operating within the same establishment.
I. The fact that a person possesses other types of permits and/or licenses does not exempt such person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business or employee license. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-5 Issuance of license; denial; annual renewal required
A. Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the town clerk shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate town departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application. Any inspection requirement of a particular town agency shall be waived if the respective town agency fails to complete its inspection within twenty (20) days of the date it received an inspection request. The application review process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of the completed application. After the investigation, the town clerk shall issue an employee license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
    1. That the applicant has failed to provide the information required by this article for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;
    2. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
    3. The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
    4. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this article; or
    5. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by any jurisdiction within two (2) years of the date of the current application.
B. If an application for a sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void.
C. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this article.
D. A license issued pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The employee shall keep the license on the employee’s person at all times while engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business premises so that said license may be available for inspection upon lawful request.
E. If application is made for a sexually oriented business license, the town clerk shall approve or deny issuance of the license within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the completed application. The failure of the town or a particular town official or agency to timely act shall result in the waiver by the town of any requirement under this article as applied to that particular town official or agency. The town clerk shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is determined that one or more of the following findings is true:
    1. An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;
    2. An applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
    3. An applicant has been denied a license by the town to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or applicant’s license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months;
    4. An applicant is overdue in payment to the town in taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business;
    5. An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
    6. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
    7. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business is located within 1,500 feet of any residential zone, single or multiple-family dwelling, family-oriented entertainment business, church, park or school;
    8. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business is located within 1,500 feet of either any other sexually oriented business licensed under this article or any other sexually oriented business that would be licensed under this article if it were located within the town limits;
    9. The license fee required under this article has not been paid; or
    10. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with one or more of the provisions of this article.
F. A license issued pursuant to subsection (E) of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business, and the section 8-4-2 classification for which the license is issued. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
G. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification, as set forth in section 8-4-2. Each classification operating within the same establishment and wholly owned by that establishment requires a separate license.
H. In the event that the town clerk determines that an applicant is not eligible for a sexually oriented business license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the completed application by the town clerk, provided that the applicant may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this article.
I. Each license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the town clerk that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within thirty (30) days of receiving the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section 8-4-6. Non-renewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this article. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-6 Fees
A. An original application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and by a license fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The license fee will be refunded if the license is denied. An application for renewal shall be accompanied by the amount of the license fee.
B. An application for issuance or renewal of an employee of a sexually oriented business shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
C. An application for issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented business manager permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00).
D. A duplicate or certified copy of a license, permit or identification card shall be issued upon verification of identity and a payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
E. Charges for fingerprinting shall be paid to and determined by the Oro Valley Police Department. The fee requirements under this article shall not result in the suspension, non-renewal or revocation of a license pursuant to this article if the applicant or licensee makes full payments within fifteen (15) days of being notified of the fee requirements. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-7 Inspection
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Building Department, or other town, state or federal departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspection shall be limited to visual assessment of the activities conducted in areas in accord with the provisions of this article: areas to which patrons have access or are allowed access; to requests for inspection of the licenses required under this article; and to requests for identification of those individuals who reasonably appear to be under the age of 18.
B. It shall be unlawful for an applicant, licensee or employee of a sexually oriented business to refuse to permit law enforcement officers or any other agent allowed by this section to inspect the premises at any time the premises is occupied or open for business.
C. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel that are currently being rented for use as temporary or permanent habitation. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-8 Expiration of license
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by submitted a renewal application to the town. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date.
B. If the town clerk denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, in the event a licensee appeals the non-renewal of a license, the status quo immediately prior to the non-renewal shall be maintained throughout the pendency of the appeal. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-9 Suspension
A. The town clerk shall issue a notice and order of suspension, suspending a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, if the town clerk determines that the licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
    1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article;
    2. Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business while intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances;
    3. Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; or
    4. Knowingly or intentionally permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises.
B. The notice and order of suspension shall become effective within ten (10) days after issuance unless the licensee appeals the suspension of a license. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-10 Revocation
A. The town clerk shall issue a notice and order or revocation, revoking a license issued pursuant to this article if any of the following occur:
    1. A cause of license suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months;
    2. A licensee knowingly or intentionally gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
    3. A licensee, or a person with whom the licensee resides, is convicted of a specified criminal activity on a charge that was pending prior to the issuance of the license;
    4. A licensee, subsequent to licensing, is convicted of a specified criminal activity;
    5. A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
    6. A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted the sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises;
    7. A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted prostitution on the premises;
    8. A licensee knowingly or intentionally operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
    9. A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the licensed premises;
    10. A licensee knowingly or intentionally is delinquent in payment to the Town, County or State for any taxes or fees;
    11. A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted a person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter the establishment;
    12. A licensee knowingly or intentionally attempted to sell his business license, or has sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to a non-licensee; or
    13. A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted a person or persons to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented business.
B. When the town clerk revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, nd the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Town determines that the basis for the revocation been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
C. The notice and order of revocation shall become effective within ten (10) days after issuance unless the licensee appeals the suspension of a license. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-11 Administrative appeal
An applicant may appeal the decision of the town clerk regarding a denial, revocation or suspension to the town council by filing a written notice of appeal with the town clerk within fifteen (15) days after service of notice upon the applicant of the town clerk’s decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The town clerk may, within fifteen (15) days of service upon the town clerk of the applicant’s memorandum, submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal to the town council. The applicant shall be afforded a hearing before the town council at which the applicant or the applicant’s attorney shall be afforded the right to address the council and the town clerk’s decision, after which the town may respond to the applicant’s presentation; the hearing shall be taken within thirty-one (31) calendar days after the date on which the town clerk receives the notice of appeal. After reviewing submitted memoranda and exhibits as well as the arguments orally presented by the applicant and the town, the town council shall vote either to uphold or overrule the town clerk’s decision. The town council’s decision shall be effective upon its rendering. Judicial review of a denial by the town clerk and the town council may then be made pursuant to this article. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-12 Judicial review
After denial of an initial or renewal application, or suspension or revocation of a license by the town council, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. At such time as the town is notified that an applicant has filed for judicial review of the administrative action resulting in the denial of an application, the town shall issue a provisional license to applicant allowing it to carry on its requested activities, subject to the orders of the reviewing court. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-13 Change of employment
A. An establishment operator covered by this article shall keep and maintain an up-to-date register of all employees including the following: each employee’s name, address, age, sex and duties. The licensee must notify the town clerk in writing within fifteen (15) days of hiring any attendant or employee.
B. An establishment operator covered by this article must notify the town clerk in writing within fifteen (15) days of any change of licensed employees employed at the establishment.
C. An employee covered by this article must notify the town clerk in writing within fifteen (15) days of any change in the employee’s place of employment from one establishment covered by this article to another. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-14 Sale, transfer or expansion
A. Upon the sale or transfer of a substantial interest in a sexually oriented business, the license therefor shall be null and void, unless the transaction was approved in advance by the town clerk, under the application procedure of this article. An original application shall be made by any person, association, firm or corporation desiring to own or operate the establishment upon its transfer.
B. An establishment licensee shall submit, upon sale or transfer of any interest in an existing sexually oriented business, or any enlargement or expansion of the place of business of a sexually oriented business, new certifications of inspection as required of original applicants by this article. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-15 Notices
A. Any notice required or permitted to be given by the town clerk or any other town office, division, department or other agency under this article to any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change that has been received by the town clerk. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the town clerk or the town clerk’s designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the establishment.
B. Any notice required or permitted to be given to the town clerk by any person under this article shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the town clerk.
C. It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish notice to the town clerk in writing of any change of residence or mailing address. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-16 Reserved
[RESERVED] ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-17 Additional regulations for escort agencies
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years; neither shall any person who is under the age of 18 may be employed or act as an escort.
B. A person shall not act as an escort or agree to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years; neither shall an escort agency arrange for an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-18 Additional regulations for nude model studios
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
B. A person under the age of 18 years shall not appear semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio.
C. A person shall not appear in a state of nudity, or with knowledge, allow another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public and containing a partition to prevent visibility into the studio. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-19 Solicitation of gratuity prohibited
An employee of a sexually oriented business, while nude or semi-nude, shall not solicit any gratuity from any patron or customer on the sexually oriented business premises, nor shall any patron or customer pay or give any gratuity to any employee who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity on the sexually oriented business premises. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-20 Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and videos
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction, that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6") inches. The town clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
B. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
C. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the town clerk or the town clerk’s designee.
D. It is the duty of the owner and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
E. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may neither contain nor be surveilled by video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
F. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (E) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in the application filed pursuant to subsection (A) of this section.
G. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
H. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot-candle as measured at the floor level.
I. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
J. No licensee shall allow an opening of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
K. No person shall make any attempt to make an opening of any kind between the viewing booths or rooms.
L. The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, during each business day, inspect the walls between the viewing rooms or booths to determine if an openings or holes exist. No licensee or employee of a sexually oriented business may permit a patron to occupy a viewing room or booth containing any openings or holes allowing viewing between two or more booths.
M. The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
N. The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty eight (48") inches of the floor. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-21 Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses
A. An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall not allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment.
B. An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall abide by the provisions of this article regulating the content of signs.
C. An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall not allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met:
    1. The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center;
    2. The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center; but
    3. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-22 Signage
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein. This section is intended to augment the town sign code, not supplant it.
B. Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display surface shall:
    1. Not contain any flashing lights;
    2. Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
    3. Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and
    4. Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
C. Primary and secondary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise.
D. Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
E. Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall:
    1. Not contain any flashing lights;
    2. Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
    3. Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
    4. Not exceed (5) feet in height or five (5) feet in width; and
    5. Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the enterprise. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-23 Sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business is prohibited. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-24 Persons younger than eighteen prohibited from entry; attendant required
A. An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall not allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business is open for business.
B. It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business’ regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
    1. A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s, or chauffeur’s driver’s license; or
    2. A valid personal identification issued by the State of Arizona reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-25 Hours of operation
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of one a.m. (1:00) and eight a.m. (8:00) on weekdays and Saturdays, and one a.m. (1:00) and twelve p.m. (12:00) on Sundays. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-26 Applicability to existing businesses
The provisions of this article shall apply to the activities of all persons and sexually oriented businesses described herein, whether such business or activities were established or commenced before, on or after the effective date of this section, except that the requirements that sexually oriented businesses be separated from certain types of land uses shall not apply to businesses existing on the date of passage of this ordinance. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 8-4-27 Violations, penalty and abatement
A. It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this article to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
B. A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a class one misdemeanor in accordance with Article 1-8 of the Oro Valley Town Code.
C. In addition to prosecution for a criminal violation of this article, the operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid license shall constitute a nuisance and the Town Attorney may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction against a person or entity operating or causing to be operated such business for injunctive relief or to abate the nuisance arising out of violation of this ordinance. ((O)05-36, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Article 8-5 PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND SCRAP METAL DEALERS

Sections:
8-5-1        Definitions
8-5-2        Duty to Report Receipt of Articles to Police
8-5-3        Contents of Report to Police
8-5-4        Duty to Report/Photos Required
8-5-5        Form of Reports; When Due
8-5-6        Requirements; Record of Transactions; Police Department Hold on Property
8-5-7        Prohibited Acts
8-5-8        Violations, Penalties
8-5-9        Scope
8-5-10       Property to Be Disposed Of
8-5-11       Initiation of Petition
8-5-12       Service of the Petition; Notice of Hearing
8-5-13       Claimant’s Rights
8-5-14       Hearing Officer
8-5-15       Conduct of Hearing
8-5-16       Judicial Review
8-5-17       Release of Property
8-5-18       Limited Effect of Hearing Officer Decision
8-5-19       Provisions Severable
8-5-20       Grounds for Denial and Revocation of License
8-5-21       Revocation Hearing

Section 8-5-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this article:
A. The following terms shall have the meanings given in Section 44-1621, Arizona Revised Statutes: identification document, loan, pawn ticket, pawn transaction, pawnbroker, pawnshop, pledged goods, pledgor, reportable transaction, and transaction date.
B. “Jewelry” includes gold, platinum, silver, gold-filled or plated ware, diamonds and other precious or semiprecious stones whether mounted or unmounted, cultured pearls, and watches, clocks and goods, wares and other merchandise commonly classified as jewelry and commonly offered for sale in jewelry stores.
C. “Pawn” means to hold or retain an item for a period of ninety (90) days allowing the customer to reclaim the item. The customer has the right to reclaim the item from the dealer within this ninety (90) day period. After the ninety (90) day period the item may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the dealer who has lawfully acquired the property.
D. “Purchase” means to buy an item for an agreed upon price. The purchaser understands the item must be held for twenty (20) days before changing the status.
E. “Secondhand dealer” means every person engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares, merchandise or other articles, including, but not limited to: scrap metals, coins, gems or semiprecious stones, serialized electronics and appliances, jewelry, precious metals purchased from any person other than the original manufacturer or authorized distributor selling the same for money, credit or exchange, sports or other sports related equipment, serialized automobile tire rims, serialized tools, serialized musical instruments, serialized optical and photographic equipment, compact discs, digital video discs, all goods and articles which bear a serial number, owner applied number or have a fair market value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00). A “secondhand dealer” means any person engaged in the described business whether such business be the principal or sole business so carried on, managed or conducted, or be merely incidental to, in connection with or a branch or department of some other business. This definition includes scrap metal dealers. This definition does not include organizations that are recognized as not-for-profit under the laws of this State or any other state.
F. “Scrap metal” includes any ferrous or nonferrous metals as defined in Section 44-1641, Arizona Revised Statutes, any insulated or uninsulated metallic cable, and any other materials commonly known as “scrap metal” including iron, copper, brass, lead, zinc, tin, steel, aluminum, metallic cables and wires and other like materials, except used food and beverage containers.
G. “Scrap metal dealer” means each person or business entity including all employees of the person or business entity, engaged in the business of purchasing, trading, bartering or otherwise receiving secondhand or castoff material of any kind, except used food and beverage containers, which is defined in this section or commonly known as scrap metal. This term includes automotive recyclers as defined and licensed pursuant to Title 28 of the Arizona Revised Statutes when such recycler engages in the activity defined in this subsection. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-2 Duty to Report Receipt of Articles to Police
A. A pawnbroker shall make and deliver to the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, a true, complete and accurate report of each article the pawnbroker receives through a reportable transaction, as provided by Section 44-1625, Arizona Revised Statutes. In addition, pawnbrokers shall be required to report to any other site (leads online, etc.) that the Chief of Police or his/her designee requires.
B. It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer, including any scrap metal dealer, or any employee or agent thereof to fail, neglect or refuse to deliver to the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, within five (5) business days after the receipt thereof, a full, true and complete report of any of the following enumerated goods, wares, merchandise or other articles received at the secondhand or scrap metal dealer’s place of business on deposit or by purchase, trade, consignment or otherwise:
    1. Coins.
    2. Gems or semiprecious stones.
    3. Serialized electronics, appliances, and optical or photographic equipment.
    4. Jewelry.
    5. Precious metals purchased from any person other than the original manufacturer or authorized distributor selling the same for money, credit or exchange.
    6. Serialized automobile tire rims.
    7. All tools, including, but not limited to, hand tools, power tools, meters, gauges, tool attachments and ladders.
    8. Serialized musical instruments.
    9. Compact discs, digital video discs, expanded memory cards and game cards, video games and game cards where the total value of the transaction exceeds ten dollars ($10.00). Transactions shall not be split into smaller portions for the purpose of avoiding the reporting requirements of this section.
    10. Scrap metal.
    11. Bicycles.
    12. Golf clubs and other sports related equipment.
    13. Ballistic vests, bulletproof vests and body armor.
    14. All goods and articles which bear a serial number, owner applied number, or have a fair market value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
    15. Collectible goods and articles which contain autographs, limited edition designations and number sequences. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-3 Contents of Report to Police
The report required by Section 8-5-2 shall be developed and maintained by the Town and include at least all of the following:
A. The last, first and middle name of the pledgor or seller.
B. The permanent address and telephone number, if applicable, of the pledgor or seller.
C. The physical description of the pledgor or seller, including height, weight, hair and eye color, sex, race, date of birth, prominent scars and other distinguishing features.
D. The number and type of identification document presented by the pledgor or seller; and, for scrap metals, the number and state of issuance of the license on the vehicle used to deliver the scrap metal.
E. An accurate, legible description of each item pledged or sold, including the manufacturer’s name, model number, serial number, caliber, size, type of item and any owner applied number, inscription or monogram; and, for scrap metals, the description and weight of the scrap metal received.
F. The pawnbroker’s or secondhand dealer’s name and address, and the initials or identifying number of the employee who received the item.
G. The date and time of the initial pawn or purchase transaction.
H. The type of transaction and initial pawn ticket number.
I. The amount loaned or paid in the transaction.
J. A fingerprint of the pledgor or seller only as required by State law, and a right index fingerprint of each seller.
The requirements of this section are in addition to those listed in Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 44-1601 et seq. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-4 Duty to Report/Photos Required
A digital photo of the identification document that the dealer obtains from the seller, and a digital photo of each pawn item shall be placed on top of the report form and submitted with the report. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-5 Form of Reports; When Due
A. All reports required by Section 8-5-2 shall be written or printed entirely in the English language on forms provided by the Town in a clear and legible manner, and shall be delivered to the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, by electronic means as approved by the Chief of Police, or his/her designee. The fingerprint required by Section 8-5-3 shall be affixed in the manner described on the form provided by the Town. All reports required by Section 8-5-2 shall be delivered within five (5) business days after the receipt of an item through a reportable transaction.
B. Each transaction report will include no more than three (3) items. For the purposes of this subsection, multiple nonserialized items of the same type (e.g., rings) that are delivered in a single transaction and that have no owner assigned numbers, engravings, inscriptions, monograms or other unique identifying characteristics, may be considered one (1) item on the report (e.g., “six (6) silver rings”).
C. Each transaction report form shall be purchased in advance from the Town’s Police Department for three dollars ($3.00) per form. Upon payment, the report forms will be assigned to the licensee. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-6 Requirements; Record of Transactions; Police Department Hold on Property
A. Every secondhand dealer within the Town shall keep a permanent record at his place of business, in which a complete record of all transactions required to be reported under this article shall be entered in the English language in a clear and legible manner and at the time the transaction takes place. Such record shall contain all the information required to be reported to the Chief of Police, or their designee, under the provisions of Sections 8-5-2 and 8-5-3 and shall be retained for no less than two (2) years from the date of the last entry in addition to any information required under Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 44-1601 et seq.
B. The record of transactions required by subsection (A) of this section shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, during normal business hours.
C. Whenever there exists probable cause to believe that property in the possession of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or other person is stolen, a police officer or person so designated by the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, may place a hold on the property for a period of up to ninety (90) days. When a police officer or designee places a hold on the property, the police officer or designee shall initiate such hold by contacting the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in person or by telephone and informing the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer of the hold and describing the item or items to be held. Within three (3) days of the initial contact, the police officer or designee shall deliver or mail to the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer a written notice of the hold. The written notice shall include a description of the item or items to be held.
D. Whenever property in the possession of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or other person is subject to a hold and the property is required by a police officer in a criminal investigation or for use as evidence in a criminal proceeding, the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or other person, upon reasonable notice, shall deliver the property to the police officer.
E. The Town’s Police Department may extend a hold placed pursuant to this section for the purpose of criminal investigation or for use in any judicial proceeding, including that set forth in this article. Any extended hold shall be no longer than is reasonably necessary.
F. Whenever property in the possession of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or other person is subject to a hold and the property is no longer required for the purpose of criminal investigation or any criminal proceeding, and more than one (1) person can reasonably be anticipated to make a claim for possession of the property, the Town’s Police Department may follow the procedures set forth in this article for disposition of the property within forty-five (45) days of the conclusion of the criminal investigation or criminal proceeding.
G. Whenever property that is in the possession of the Town’s Police Department pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section is no longer required for the purpose of criminal investigation or for use as evidence in any criminal proceeding, the Police Department may follow the procedures set forth in this article for disposition of the property within forty-five (45) days of the conclusion of the criminal investigation or proceeding. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-7 Prohibited Acts
A. No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or any employee or agent thereof shall:
    1. Receive any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles that are required to be reported by this article whether on deposit, in pawn or pledge, or by purchase or otherwise from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or from any intoxicated person.
    2. Purchase or otherwise take any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles that are required to be reported by this article without first taking reasonable steps, including requiring the pledgor or seller to produce an identification document as determined acceptable by the Town’s Police Department, to ascertain that such goods, wares, merchandise or other articles are the property of the person offering to deposit, pawn, pledge or sell the same.
    3. Purchase or otherwise take any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles, knowing or having reason to know that such goods, wares, merchandise or other articles are stolen.
    4. Sell, trade, transfer or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles that are required to be reported under this article, except for scrap metal, compact discs, digital video discs, expanded memory cards and game cards until twenty (20) days after filing the report required by Section 8-5-2. For the purposes of this section, the twenty (20) day retention period begins upon receipt of the transmission of the transaction, as approved by the Chief of Police, or his/her designee.
    5. Sell, trade, transfer or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles subject to a Police Department hold described by Section 8-5-6, except pursuant to a court order, order of a hearing officer issued pursuant to this article, or upon receipt of a written authorization signed by a police officer.
    6. Purchase, receive, sell or transfer any item from which a manufacturer’s serial number or model designator has been removed, altered or tampered with. These items shall be reported to the Town’s Police Department.
    7. Refuse to permit the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, to enter such business during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting such goods or records.
B. No secondhand dealer shall sell, trade, transfer, purchase, receive, or otherwise take or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles that are required to be reported under this article without first obtaining the appropriate business and secondhand/pawn licenses from the Town Clerk’s office. In addition, all secondhand dealers, pawnbrokers and scrap metal dealers shall attend and pay for any training required by the Town’s Police Department. Each attendee shall be given a copy of this article after completing the training and acknowledging receipt of the code.
C. In any transaction with a secondhand dealer, no pledgor or seller shall provide false information concerning the pledgor’s or seller’s name, address, phone number or rightful ownership. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-8 Violations, Penalties
Each violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-9 Scope
Property which is in the possession of pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, the Police Department or other person, and which has all the characteristics set forth in Section 8-5-10, shall be disposed of pursuant to this article. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-10 Property to Be Disposed Of
Property may be disposed of under this article if all of the following requirements are met:
A. The Town has reason to believe the property was stolen.
B. The Police Department has possession of the property or has placed a hold on the property as set forth in Section 8-5-6.
C. No State court has before it a petition against a suspect alleged to have stolen the property.
D. Two (2) or more persons are known or believed to have made, or can reasonably be anticipated to make, a claim for possession of the property.
E. The Town makes no claim to possession of the property.
F. The property will not be required to be retained for use as evidence in any legal proceeding other than the hearing under this article, and the Town Police Department has no other lawful reason for holding the property. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-11 Initiation of Petition
The Town’s Police Department shall file a petition with a hearing officer designated by the Town Magistrate to determine ownership of the property within forty-five (45) days of the conclusion of the criminal investigation or criminal proceedings involving the property. Such petition shall set forth the following:
A. The facts establishing compliance with Section 8-5-10.
B. The name and address of each person described in Section 8-5-10(D).
C. An accurate description of the property, any identifying marks or serial numbers, the police identification number(s), the location where the property is currently being held, and the person from whom seized, if the property was in fact seized. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-12 Service of the Petition; Notice of Hearing
A. The Town’s Police Department shall serve the petition by personal service or by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, upon all persons known to have an interest in the property, each person described and named in Section 8-5-10(D), and, in all cases, the person from whom the property was obtained or who currently possesses the property subject to the Town’s Police Department hold.
B. A copy of Sections 8-5-9 through 8-5-18 shall be served with each petition.
C. There shall be served with the petition a notice of hearing setting forth the date, time and place for the conduct of the hearing to determine the right of possession to the property. The hearing date shall not be sooner than twenty-five (25), nor more than forty-five (45), calendar days after the date of service of the petition and notice.
D. Service shall be made to the last known address of all persons included in subsection (A) of this section.
E. Service shall be complete upon receipt. If service is made by certified mail, the return receipt shall be prima facie evidence of service.
F. Proof of service upon each potential claimant shall be delivered to the hearing officer. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-13 Claimant’s Rights
A. Any person claiming an interest in the property shall be known as a respondent.
B. A respondent or any other person claiming any ownership interest of any kind, or possessory right to the property shall have the right to appear at the hearing and to present any and all evidence in support of such person’s claim to the property.
C. Except as provided in Section 8-5-15(B), the failure of any person to appear at such hearing shall constitute a waiver of any claim to the property by such person as against the Town, and shall authorize the hearing officer to enter a ruling consistent therewith. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-14 Hearing Officer
All petitions filed pursuant to this article shall be filed with and considered by a hearing officer appointed by the Town Magistrate. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-15 Conduct of Hearing
A. The hearing shall be conducted informally and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply; provided, that the decision of the hearing officer shall in all cases be based upon substantial and reliable evidence. All parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present evidence and testimony in support of their position and to cross-examine adverse witnesses. All witnesses shall be placed under oath before testifying.
B. The burden of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence, and shall at all times be upon the person or persons challenging the possession of the party from whom the property was taken by the Town’s Police Department, even if the party from whom the property was taken does not appear at the hearing. If the property was not seized by the Town’s Police Department, the burden of proof shall at all times be upon the person or persons challenging the party who currently possesses the property subject to the hold.
C. The hearing shall be recorded electronically or by other means.
D. The decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within ten (10) calendar days of the close of the record. The decision shall be in writing, and shall be mailed postage prepaid to each respondent or claimant appearing. A copy of the decision shall also be sent to the Town Police Department.
E. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final upon issuance. Any appeal must be filed in superior court. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-16 Judicial Review
A. Any respondent or other party participating in the hearing who is aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may seek judicial review by way of special action to the superior court.
B. A complaint seeking special action review shall be filed within thirty (30) days of a final decision by the hearing officer. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-17 Release of Property
A. Any person prevailing in a hearing or uncontested proceeding administered pursuant to this article shall be entitled to receive the property described in the petition after producing a copy of the decision in their favor and appropriate identification to the property’s custodian.
B. A receipt shall be signed evidencing delivery of the property to the person identified in subsection (A) of this section.
C. Any person with custody of the property described in the petition that is presented with a copy of the hearing officer’s decision and appropriate identification shall release the property to the prevailing party. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-18 Limited Effect of Hearing Officer Decision
Nothing in this article shall prevent any person from filing an action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to establish ownership to the property. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-19 Provisions Severable
If a provision of this article or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the article that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-20 Grounds for Denial and Revocation of License
A. No license for a secondhand dealer shall be issued or renewed if the applicant or licensee:
    1. Is not eighteen (18) years of age or older.
    2. Made any false statement or failed to answer any question in the application.
    3. While licensed under this article, has had such license revoked within the previous two (2) years.
    4. Has been convicted of or found responsible for a violation of this article within one (1) year immediately preceding the application.
B. No license shall be issued or renewed if the location of the business is not in conformity with applicable zoning regulations.
C. The Town Clerk shall revoke a license issued under this article for the non-exclusive reasons listed below, which include:
    1. The licensee is convicted of or found responsible for two (2) or more violations of this article committed within a one (1) year period.
    2. An employee of the licensee is convicted of or found responsible for two (2) or more violations of this article committed within a one (1) year period. The licensee shall be notified in writing by the Town’s Police Department whenever an employee is cited for a violation of this article. Notice shall be given to the licensee within ten (10) days of the charge being filed. The provisions of this subsection regarding license suspension shall not apply in the absence of such notification.
    3. The applicant or licensee had made false or misleading statements of material fact in the application for the license required by this article, or has entered or given false information in any record or report required by this article to be kept or made by a licensee. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

Section 8-5-21 Revocation Hearing
A. The Town Clerk, upon notification by the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, that grounds for revocation exist, shall file a written petition for revocation with the Magistrate Court, requesting that a time and place be set for a hearing and specifying the grounds for revocation. Within five (5) days, the Magistrate shall schedule a hearing to be conducted within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the petition to revoke. The Magistrate shall notify the parties in the manner provided in this article and shall state the grounds relied upon for the proposed revocation. Should the licensee fail to appear at the hearing, a default judgment of revocation shall be entered. A record shall be kept of all proceedings. No license shall be revoked unless grounds therefor are established by a preponderance of the evidence as shown by the record of the hearing. The hearing shall be held in an informal manner as to the order of proceeding and presentation of evidence with a record made. The Arizona Rules of Evidence may apply. However, the Magistrate shall admit evidence over hearsay objections where the proffered evidence has substantial probative value and reliability. Copies of records and documents prepared in the ordinary course of business shall be admitted, but subject to challenge as to weight and authenticity. The Magistrate shall provide the licensee and other parties written notice of the decision within five (5) days, pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. Revocation of a license shall be affected by the Magistrate’s signing of the written notice of the decision. Appeal of the decision of the Magistrate shall be by way of special action to the superior court on the record of the hearing. A licensee’s right to do business under authority of the license shall terminate immediately upon giving or mailing to the licensee a copy of a signed decision revoking the license except that the revocation may be stayed by the superior court pending a timely appeal of the decision by special action. Such appeal must be filed within ten (10) days after the decision to revoke is signed unless the decision is mailed, in which case the appeal must be filed no later than fifteen (15) days after entry of the decision. The appellee shall bear the cost of preparing the record of appeal. If an appeal is not timely made, the revocation becomes final and the license is terminated.
B. Notices required by this article may be served by certified mail to the licensee’s attorney, to the licensee at the address as shown on the business license or by personal service.
C. Upon revocation of a license, all fees or taxes theretofore paid for or on account of any such license shall be forfeited to the Town. ((O)11-03, Enacted,  02/02/2011)

CHAPTER 8A TAX CODE - PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES

Articles:
8A-1         General Conditions and Definitions
8A-2         Determination of Gross Income
8A-3         Licensing and Recordkeeping
8A-4         Privilege Taxes
8A-5         Administration
8A-6         Use Tax
8A-7         Regulations

Article 8A-1 GENERAL CONDITIONS AND DEFINITIONS

Sections:
8A-1         Words of Tense, Number and Gender; Code References
8A-100       General Definitions
8A-110       Definitions: Income-Producing Capital Equipment
8A-115       Definitions: Computer Software; Custom Computer Programming
8A-120       Definitions: Food for Home Consumption

Section 8A-1 Words of Tense, Number and Gender; Code References
a. For the purposes of this chapter, all words of tense, number, and gender shall comply with A.R.S. Section 1-214 as amended.
b. For the purposes of this chapter, all code references, unless specified otherwise, shall:
    1. refer to this Town Code.
    2. be deemed to include all amendments to such code references. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-100 General Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
“Assembler” means a person who unites or combines products, wares, or articles of manufacture so as to produce a change in form or substance of such items without changing or altering component parts.
“Broker” means any person engaged or continuing in business who acts for another for a consideration in the conduct of a business activity taxable under this chapter, and who receives for his principal all or part of the gross income from the taxable activity.
“Business” means all activities or acts, personal or corporate, engaged in and caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect, but not casual activities or sales.
“Business day” means any day of the week when the Tax Collector’s office is open for the public to conduct the Tax Collector’s business.
“Casual activity or sale” means a transaction of an isolated nature made by a person who neither represents himself to be nor is engaged in a business subject to a tax imposed by this chapter. However, no sale, rental, license for use, or lease transaction concerning real property nor any activity entered into by a business taxable by this chapter shall be treated, or be exempt, as casual. This definition shall include sales of used capital assets; provided, that the volume and frequency of such sales do not indicate that the seller regularly engages in selling such property.
“Combined taxes” means the sum of all applicable Arizona Transaction Privilege and Use Taxes; all applicable transportation taxes imposed upon gross income by this County as authorized by Article 3, Chapter 6, Title 42, Arizona Revised Statutes; and all applicable taxes imposed by this chapter.
“Commercial property” is any real property, or portion of such property, used for any purpose other than lodging or lodging space, including structures built for lodging but used otherwise, such as model homes, apartments used as offices, etc.
“Communications channel” means any line, wire, cable, microwave, radio signal, light beam, telephone, telegraph, or any other electromagnetic means of moving a message.
“Construction contracting” refers to the activity of a construction contractor.
“Construction contractor” means a person who undertakes to or offers to undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck, or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation, or other structure, project, development, or improvement to real property, or to do any part thereof. “Construction contractor” includes subcontractors, specialty contractors, prime contractors, and any person receiving consideration for the general supervision and/or coordination of such a construction project except for remediation contracting. This definition shall govern without regard to whether or not the construction contractor is acting in fulfillment of a contract.
“Delivery (of notice) by the tax collector” means “receipt (of notice) by the taxpayer.”
“Delivery, installation, or other direct customer services” means services or labor, excluding repair labor, provided by a taxpayer to or for his customer at the time of transfer of tangible personal property; provided, that the charge for such labor or service is separately billed to the customer and maintained separately in the taxpayer’s books and records.
“Engaging,” when used with reference to engaging or continuing in business, includes the exercise of corporate or franchise powers.
“Equivalent excise tax” means either:
    1. a privilege or use tax levied by another Arizona municipality upon the transaction in question, and paid either to such Arizona municipality directly or to the vendor; or
    2. an excise tax levied by a political subdivision of a state other than Arizona upon the transaction in question, and paid either to such jurisdiction directly or to the vendor; or
    3. an excise tax levied by a Native American Government organized under the laws of the Federal Government upon the transaction in question, and paid either to such jurisdiction directly or to the vendor.
“Federal Government” means the United States Government, its departments and agencies; but not including national banks or Federally chartered or insured banks, savings and loan institutions, or credit unions.
“Food” means any items intended for human consumption as defined by rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue, State of Arizona, pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5106. Under no circumstances shall “food” include alcoholic beverages or tobacco, or food items purchased for use in conversion to any form of alcohol by distillation, fermentation, brewing, or other process. Under no circumstances shall “food” include an edible product, beverage, or ingredient infused, mixed, or in any way combined with medical marijuana or an active ingredient of medical marijuana.
“Hotel” means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home, house, motel, rooming house, apartment house, trailer, or other lodging place within the Town offering lodging, wherein the owner thereof, for compensation, furnishes lodging to any transient, except foster homes, rest homes, sheltered care homes, nursing homes, or primary health care facilities.
“Jet fuel” means jet fuel as defined in A.R.S. Section 42-5351.
“Job printing” means the activity of copying or reproducing an article by any means, process, or method. “Job printing” includes engraving of printing plates, embossing, copying, micrographics, and photo reproduction.
“Lessee” includes the equivalent person in a rental or licensing agreement for all purposes of this chapter.
“Lessor” includes the equivalent person in a rental or licensing agreement for all purposes of this chapter.
“Licensing (for use)” means any agreement between the user (“licensee”) and the owner or the owner’s agent (“licensor”) for the use of the licensor’s property whereby the licensor receives consideration, where such agreement does not qualify as a “sale” or “lease” or “rental” agreement.
“Lodging (lodging space)” means any room or apartment in a hotel or any other provider of rooms, trailer spaces, or other residential dwelling spaces; or the furnishings or services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of said dwelling space, including storage or parking space for the property of said tenant.
“Manufactured buildings” means a manufactured home, mobile home or factory-built building, as defined in A.R.S. Section 41-2142.
“Manufacturer” means a person engaged or continuing in the business of fabricating, producing, or manufacturing products, wares, or articles for use from other forms of tangible personal property, imparting to such new forms, qualities, properties, and combinations.
“Medical marijuana” means “marijuana” used for a “medical use” as those terms are defined in A.R.S. Section 36-2801.
“Mining and metallurgical supplies” means all tangible personal property acquired by persons engaged in activities defined in Section 8A-432 for such use. This definition shall not include:
    1. janitorial equipment and supplies.
    2. office equipment, office furniture, and office supplies.
    3. motor vehicles licensed for use upon the highways of the State.
“Modifier” means a person who reworks, changes, or adds to products, wares, or articles of manufacture.
“Nonprofit entity” means any entity organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes, or operated by the Federal Government, the State, or any political subdivision of the State.
“Occupancy (of real property)” means any occupancy or use of, or any right to occupy or use, real property including any improvements, rights, or interests in such property.
“Out-of-state sale” means the sale of tangible personal property and job printing if all of the following occur:
    1. the order is placed from without the State of Arizona; and
    2. the property is delivered to the buyer at a location outside the State; and
    3. the property is purchased for use outside the State.
“Out-of-town sale” means the sale of tangible personal property and job printing if all of the following occur:
    1. transference of title and possession occur without the Town; and
    2. the stock from which such personal property was taken was not within the corporate limits of the Town; and
    3. the order is received at a permanent business location of the seller located outside the Town, which location is used for the substantial and regular conduct of such business sales activity. In no event shall the place of business of the buyer be determinative of the situs of the receipt of the order.
For the purpose of this definition it does not matter that all other indicia of business occur within the Town, including, but not limited to, accounting, invoicing, payments, centralized purchasing, and supply to out-of-town storehouses and out-of-town retail branch outlets from a primary storehouse within the Town.
“Owner-builder” means an owner or lessor of real property who, by himself or by or through others, constructs or has constructed or reconstructs or has reconstructed any improvement to real property.
“Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the Federal Government, this State, or any political subdivision or agency of this State. For the purposes of this chapter, a person shall be considered a distinct and separate person from any general or limited partnership or joint venture or other association with which such person is affiliated. A subsidiary corporation shall be considered a separate person from its parent corporation for purposes of taxation of transactions with its parent corporation.
“Prosthetic” means any of the following tangible personal property if such items are prescribed or recommended by a licensed podiatrist, chiropractor, dentist, physician or surgeon, naturopath, optometrist, osteopathic physician or surgeon, psychologist, hearing aid dispenser, physician assistant, nurse practitioner or veterinarian:
    1. any man-made device for support or replacement of a part of the body, or to increase acuity of one (1) of the senses. Such items include: prescription eyeglasses; contact lenses; hearing aids; artificial limbs or teeth; neck, back, arm, leg, or similar braces.
    2. insulin, insulin syringes, and glucose test strips sold with or without a prescription.
    3. hospital beds, crutches, wheelchairs, similar home health aids, or corrective shoes.
    4. drugs or medicine, including oxygen.
    5. equipment used to generate, monitor, or provide health support systems, such as respiratory equipment, oxygen concentrator, dialysis machine.
    6. durable medical equipment which has a Federal health care financing administration common procedure code, is designated reimbursable by Medicare, can withstand repeated use, is primarily and customarily used to serve a medical purpose, is generally not useful to a person in the absence of illness or injury and is appropriate for use in the home.
    7. Under no circumstances shall “prosthetic” include medical marijuana, regardless of whether it is sold or dispensed pursuant to a prescription, recommendation, or written certification by any authorized person.
Qualifying community health center.
    1. means an entity that is recognized as nonprofit under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, that is a community-based, primary care clinic that has a community-based board of directors and that is either:
        a. the sole provider of primary care in the community.
        b. a nonhospital affiliated clinic that is located in a federally designated medically underserved area in this State.
    2. includes clinics that are being constructed as qualifying community health centers.
“Qualifying health care organization” means an entity that is recognized as nonprofit under Section 501(c) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and that uses, saves or invests at least eighty percent (80%) of all monies that it receives from all sources each year only for health and medical related educational and charitable services, as documented by annual financial audits prepared by an independent certified public accountant, performed according to generally accepted accounting standards and filed annually with the Arizona Department of Revenue. Monies that are used, saved or invested to lease, purchase or construct a facility for health and medical related education and charitable services are included in the eighty percent (80%) requirement.
“Qualifying hospital” means any of the following:
    1. a licensed hospital which is organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
    2. a licensed nursing care institution or a licensed residential care institution or a residential care facility operated in conjunction with a licensed nursing care institution or a licensed kidney dialysis center, which provides medical services, nursing services or health related services and is not used or held for profit.
    3. a hospital, nursing care institution or residential care institution which is operated by the Federal Government, this State or a political subdivision of this State.
    4. a facility that is under construction and that on completion will be a facility under subsection (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
“Receipt (of notice) by the taxpayer” means the earlier of actual receipt or the first attempted delivery by certified United States Mail to the taxpayer’s address of record with the Tax Collector.
“Remediation” means those actions that are reasonable, necessary, cost-effective and technically feasible in the event of the release or threat of release of hazardous substances into the environment such that the waters of the State are or may be affected; such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess and evaluate such release or threat of release; actions of remediation, removal or disposal of hazardous substances or taking such other actions as may be necessary to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare or to the waters of the State which may otherwise result from a release or threat of release of a hazardous substance that will or may affect the waters of the State. Remediation activities include the use of biostimulation with indigenous microbes and bioaugmentation using microbes that are nonpathogenic, nonopportunistic and that are naturally occurring. Remediation activities may include community information and participation costs and providing an alternative drinking water supply.
“Rental equipment” means tangible personal property sold, rented, leased, or licensed to customers to the extent that the item is actually used by the customer for rental, lease, or license to others; provided, that:
    1. the vendee is regularly engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or licensing such property for a consideration; and
    2. the item so claimed as “rental equipment” is not used by the person claiming the exemption for any purpose other than rental, lease, or license for compensation, to an extent greater than fifteen percent (15%) of its actual use.
“Rental supply” means an expendable or nonexpendable repair or replacement part sold to become part of rental equipment; provided, that:
    1. the documentation relating to each purchased item so claimed specifically itemizes to the vendor the actual item of rental equipment to which the purchased item is intended to be attached as a repair or replacement part; and
    2. the vendee is regularly engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or licensing such property for a consideration; and
    3. the item so claimed as “rental equipment” is not used by the person claiming the exemption for any purpose other than rental, lease, or license for compensation, to an extent greater than fifteen percent (15%) of its actual use.
“Repairer” means a person who restores or renews products, wares, or articles of manufacture.
“Resides within the Town” means, in cases other than individuals, whose legal addresses are determinative of residence, the engaging, continuing, or conducting of regular business activity within the Town.
“Restaurant” means any business activity where articles of food, drink, or condiment are customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or off the premises, also including bars, cocktail lounges, the dining rooms of hotels, and all caterers. For the purposes of this chapter, a “fast food” business, which includes street vendors and mobile vendors selling in public areas or at entertainment or sports or similar events, who prepares or sells food or drink for consumption on or off the premises is considered a “restaurant,” and not a “retailer.”
“Retail sale (sale at retail)” means the sale of tangible personal property, except the sale of tangible personal property to a person regularly engaged in the business of selling such property.
“Retailer” means any person engaged or continuing in the business of sales of tangible personal property at retail.
“Sale” means any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, including consignment transactions and auctions, of property for a consideration. “Sale” includes any transaction whereby the possession of such property is transferred but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price. “Sale” also includes the fabrication of tangible personal property for consumers who, in whole or in part, furnish either directly or indirectly the materials used in such fabrication work.
“Solar daylighting” means a device that is specifically designed to capture and redirect the visible portion of the solar beam, while controlling the infrared portion, for use in illuminating interior building spaces in lieu of artificial lighting.
“Solar energy device” means a system or series of mechanisms designed primarily to provide heating, to provide cooling, to produce electrical power, to produce mechanical power, to provide solar daylighting or to provide any combination of the foregoing by means of collecting and transferring solar generated energy into such uses either by active or passive means, including wind generator systems that produce electricity. Solar energy systems may also have the capability of storing solar energy for future use. Passive systems shall clearly be designed as a solar energy device, such as a trombe wall, and not merely as a part of a normal structure, such as a window.
“Speculative builder” means either:
    1. an owner-builder who sells or contracts to sell, at any time, improved real property (as provided in Section 8A-416) consisting of:
        a. custom, model, or inventory homes, regardless of the stage of completion of such homes; or
        b. improved residential or commercial lots without a structure; or
    2. an owner-builder who sells or contracts to sell improved real property, other than improved real property specified in subsection (1) above:
        a. prior to completion; or
        b. before the expiration of twenty-four (24) months after the improvements of the real property sold are substantially complete.
“Substantially complete” means the construction contracting or reconstruction contracting:
    1. has passed final inspection or its equivalent; or
    2. certificate of occupancy or its equivalent has been issued; or
    3. is ready for immediate occupancy or use.
“Supplier” means any person who rents, leases, licenses, or makes sales of tangible personal property within the Town, either directly to the consumer or customer or to wholesalers, jobbers, fabricators, manufacturers, modifiers, assemblers, repairers, or those engaged in the business of providing services which involve the use, sale, rental, lease, or license of tangible personal property.
“Tax Collector” means the Town Council or its designee or agent for all purposes under this chapter.
“Taxpayer” means any person liable for any tax under this chapter.
“Telecommunication service” means any service or activity connected with the transmission or relay of sound, visual image, data, information, images, or material over a communications channel or any combination of communications channels.
“Transient” means any person who either at the person’s own expense or at the expense of another obtains lodging space or the use of lodging space on a daily or weekly basis, or on any other basis for less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
“Utility service” means the producing, providing, or furnishing of electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to consumers or ratepayers. ((O)11-22, Amended,  07/06/2011; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-110 Definitions: Income-Producing Capital Equipment
a. The following tangible personal property, other than items excluded in subsection (d) below, shall be deemed “income-producing capital equipment” for the purposes of this chapter:
    1. machinery or equipment used directly in manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job printing, refining or metallurgical operations. The terms “manufacturing,” “processing,” “fabricating,” “job printing,” “refining,” and “metallurgical” as used in this paragraph refer to and include those operations commonly understood within their ordinary meaning. “Metallurgical operations” includes leaching, milling, precipitating, smelting and refining.
    2. mining machinery, or equipment, used directly in the process of extracting ores or minerals from the earth for commercial purposes, including equipment required to prepare the materials for extraction and handling, loading or transporting such extracted material to the surface. “Mining” includes underground, surface and open pit operations for extracting ores and minerals.
    3. tangible personal property, sold to persons engaged in business classified under the telecommunications classification, consisting of central office switching equipment; switchboards; private branch exchange equipment; microwave radio equipment; and carrier equipment including optical fiber, coaxial cable, and other transmission media which are components of carrier systems.
    4. machinery, equipment, or transmission lines used directly in producing or transmitting electrical power, but not including distribution. Transformers and control equipment used at transmission substation sites constitute equipment used in producing or transmitting electrical power.
    5. pipes or valves four (4) inches in diameter or larger and related equipment, used to transport oil, natural gas, artificial gas, water, or coal slurry. For the purpose of this section, related equipment includes: compressor units, regulators, machinery and equipment, fittings, seals and any other parts that are used in operating the pipes or valves.
    6. aircraft, navigational and communication instruments, and other accessories and related equipment sold to:
        A. a person holding a Federal certificate of public convenience and necessity or foreign air carrier permit for air transportation for use as or in conjunction with or becoming a part of aircraft to be used to transport persons, property or United States Mail in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce.
        B. any foreign government for use by such government outside of this State.
        C. persons who are not residents of this State and who will not use such property in this State other than in removing such property from this State. This subdivision also applies to corporations that are not incorporated in this State, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this State, if the principal corporate office is located outside this State and the property will not be used in this State other than in removing the property from this State.
    7. machinery, tools, equipment and related supplies used or consumed directly in repairing, remodeling or maintaining aircraft, aircraft engines or aircraft component parts by or on behalf of a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or property.
    8. railroad rolling stock, rails, ties and signal control equipment used directly to transport persons or property.
    9. machinery or equipment used directly to drill for oil or gas or used directly in the process of extracting oil or gas from the earth for commercial purposes.
    10. buses or other urban mass transit vehicles which are used directly to transport persons or property for hire or pursuant to a governmentally adopted and controlled urban mass transportation program and which are sold to bus companies holding a Federal certificate of convenience and necessity or operated by a city, town or other governmental entity or by any person contracting with such governmental entity as part of a governmentally adopted and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation.
    11. metering, monitoring, receiving, and transmitting equipment acquired by persons engaged in the business of providing utility services or telecommunications services; but only to the extent that such equipment is to be used by the customers of such persons and such persons separately charge or bill their customers for use of such equipment.
    12. groundwater measuring devices required under A.R.S. Section 45-604.
    13. machinery or equipment used in research and development. In this paragraph, “research and development” means basic and applied research in the sciences and engineering, and designing, developing or testing prototypes, processes or new products, including research and development of computer software that is embedded in or an integral part of the prototype or new product or that is required for machinery or equipment otherwise exempt under this section to function effectively. Research and development do not include manufacturing quality control, routine consumer product testing, market research, sales promotion, sales service, research in social sciences or psychology, computer software research that is not included in the definition of research and development, or other nontechnological activities or technical services.
    14. (Reserved)
    15. included in “income-producing capital equipment” are liquid, solid or gaseous chemicals used in manufacturing, processing, fabricating, mining, refining, metallurgical operations, research and development or job printing, if using or consuming the chemicals, alone or as part of an integrated system of chemicals, involving direct contact with the materials from which the product is produced for the purpose of causing or permitting a chemical or physical change to occur in the materials as part of the production process. This subsection does not include chemicals that are used or consumed in activities such as packaging, storage or transportation but does not affect any deduction for such chemicals that is otherwise provided by this code. Chemicals meeting the requirements of this subsection are deemed not to be expendable under subsection (d) of this section.
    16. cleanrooms that are used for manufacturing, processing, fabrication or research and development, as defined in paragraph (13) of this subsection, of semiconductor products. For purposes of this paragraph, “cleanroom” means all property that comprises or creates an environment where humidity, temperature, particulate matter and contamination are precisely controlled within specified parameters, without regard to whether the property is actually contained within that environment or whether any of the property is affixed to or incorporated into real property. Cleanroom:
        A. includes the integrated systems, fixtures, piping, movable partitions, lighting and all property that is necessary or adapted to reduce contamination or to control airflow, temperature, humidity, chemical purity or other environmental conditions or manufacturing tolerances, as well as the production machinery and equipment operating in conjunction with the cleanroom environment.
        B. does not include the building or other permanent, nonremovable component of the building that houses the cleanroom environment.
    17. machinery and equipment that are purchased by or on behalf of the owners of a soundstage complex and primarily used for motion picture, multimedia or interactive video production in the complex. This paragraph applies only if the initial construction of the soundstage complex begins after June 30, 1996, and before January 1, 2002, and the machinery and equipment are purchased before the expiration of five (5) years after the start of initial construction. For purposes of this paragraph:
        A. “motion picture, multimedia or interactive video production” includes products for theatrical and television release, educational presentations, electronic retailing, documentaries, music videos, industrial films, CD-ROM, video game production, commercial advertising and television episode production and other genres that are introduced through developing technology.
        B. “soundstage complex” means a facility of multiple stages including production offices, construction shops and related areas, prop and costume shops, storage areas, parking for production vehicles and areas that are leased to businesses that complement the production needs and orientation of the overall facility.
    18. tangible personal property that is used by either of the following to receive, store, convert, produce, generate, decode, encode, control or transmit telecommunications information:
        A. any direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service that operates pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 25 and 100.
        B. any satellite television or data transmission facility, if both of the following conditions are met:
            i. over two-thirds (2/3) of the transmissions, measured in megabytes, transmitted by the facility during the test period were transmitted to or on behalf of one (1) or more direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission services that operate pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 25 and 100.
            ii. over two-thirds (2/3) of the transmissions, measured in megabytes, transmitted by or on behalf of those direct broadcast television or data transmission services during the test period were transmitted by the facility to or on behalf of those services.
        For purposes of this subsection (B), “test period” means the three hundred sixty-five (365) day period beginning on the later of the date on which the tangible personal property is purchased or the date on which the direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service first transmits information to its customers.
    19. machinery and equipment that is used directly in the feeding of poultry, the environmental control of housing for poultry, the movement of eggs within a production and packaging facility or the sorting or cooling of eggs. This exemption does not apply to vehicles used for transporting eggs.
    20. machinery or equipment, including related structural components, that is employed in connection with manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job printing, refining, mining, natural gas pipelines, metallurgical operations, telecommunications, producing or transmitting electricity or research and development that is used directly to meet or exceed rules or regulations adopted by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or a political subdivision of this State to prevent, monitor, control or reduce land, water or air pollution.
    21. machinery or equipment that enables a television station to originate and broadcast or to receive and broadcast digital television signals and that was purchased to facilitate compliance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-104; 110 Stat. 56; 47 United States Code Section 336) and the Federal Communications Commission Order issued April 21, 1997, 47 Code of Federal Regulations Part 73. This paragraph does not exempt any of the following:
        A. repair or replacement parts purchased for the machinery or equipment described in this paragraph.
        B. machinery or equipment purchased to replace machinery or equipment for which an exemption was previously claimed and taken under this paragraph.
        C. any machinery or equipment purchased after the television station has ceased analog broadcasting, or purchased after November 1, 2009, whichever occurs first.
b. The term “income-producing capital equipment” shall further include ancillary machinery and equipment used for the treatment of waste products created by the business activities which are allowed to purchase “income-producing capital equipment” defined in subsection (a) above.
c. The term “income-producing capital equipment” shall further include repair and replacement parts, other than the items in subsection (d) below, where the property is acquired to become an integral part of another item itemized in subsections (a) or (b) above.
d. The tangible personal property defined as income-producing capital equipment in this section shall not include:
    1. expendable materials. For purposes of this paragraph, expendable materials do not include any of the categories of tangible personal property specified in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section regardless of the cost or useful life of that property.
    2. janitorial equipment and hand tools.
    3. office equipment, furniture, and supplies.
    4. tangible personal property used in selling or distributing activities.
    5. motor vehicles required to be licensed by the State of Arizona, except buses or other urban mass transit vehicles specifically exempted pursuant to subsection (a)(10) above without regard to the use of such motor vehicles.
    6. shops, buildings, docks, depots, and all other materials of whatever kind or character not specifically included as exempt.
    7. motors and pumps used in drip irrigation systems.
e. For the purposes of this section:
    1. “aircraft” includes:
        A. an airplane flight simulator that is approved by the Federal Aviation Administration for use as a Phase II or higher flight simulator under Appendix H, 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121.
        B. tangible personal property that is permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft that is owned or operated by a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or property.
    2. “other accessories and related equipment” includes aircraft accessories and equipment such as ground service equipment that physically contact aircraft at some point during the overall carrier operation. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-115 Definitions: Computer Software; Custom Computer Programming
a. “Computer software” means any computer program, part of such a program, or any sequence of instructions for automatic data processing equipment. Computer software which is not “custom computer programming” is deemed to be tangible personal property for the purposes of this chapter, regardless of the method by which title, possession, or right to use the software is transferred to the user.
b. “Custom computer programming” means any computer software which is written or prepared exclusively for a customer and includes those services represented by separately stated charges for the modification of existing prewritten programs when the modifications are written or prepared exclusively for a customer.
    1. The term does not include a prewritten program which is held or existing for general or repeated sale, lease, or license, even if the program was initially developed on a custom basis for in-house, or for a single customer’s, use.
    2. Modification to an existing prewritten program to meet the customer’s needs is custom computer programming only to the extent of the modification, and only to the extent that the actual amount charged for the modification is separately stated on invoices, statements, and other billing documents supplied to the customer. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-120 Definitions: Food for Home Consumption
a. For the purposes of this chapter only, the following definitions shall be applicable:
    1. “Eligible grocery business” means an establishment whose sales of food are such that it is eligible to participate in the food stamp program established by the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-113; 91 Stat. 958.7 U.S.C. Section 2011 et seq.), according to regulations in effect on January 1, 1979. An establishment is deemed eligible to participate in the Food Stamp Program if it is authorized to participate in the program by the United States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service Field Office on the effective date of this section, or if, prior to a reporting period for which the return is filed, such retailer proves to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that the establishment, based on the nature of the retailer’s food sales, could be eligible to participate in the food stamp program established by the Food Stamp Act of 1977 according to regulations in effect on January 1, 1979.
    2. “Facilities for the consumption of food” means tables, chairs, benches, booths, stools, counters, and similar conveniences, trays, glasses, dishes, or other tableware and parking areas for the convenience of in-car consumption of food in or on the premises on which the retailer conducts business.
    3. “Food for consumption on the premises” means any of the following:
        A. “Hot prepared food” as defined below.
        B. Hot or cold sandwiches.
        C. Food served by an attendant to be eaten at tables, chairs, benches, booths, stools, counters, and similar conveniences and within parking areas for the convenience of in-car consumption of food.
        D. Food served with trays, glasses, dishes, or other tableware.
        E. Beverages sold in cups, glasses, or open containers.
        F. Food sold by caterers.
        G. Food sold within the premises of theatres, movies, operas, shows of any type or nature, exhibitions, concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks, fairs, races, contests, games, athletic events, rodeos, billiard and pool parlors, bowling alleys, public dances, dance halls, boxing, wrestling and other matches, and any business which charges admission, entrance, or cover fees for exhibition, amusement, entertainment, or instruction.
        H. Any items contained in subsections (a)(3)(A) through (G) above even though they are sold on a “take-out” or “to go” basis, and whether or not the item is packaged, wrapped, or is actually taken from the premises.
    4. “Hot prepared food” means those products, items, or ingredients of food which are prepared and intended for consumption in a heated condition. “Hot prepared food” includes a combination of hot and cold food items or ingredients if a single price has been established.
    5. “Premises” means the total space and facilities in or on which a vendor conducts business and which are owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by a vendor or which are made available for the use of customers of the vendor or group of vendors, including any building or part of a building, parking lot, or grounds.
b. “Food for home consumption” means all food, except food for consumption on the premises, if sold by any of the following:
    1. An eligible grocery business.
    2. A person who conducts a business whose primary business is not the sale of food but who sells food which is displayed, packaged, and sold in a similar manner as an eligible grocery business.
    3. A person who sells food and does not provide or make available any facilities for the consumption of food on the premises.
    4. A person who conducts a delicatessen business either from a counter which is separate from the place and cash register where taxable sales are made or from a counter which has two (2) cash registers and which are used to record taxable and tax exempt sales, or a retailer who conducts a delicatessen business who uses a cash register which has at least two (2) tax computing keys which are used to record taxable and tax exempt sales.
    5. (Reserved)
    6. Vending machines and other types of automatic retailers.
    7. A person’s sales of food, drink and condiment for consumption within the premises of any prison, jail or other institution under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Corrections, the Department of Public Safety, the Department of Juvenile Corrections or a County Sheriff. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Article 8A-2 DETERMINATION OF GROSS INCOME

Sections:
8A-200       Determination of Gross Income: In General
8A-210       Determination of Gross Income: Transactions Between Affiliated Companies or Persons
8A-220       Determination of Gross Income: Artificially Contrived Transactions
8A-230       Determination of Gross Income Based upon Method of Reporting
8A-240       Exclusion of Cash Discounts, Returns, Refunds, Trade-In Values, Vendor-Issued Coupons, and Rebates from Gross Income
8A-250       Exclusion of Combined Taxes from Gross Income; Itemization; Notice; Limitations
8A-260       Exclusion of Fees and Taxes from Gross Income; Limitations
8A-265       (Reserved)
8A-266       Exclusion of Motor Carrier Revenues from Gross Income
8A-270       Exclusion of Gross Income of Persons Deemed Not Engaged in Business
8A-280       Exclusion of Transactions with Specified Governmental Agencies
8A-285       (Reserved)
8A-290       (Reserved)

Section 8A-200 Determination of Gross Income: In General
a. Gross income includes:
    1. the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of property, the providing of service, or both.
    2. the total amount of the sale, lease, license for use, or rental price at the time of such sale, rental, lease, or license.
    3. all receipts, cash, credits, barter, exchange, reduction of or forgiveness of indebtedness, and property of every kind or nature derived from a sale, lease, license for use, rental, or other taxable activity.
    4. all other receipts whether payment is advanced prior to, contemporaneous with, or deferred in whole or in part subsequent to the activity or transaction.
b. Barter, exchange, trade-outs, or similar transactions are includable in gross income at the fair market value of the service rendered or property transferred, whichever is higher, as they represent consideration given for consideration received.
c. No deduction or exclusion is allowed from gross income on account of the cost of the property sold, the time value of money, expense of any kind or nature, losses, materials used, labor or service performed, interest paid, or credits granted. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-210 Determination of Gross Income: Transactions Between Affiliated Companies or Persons
In transactions between affiliated companies or persons, or in other circumstances where the relationship between the parties is such that the gross income from the transaction is not indicative of the market value of the subject matter of the transaction, the Tax Collector shall determine the market value upon which the Town privilege and use taxes shall be levied. “Market value” shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross income from similar transactions of like quality or character by other taxpayers where no common interest exists between the parties, but otherwise under similar circumstances and conditions. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-220 Determination of Gross Income: Artificially Contrived Transactions
The Tax Collector may examine any transaction, reported or unreported, if, in his opinion, there has been or may be an evasion of the taxes imposed by this chapter and to estimate the amount subject to tax in cases where such evasion has occurred. The Tax Collector shall disregard any transaction which has been undertaken in an artificial manner in order to evade the taxes imposed by this chapter. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-230 Determination of Gross Income Based upon Method of Reporting
The method of reporting chosen by a taxpayer, as provided in Section 8A-520, necessitates the following adjustments to gross income for all purposes under this chapter:
a. Cash basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on a cash basis, gross income for the reporting period shall include:
    1. the total amounts received on “paid in full” transactions, against which are allowed all applicable deductions and exclusions; and
    2. all amounts received on accounts receivable, conditional sales contract, or other similar transactions, against which no deductions and no exclusions from gross income are allowed. Interest on finance contracts may be deducted if separately itemized on all books and records.
b. Accrual basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on an accrual basis, gross income shall include all gross income for the applicable period regardless of whether receipts are for cash, credit, conditional, or partially deferred transactions, and regardless of whether or not any security document or instrument is sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to another. Persons reporting on the accrual basis may deduct bad debts, provided that:
    1. the amount deducted for the bad debt must be deducted from gross income of the month in which the actual charge-off was made, and only to the extent that such amount was actually charged-off, and also only to the extent that such amount is or was included as taxable gross income; and
    2. if any amount is subsequently collected on such charged-off account, it shall be included in gross income for the month in which it was collected, without deduction for expense of collection. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-240 Exclusion of Cash Discounts, Returns, Refunds, Trade-In Values, Vendor-Issued Coupons, and Rebates from Gross Income
a. The following items are not included in gross income:
    1. Cash discounts allowed by the vendor for timely payment, but only discounts allowed against taxable gross income.
    2. The value of property returned by customers to the extent of the amount actually refunded either in cash or by credit and the amount refunded was included in taxable gross income.
    3. The trade-in allowance for tangible personal property accepted as payment, not to exceed the full sales price for any tangible personal property sold, when the full sales price is included in taxable gross income. Trade-in allowances are not allowed for manufactured buildings taxable under Section 8A-427.
    4. When coupons issued by a vendor are later accepted by the vendor as a discount against the transaction, the discount may be excluded from gross income as a cash discount. Amounts credited or refunded by a vendor for redemption of coupons issued by any person other than the vendor may not be excluded from gross income.
    5. Rebates issued by the vendor to a customer as a discount against the transaction may be excluded from gross income as a cash discount. Rebates issued by a person other than the vendor may not be excluded from gross income, even when the vendee assigns his right to the rebate to the vendor.
    6. In computing the tax base, gross proceeds of sales or gross income does not include a manufacturer’s cash rebate on the sales price of a motor vehicle if the buyer assigns the buyer’s right in the rebate to the retailer.
b. If the amount specified in subsection (a) above is credited by a vendor subsequent to the reporting period in which the original transaction occurs, such amount may be excluded from the taxable gross income of that subsequent reporting period, but only to the extent that the excludable amount was reported as taxable gross income in that prior reporting period. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-250 Exclusion of Combined Taxes from Gross Income; Itemization; Notice; Limitations
a. When tax is separately charged and/or collected. The total amount of gross income shall be exclusive of combined taxes only when the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall establish to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that such tax has been added to the total price of the transaction. The taxpayer must provide to his customer and also keep a reliable record of the actual tax charged or collected, shown by cash register tapes, sales tickets, or other accurate record, separating net transaction price and combined tax. If at any time the Tax Collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the taxpayer the total or amounts billed or collected on account of combined taxes, the claimed taxes collected may not be excluded from gross income, unless such records are completed and/or clarified to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector.
    1. Remittance of all tax charged and/or collected. When an added charge is made to cover Town (or combined) privilege and use taxes, the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall pay the full amount of the Town taxes due, whether collected by him or not, and in the event he collects more than the amount due he shall remit the excess to the Tax Collector. In the event the Tax Collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the taxpayer the total or amounts of taxes collected by him, and the Tax Collector is satisfied that the taxpayer has collected taxes in an amount in excess of the tax assessed under this chapter, the Tax Collector may determine the amount collected and collect the tax so determined in the manner provided in this chapter.
    2. Itemization. A taxpayer, in order to be entitled to exclude from his gross income any amounts paid to him by customers for combined taxes passed on to the customer, must prove that he has provided his customer with a written record of the transaction showing at a minimum the price before the tax, the combined taxes, and the total cost. This shall be in addition to the record required to be kept under subsection (a) above.
b. When tax has been neither separately charged nor separately collected. When the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall establish, by means of invoices, sales tickets, or other reliable evidence, that no added charge was made to cover combined taxes, the taxpayer may exclude tax collected from such income by dividing such taxable gross income by 1.00 plus a decimal figure representing the effective combined tax rate expressed as a fraction of 1.00. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-260 Exclusion of Fees and Taxes from Gross Income; Limitations
a. There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors of motor vehicles those motor vehicle registration fees, license fees and taxes, and lieu taxes imposed pursuant to Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes, in connection with the initial purchase of a motor vehicle, but only to the extent that such taxes or fees or both have been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser of the motor vehicle by the vendor, actually remitted to the proper registering, licensing, and taxing authorities, and the provisions of Article 8A-3, regarding recordkeeping, are met. For the purpose of the exclusion provided by this subsection only, the terms vendor and vendee shall also apply to a lessor and lessee respectively of a motor vehicle if, in addition to all other requirements of this subsection, the lease agreement specifically requires the lessee to pay such fees or taxes, and such amounts are separately itemized in the documentation provided to the lessee.
b. There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors at retail of heavy trucks and trailers the amount attributable to Federal excise taxes imposed by 26 U.S.C. Section 4051, but only to the extent that the provisions of Article 8A-3, relating to recordkeeping, have been met.
c. There shall be excluded from gross income the following fees, taxes, and lieu taxes, but only to the extent that such taxes or fees or both have been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser by the vendor, actually remitted to the proper registering, licensing, and taxing authorities, and the provisions of Article 8A-3, regarding recordkeeping, are met:
    1. emergency telecommunication services excise tax imposed pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5252. “Emergency telecommunication services” means telecommunication services or systems that use number 911 or a similarly designated telephone number for emergency calls;
    2. the telecommunication devices for the deaf and the severely hearing and speech impaired excise tax imposed pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-5252;
    3. Federal excise taxes on communications services as imposed by 26 U.S.C. Section 4251;
    4. car rental surcharge imposed pursuant to A.R.S. Section 48-4234;
    5. Federal excise taxes on passenger vehicles as imposed by 26 U.S.C. Section 4001(.01);
    6. waste tire disposal fees, imposed pursuant to A.R.S. Section 44-1302;
d. There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors of motor vehicles dealer documentation fees, but only to the extent that such fees have been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser of the motor vehicle by the vendor. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-265 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-266 Exclusion of Motor Carrier Revenues from Gross Income
There shall be excluded from gross income the gross proceeds of sale or gross income derived from any of the following:
a. A motor carrier’s use on the public highways in this State if the motor carrier is subject to a fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 15, Article 4 or A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16, Article 4.
b. Leasing, renting or licensing a motor vehicle subject to and upon which the fee has been paid under A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16.
c. The sale of a motor vehicle and any repair and replacement parts and tangible personal property becoming a part of such motor vehicle, to a motor carrier who is subject to a fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16 and who is engaged in the business of leasing, renting or licensing such property.
d. For the purposes of these exclusions, “motor carrier” includes a motor vehicle weighing twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or more, a lightweight motor vehicle which weighs twelve thousand one (12,001) pounds to twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds and a light motor vehicle weighing twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or less, which pay the fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 15, or A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-270 Exclusion of Gross Income of Persons Deemed Not Engaged in Business
a. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
    1. “Federally exempt organization” means an organization which has received a determination of exemption, or qualifies for such exemption, under 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c) and rules and regulations of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue pertaining to same, but not including a governmental entity, non-licensed business, or public educational entity.
    2. “Governmental entity” means the Federal Government, the State of Arizona, any other state, or any political subdivision, department, or agency of any of the foregoing; provided further, that persons contracting with such a governmental entity to operate any part of a governmentally adopted and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation shall be deemed a governmental entity in all activities such person performs when engaged in said contract.
    3. “Non-licensed business” means any person conducting any business activity for gain or profit, whether or not actually realized, which person is not required to be licensed for the conduct or transaction of activities subject to the tax imposed under this chapter.
    4. “Proprietary club” means any club which has qualified or would otherwise qualify as an exempt club under the provisions of 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(7), (8), and (9), notwithstanding the fact that some or all of the members may own a proprietary interest in the property and assets of the club.
    5. “Public educational entity” means any educational entity operated pursuant to any provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes.
b. Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce gross income subject to tax under this chapter shall not be subject to the imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a public educational entity; governmental entity, except proprietary activities of municipalities as provided by regulation in Article 8A-7; or non-licensed business.
c. Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce gross income subject to the tax under this chapter shall not be subject to the imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a federally exempt organization or proprietary club with the following exceptions:
    1. Transactions involving proprietary clubs and organizations exempt under 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(7), (8), and (9), where the gross revenue of the activity received from persons other than members and bona fide guests of members is in an amount in excess of fifteen percent (15%) of total gross revenue, as prescribed by regulation in Article 8A-7. In the event this fifteen percent (15%) limit is exceeded, the entire gross income of such entity shall be subject to the applicable tax.
    2. Gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512, including all statutory definitions and determinations, the rules and regulations of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, and his administrative interpretations and guidelines.
    3. (Reserved)
d. Except as may be provided elsewhere in this chapter, transactions where customers are exempt organizations, proprietary clubs, public educational entities, governmental entities, or non-licensed businesses shall be deemed taxable transactions for the purpose of the imposition of taxes under this chapter, notwithstanding that property so acquired may in fact be resold or leased by the acquiring person to others. In the case of sales, rentals, leases, or licenses to proprietary clubs or exempt organizations, the vendor may be relieved from the responsibility for reporting and paying tax on such income only by obtaining from its vendee a verified statement that includes:
    1. a statement that when the property so acquired is resold, rented, leased, or licensed, that the otherwise exempt vendee chooses, or is required, to pay Town privilege tax or an equivalent excise tax on its gross income from such transactions and does in fact file returns on same; and
    2. the privilege license number of the otherwise exempt vendee; and
    3. such other information as the Tax Collector may require.
e. Franchisees or concessionaires operating businesses for or on behalf of any exempt organization, governmental entity, public educational entity, proprietary club, or non-licensed business shall not be considered to be such an exempt organization, club, entity, or non-licensed business, but shall be deemed to be a taxpayer subject to the provisions of this chapter, except as provided in the definition of governmental entity, regarding urban mass transit.
f. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-280 Exclusion of Transactions with Specified Governmental Agencies
Notwithstanding provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter, gross income derived from transactions that would be deemed taxable, if conducted with or for other customers or consumers, shall be deemed exempt from the taxes imposed by this chapter when the customer or consumer is:
    1. the Federal Government.
    2. the State of Arizona, its departments and agencies, including the State universities maintained by the State Board of Regents; but not including State-chartered or State-insured banks, savings and loan institutions, and credit unions.
    3. any county of this State, its departments and agencies, including, but not limited to, public school districts.
    4. any other incorporated city or town in this State.
    5. this Town. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-285 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-290 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Article 8A-3 LICENSING AND RECORDKEEPING

Sections:
8A-300       Licensing Requirements
8A-305       Special Licensing Requirements
8A-310       Licensing: Duration of License; Transferability; Display
8A-315       (Reserved)
8A-320       Licensing: Cancellation; Revocation
8A-330       Operating Without a License
8A-350       Recordkeeping Requirements
8A-360       Recordkeeping: Claim of Exclusion, Exemption, Deduction, or Credit; Documentation; Liability
8A-370       Inadequate or Unsuitable Records

Section 8A-300 Licensing Requirements
a. The following persons shall make application to the Tax Collector for a privilege license, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of twelve dollars ($12.00), and no person shall engage or continue in business or engage in such activities until he shall have such a license:
    1. every person desiring to engage or continue in business activities within the Town upon which a privilege tax is imposed by this chapter.
    2. (Reserved)
    3. every person required to report and pay a tax upon rental occupancy, as imposed by Section 8A-440.
b. A person engaged in more than one (1) activity subject to Town privilege and use taxes at any one (1) business location is not required to obtain a separate license for each activity; provided, that at the time such person makes application for a license, he shall list on such application each category of activity in which he is engaged. The licensee shall inform the Tax Collector of any changes in his business activities, location, or mailing address within thirty (30) days.
c. Limitation. The issuance of a privilege license by the Tax Collector shall in no way be construed as permission to operate a business activity in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity may be subject. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-305 Special Licensing Requirements
a. Partnerships. Application for a privilege license for a partnership engaging or continuing in business in the Town shall provide, as a minimum, the names and addresses of all general partners. Licenses issued to persons engaged in business as partners, limited or general, shall be in the name of the partnership.
b. Corporations. Application for a privilege license for a corporation engaging or continuing in business in the Town shall provide, as a minimum, the names and addresses of both the chief executive officer and chief financial officer of the corporation. Licenses issued to persons engaged in business as corporations shall be in the name of the corporation.
c. Multiple Locations or Multiple Business Names. A person engaged in or conducting one (1) or more businesses at two (2) or more locations or under two (2) or more business names shall procure a license for each such location or business name. A “location” is a place of a separate business establishment.
d. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-310 Licensing: Duration of License; Transferability; Display
a. Except as provided in Section 8A-320, the privilege license shall be valid until request for cancellation and/or surrender of the license by the licensee or expiration through cessation by the licensee of the business activity for which it was issued.
b. The privilege license shall be nontransferable between owners or locations, and shall be on display to the public in the licensee’s place of business.
c. Any licensee who permits his license to expire through cancellation as provided in Section 8A-320, by his request for cancellation, by surrender of the license, or by the cessation of the business activity for which the license was issued, and who thereafter applies for license, shall be granted a new license as an original applicant and shall pay the current license fee. Any licensee who loses or misplaces his privilege license which is still in effect shall be charged the current license fee for each reissuance of a license.
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
f. (Reserved)
g. (Reserved)
h. (Reserved)
i. (Reserved)
j. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-315 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-320 Licensing: Cancellation; Revocation
a. Cancellation. The Tax Collector shall be authorized to cancel the Town privilege license of any licensee as “inactive” if the taxpayer, required to report monthly to the Town, has neither filed any return nor remitted to the Town any taxes imposed by this chapter for a period of six (6) consecutive months; or, if required to report quarterly, has neither filed any return nor remitted any taxes imposed by this chapter for two (2) consecutive quarters; or, if required to report annually, has neither filed any return nor remitted any taxes imposed by this chapter when such annual report and tax are due to be filed with and remitted to the Tax Collector.
b. Revocation. If any licensee fails to pay any tax, interest, penalty, fee, or sum required to be paid to the Town under this chapter, or if such licensee fails to comply with any other provisions of this chapter, the Tax Collector shall be authorized to revoke the Town privilege license of said licensee.
c. Notice and Hearing. The Tax Collector shall deliver notice to such licensee of cancellation or revocation of the privilege license. If within twenty (20) days the licensee so notified requests a hearing, he shall be granted a hearing before the Tax Collector.
d. After cancellation or revocation of a taxpayer’s license, the taxpayer shall not be relicensed until all reports have been filed; all fees, taxes, interest, and penalties due have been paid; and he is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-330 Operating Without a License
It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this chapter to obtain a privilege license to engage in or continue in business within the Town without a license. The Tax Collector shall assess any delinquencies in tax, interest, and penalties which may apply against such person upon any transactions subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-350 Recordkeeping Requirements
a. It shall be the duty of every person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve suitable records and such other books and accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable under this chapter. The books and records must contain, at a minimum, such detail and summary information as may be required by regulation in Article 8A-7; or when records are maintained within an electronic data processing (EDP) system, the requirements established by the Arizona Department of Revenue for privilege tax filings will be accepted. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve such books and records for a period equal to the applicable limitation period for assessment of tax, and all such books and records shall be open for inspection by the Tax Collector during any business day.
b. The Tax Collector may direct, by letter, a specific taxpayer to keep specific other books, records, and documents. Such letter directive shall apply:
    1. only for future reporting periods, and
    2. only by express determination of the Tax Collector that such specific recordkeeping is necessary due to the inability of the Town to conduct an adequate examination of the past activities of the taxpayer, which inability resulted from inaccurate or inadequate books, records, or documentation maintained by the taxpayer. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-360 Recordkeeping: Claim of Exclusion, Exemption, Deduction, or Credit; Documentation; Liability
a. All deductions, exclusions, exemptions and credits provided in this chapter are conditional upon adequate proof and documentation of such as may be required under A.R.S. Section 42-5022 or by this chapter or regulation in Article 8A-7.
b. Any person who claims and receives an exemption, deduction, exclusion, or credit to which he is not entitled under this chapter shall be subject to, liable for, and pay the tax on the transaction as if the vendor subject to the tax had passed the burden of the payment of the tax to the person wrongfully claiming the exemption. A person who wrongfully claimed such exemption shall be treated as if he is delinquent in the payment of the tax and shall be subject to interest and penalties upon such delinquency. However, if the tax is collected from the vendor on such transaction it shall not again be collected from the person claiming the exemption, or if collected from the person claiming the exemption it shall not also be collected from the vendor. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-370 Inadequate or Unsuitable Records
In the event the records provided by the taxpayer are considered by the Tax Collector to be inadequate or unsuitable to determine the amount of the tax for which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this chapter, it is the responsibility of the taxpayer either:
    1. to provide such other records required by this chapter or regulation in Article 8A-7; or
    2. to correct or to reconstruct his records, to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Article 8A-4 PRIVILEGE TAXES

Sections:
8A-400       Imposition of Privilege Taxes; Presumption
8A-405       Advertising
8A-407       (Reserved)
8A-410       Amusements, Exhibitions, and Similar Activities
8A-415       Construction Contracting: Construction Contractors
8A-416       Construction Contracting: Speculative Builders
8A-417       Construction Contracting: Owner-Builders Who Are Not Speculative Builders
8A-418       (Reserved)
8A-420       (Reserved)
8A-425       Job Printing
8A-427       Manufactured Buildings
8A-430       Timbering and Other Extraction
8A-432       Mining
8A-435       Publishing and Periodicals Distribution
8A-440       Rental Occupancy
8A-444       Hotels
8A-445       Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Real Property
8A-446       (Reserved)
8A-447       Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Real Property: Additional Tax Upon Transient Lodging
8A-450       Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property
8A-452       (Reserved)
8A-455       Restaurants and Bars
8A-460       Retail Sales: Measure of Tax; Burden of Proof; Exclusions
8A-465       Retail Sales: Exemptions
8A-470       Telecommunication Services
8A-475       Transporting for Hire
8A-480       Utility Services
8A-485       (Reserved)

Section 8A-400 Imposition of Privilege Taxes; Presumption
a. There are hereby levied and imposed, subject to all other provisions of this chapter, the following privilege taxes for the purpose of raising revenue to be used in defraying the necessary expenses of the Town, such taxes to be collected by the Tax Collector:
    1. a privilege tax upon persons on account of their business activities, to the extent provided elsewhere in this article, to be measured by the gross income of persons, whether derived from residents of the Town or not, or whether derived from within the Town or from without.
    2. a privilege tax upon certain persons for the privilege of occupancy of real property, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8A-440.
b. Taxes imposed by this chapter are in addition to others. Except as specifically designated elsewhere in this chapter, each of the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to all other licenses, fees, and taxes levied by law, including other taxes imposed by this chapter.
c. Presumption. For the purpose of proper administration of this chapter and to prevent evasion of the taxes imposed by this chapter, it shall be presumed that all gross income is subject to the tax until the contrary is established by the taxpayer.
d. Limitation of exemptions, deductions, and credits allowed against the measure of taxes imposed by this chapter. All exemptions, deductions, and credits set forth in this chapter shall be limited to the specific activity or transaction described and not extended to include any other activity or transaction subject to the tax. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-405 Advertising
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of local advertising by billboards, direct mail, radio, television, or by any other means. However, commission and fees retained by an advertising agency shall not be includable in gross income from local advertising. All delivery or disseminating of information directly to the public or any portion thereof for a consideration shall be considered local advertising, except the following:
    1. the advertising of a product or service which is sold or provided both within and without the State by more than one (1) commonly designated business entity within the State, and in which the advertisement names either no commonly designated business entity within the State or more than one (1) commonly designated business entity. “Commonly designated business entity” means any person selling or providing any product or service to its customers under a common business name or style, even though there may be more than one (1) legal entity conducting business functions using the same or substantially the same business name or style by virtue of a franchise, license, or similar agreement.
    2. the advertising of a facility or of a service or activity in which neither the facility nor a business site carrying on such service or activity is located within the State.
    3. the advertising of a product which may only be purchased from an out-of-State supplier.
    4. political advertising for United States Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates only.
    5. advertising by means of product purchase coupons redeemable at any retail establishment carrying such product but not product coupons redeemable only at a single commonly designated business entity.
    6. advertising transportation services where a substantial portion of the transportation activity of the business entity advertised involves interstate or foreign carriage.
b. (Reserved) ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-407 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-410 Amusements, Exhibitions, and Similar Activities
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of providing amusement that begins in the Town or takes place entirely within the Town, which includes the following type or nature of businesses:
    1. operating or conducting theaters, movies, operas, shows of any type or nature, exhibitions, concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks, menageries, fairs, races, contests, games, billiard or pool parlors, bowling alleys, skating rinks, tennis courts, golf courses, video games, pinball machines, public dances, dance halls, sports events, jukeboxes, batting and driving ranges, animal rides, or any other business charging admission for exhibition, amusement, or entertainment.
    2. (Reserved)
b. Deductions or exemptions. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this section:
    1. (Reserved)
    2. Amounts retained by the Arizona Exposition and State Fair Board from ride ticket sales at the annual Arizona State Fair.
    3. Income received from a hotel business subject to tax under Section 8A-444, if all of the following apply:
        A. The hotel business receives gross income from a customer for the specific business activity otherwise subject to amusement tax.
        B. The consideration received by the hotel business is equal to or greater than the amount to be deducted under this section.
        C. The hotel business has provided an exemption certificate to the person engaging in business under this section.
    4. Income that is specifically included as the gross income of a business activity upon which another Section of this article imposes a tax, that is separately stated to the customer and is taxable to the person engaged in that classification not to exceed consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.
    5. Income from arranging transportation connected to amusement activity that is separately stated to the customer, not to exceed consideration paid to the transportation business.
c. The tax imposed by this section shall not include arranging an amusement activity as a service to a person’s customers if that person is not otherwise engaged in the business of operating or conducting an amusement themselves or through others. This exception does not apply to businesses that operate or conduct amusements pursuant to customer orders and send the billings and receive the payments associated with that activity, including when the amusement is performed by third party independent contractors. For the purposes of this paragraph, “arranging” includes billing for or collecting amusement charges from a person’s customers on behalf of the persons providing the amusement. ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-415 Construction Contracting: Construction Contractors
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to four percent (4%) of the gross income from the business upon every construction contractor engaging or continuing in the business activity of construction contracting within the Town.
    1. However, gross income from construction contracting shall not include charges related to groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. Section 45-604.
    2. (Reserved)
    3. Gross income from construction contracting shall not include gross income from the sale of manufactured buildings taxable under Section 8A-427.
    4. For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated in a contract is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of this subsection, “direct costs” means the portion of the actual costs that are directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services.
b. Deductions and exemptions. 
    1. Gross income derived from acting as a subcontractor shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
    2. All construction contracting gross income subject to the tax and not deductible herein shall be allowed a deduction of thirty-five percent (35%).
    3. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
        A. Section 8A-465, subsections (g) and (p);
        B. (Reserved)
    shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this section.
    4. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section 8A-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section 8A-465(g) that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, “permanent attachment” means at least one (1) of the following:
        A. to be incorporated into real property.
        B. to become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real property.
        C. to be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed.
    5. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting or cooling and packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
    6. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section 8A-465, subsection (g), shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
    7. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this State for the construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
    8. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a postconstruction contract to perform postconstruction treatment of real property for termite and general pest control, including wood-destroying organisms, shall be exempt from tax imposed under this section.
    9. Through December 31, 2009, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for constructing any lake facility development in a commercial enhancement reuse district that is designated pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-499.08 if the contractor maintains the following records in a form satisfactory to the Arizona Department of Revenue and to the Town:
        A. The certificate of qualification of the lake facility development issued by the Town pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-499.08, subsection D.
        B. All State and local transaction privilege tax returns for the period of time during which the contractor received gross proceeds of sales or gross income from a contract to construct a lake facility development in a designated commercial enhancement reuse district, showing the amount exempted from State and local taxation.
        C. Any other information considered to be necessary.
    10. Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer. For the purposes of this paragraph:
        A. the attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the development fees actually imposed.
        B. the attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
        C. “development fees” means fees imposed to offset capital costs of providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a development and authorized pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-463.05, A.R.S. Section 11-1102 or A.R.S. Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid.
    11. For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, and ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The contractor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and the Town, as applicable, for examination.
c. “Subcontractor” means a construction contractor performing work for either:
    1. a construction contractor who has provided the subcontractor with a written declaration that he is liable for the tax for the project and has provided the subcontractor his Town privilege license number.
    2. an owner-builder who has provided the subcontractor with a written declaration that:
        A. the owner-builder is improving the property for sale; and
        B. the owner-builder is liable for the tax for such construction contracting activity; and
        C. the owner-builder has provided the contractor his Town privilege license number.
    3. a person selling new manufactured buildings who has provided the subcontractor with a written declaration that he is liable for the tax for the site preparation and setup, and provided the subcontractor his Town privilege license number.
    Subcontractor also includes a construction contractor performing work for another subcontractor as defined above. ((O)11-22, Amended,  07/06/2011; (O)09-16, Amended,  08/19/2009; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-416 Construction Contracting: Speculative Builders
a. The tax shall be equal to four percent (4%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in business as a speculative builder within the Town.
    1. The gross income of a speculative builder considered taxable shall include the total selling price from the sale of improved real property at the time of closing of escrow or transfer of title.
    2. “Improved real property” means any real property:
        A. upon which a structure has been constructed; or
        B. where improvements have been made to land containing no structure (such as paving or landscaping); or
        C. which has been reconstructed as provided by regulation; or
        D. where water, power, and streets have been constructed to the property line.
    3. “Sale of improved real property” includes any form of transaction, whether characterized as a lease or otherwise, which in substance is a transfer of title of, or equitable ownership in, improved real property and includes any lease of the property for a term of thirty (30) years or more (with all options for renewal being included as a part of the term). In the case of multiple unit projects, “sale” refers to the sale of the entire project or to the sale of any individual parcel or unit.
    4. “Partially improved residential real property,” as used in this section, means any improved real property, as defined in subsection (a)(2) above, being developed for sale to individual homeowners, where the construction of the residence upon such property is not substantially complete at the time of the sale.
b. Exclusions. 
    1. In cases involving reconstruction contracting, the speculative builder may exclude from gross income the prior value allowed for reconstruction contracting in determining his taxable gross income, as provided by regulation.
    2. Neither the cost nor the fair market value of the land which constitutes part of the improved real property sold may be excluded or deducted from gross income subject to the tax imposed by this section.
    3. (Reserved)
    4. A speculative builder may exclude gross income from the sale of partially improved residential real property as defined in (a)(4) above to another speculative builder only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
        A. The speculative builder purchasing the partially improved residential real property has a valid Town privilege license for construction contracting as a speculative builder; and
        B. At the time of the transaction, the purchaser provides the seller with a properly completed written declaration that the purchaser assumes liability for and will pay all privilege taxes which would otherwise be due the Town at the time of sale of the partially improved residential real property; and
        C. The seller also:
            i. maintains proper records of such transactions in a manner similar to the requirements provided in this chapter relating to sales for resale; and
            ii. retains a copy of the written declaration provided by the buyer for the transaction; and
            iii. is properly licensed with the Town as a speculative builder and provides the Town with the written declaration attached to the Town privilege tax return where he claims the exclusion.
    5. For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated in a contract is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of this subsection, “direct costs” means the portion of the actual costs that are directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services.
c. Tax liability for speculative builders occurs at close of escrow or transfer of title, whichever occurs earlier, and is subject to the following provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax credits:
    1. Exemptions. 
        A. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
            i. Section 8A-465, subsections (g) and (p);
            ii. (Reserved)
        shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this section.
        B. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting or cooling and packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
        C. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section 8A-465, subsection (g), shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
        D. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this State for the construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
        E. Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section. For the purposes of this paragraph:
            i. the attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the development fees actually imposed.
            ii. the attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
            iii. “development fees” means fees imposed to offset capital costs of providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a development and authorized pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-463.05, A.R.S. Section 11-1102 or A.R.S. Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid.
    2. Deductions. 
        A. All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in the amount of thirty-five percent (35%).
        B. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section 8A-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section 8A-465(g), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, “permanent attachment” means at least one (1) of the following:
            i. to be incorporated into real property.
            ii. to become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real property.
            iii. to be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed.
        C. For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, and ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The contractor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and the Town, as applicable, for examination.
    3. Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-builders or speculative builders, not to exceed the tax liability against which such credits apply, provided such credits are documented to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector:
        A. A tax credit equal to the amount of Town privilege or use tax, or the equivalent excise tax, paid directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with respect to the tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement to real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder.
        B. A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this Town, or charged separately to the speculative builder, by a construction contractor, on the gross income derived by said person from the construction of any improvement to the real property.
        C. No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that the gross income against which said credits apply is reported. ((O)11-22, Amended,  07/06/2011; (O)09-16, Amended,  08/19/2009; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-417 Construction Contracting: Owner-Builders Who Are Not Speculative Builders
a. At the expiration of twenty-four (24) months after improvement to the property is substantially complete, the tax liability for an owner-builder who is not a speculative builder shall be at an amount equal to four percent (4%) of:
    1. the gross income from the activity of construction contracting upon the real property in question which was realized by those construction contractors to whom the owner-builder provided written declaration that they were not responsible for the taxes as prescribed in Subsection 8A-415(c)(2); and
    2. the purchase of tangible personal property for incorporation into any improvement to real property, computed on the sales price.
b. For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated in a contract is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of this subsection, “direct costs” means the portion of the actual costs that are directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services.
c. The tax liability of this section is subject to the following provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax credits:
    1. Exemptions. 
        A. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
            i. Section 8A-465, subsections (g) and (p);
            ii. (Reserved)
        shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this section.
        B. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting or cooling and packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
        C. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section 8A-465, subsection (g), shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
        D. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this State for the construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
        E. Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section. For the purposes of this paragraph:
            i. the attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the development fees actually imposed.
            ii. the attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
            iii. “development fees” means fees imposed to offset capital costs of providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a development and authorized pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-463.05, A.R.S. Section 11-1102 or A.R.S. Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid.
    2. Deductions. 
        A. All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in the amount of thirty-five percent (35%).
        B. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section 8A-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section 8A-465(g), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, “permanent attachment” means at least one (1) of the following:
            i. to be incorporated into real property.
            ii. to become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real property.
            iii. to be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed.
        C. For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, and ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The contractor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and the Town, as applicable, for examination.
    3. Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-builders and speculative builders, not to exceed the tax liability against which such credits apply, provided such credits are documented to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector:
        A. A tax credit equal to the amount of Town privilege or use tax, or the equivalent excise tax, paid directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with respect to the tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement to real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder.
        B. A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this Town, or charged separately to the speculative builder, by a construction contractor, on the gross income derived by said person from the construction of any improvement to the real property.
        C. No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that the gross income against which said credits apply is reported.
d. The limitation period for the assessment of taxes imposed by this section is measured based upon when such liability is reportable, that is, in the reporting period that encompasses the twenty-fifth (25th) month after said unit or project was substantially complete. Interest and penalties, as provided in Section 8A-540, will be based on reportable date.
e. (Reserved) ((O)11-22, Amended,  07/06/2011; (O)09-16, Amended,  08/19/2009; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-418 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-420 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-425 Job Printing
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of job printing, which includes engraving of printing plates, embossing, copying, micrographics, and photo reproduction.
b. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to:
    1. job printing purchased for the purpose of resale by the purchaser in the form supplied by the job printer.
    2. out-of-Town sales.
    3. out-of-State sales.
    4. job printing of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals or publications for a person who is subject to the tax imposed by subsection 8A-435(a) or an equivalent excise tax; provided further, that said person is properly licensed by the taxing jurisdiction at the location of publication.
    5. sales of job printing to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
    6. (Reserved) ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-427 Manufactured Buildings
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income, including site preparation, moving to the site, and/or set-up, upon every person engaging or continuing in the business activity of selling manufactured buildings within the Town. Such business activity is deemed to occur at the business location of the seller where the purchaser first entered into the contract to purchase the manufactured building.
b. Sales of used manufactured buildings are not taxable.
c. The sale prices of furniture, furnishings, fixtures, appliances, and attachments that are not incorporated as component parts of or attached to a manufactured building are exempt from the tax imposed by this section. Sales of such items are subject to the tax under Section 8A-460.
d. Under this section, a trade-in will not be allowed for the purpose of reducing the tax liability. ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-430 Timbering and Other Extraction
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the following businesses:
    1. felling, producing, or preparing timber or any product of the forest for sale, profit, or commercial use.
    2. extracting, refining, or producing any oil or natural gas for sale, profit, or commercial use.
b. The rate specified in subsection (a) above shall be applied to the value of the entire product extracted, refined, produced, or prepared for sale, profit, or commercial use, when such activity occurs within the Town, regardless of the place of sale of the product or the fact that delivery may be made to a point without the Town or without the State.
c. If any person engaging in any business classified in this section ships or transports products, or any part thereof, out of the State without making sale of such products, or ships his products outside of the State in an unfinished condition, the value of the products or articles in the condition or form in which they existed when transported out-of-State and before they enter interstate commerce shall be the basis for assessment of the tax imposed by this section.
d. (Reserved) ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-432 Mining
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to one tenth of one percent (0.1%), not to exceed one tenth of one percent (0.1%), of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of mining, smelting, or producing for sale, profit, or commercial use any copper, gold, silver, or other mineral product, compound, or combination of mineral products; but not including the extraction, removal, or production of sand, gravel, or rock from the ground for sale, profit, or commercial use.
b. The rate specified in subsection (a) above shall be applied to the value of the entire product mined, smelted or produced for sale, profit, or commercial use, when such activity occurs within the Town, regardless of the place of sale of the product or the fact that delivery may be made to a point without the Town or without the State.
c. If any person engaging in any business classified in this section ships or transports products, or any part thereof, out of the State without making sale of such products, or ships his products outside of the State in an unfinished condition, the value of the products or articles in the condition or form in which they existed when transported out-of-State and before they enter interstate commerce shall be the basis for assessment of the tax imposed by this section. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-435 Publishing and Periodicals Distribution
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business activity of:
    1. publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals when published within the Town, measured by the gross income derived from notices, subscriptions, and local advertising as defined in Section 8A-405. In cases where the location of publication is both within and without this State, gross income subject to the tax shall refer only to gross income derived from residents of this State or generated by permanent business locations within this State.
    2. distribution or delivery within the Town of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals not published within the Town, measured by the gross income derived from subscriptions.
b. “Location of publication” is determined by:
    1. location of the editorial offices of the publisher, when the physical printing is not performed by the publisher; or
    2. location of either the editorial offices or the printing facilities, if the publisher performs his own physical printing.
c. “Subscription income” shall include all circulation revenue of the publisher except amounts retained by or credited to carriers or other vendors as compensation for delivery within the State by such carriers or vendors, and further except sales of published items, directly or through distributors, for the purpose of resale, to retailers subject to the privilege tax on such resale.
d. “Circulation,” for the purpose of measurement of gross income subject to the tax, shall be considered to occur at the place of delivery of the published items to the subscriber or intended reader irrespective of the location of the physical facilities or personnel of the publisher. However, delivery by the United States mail shall be considered to have occurred at the location of publication.
e. Allocation of taxes between cities and towns. In cases where publication or distribution occurs in more than one (1) city or town, the measurement of gross income subject to tax by the Town shall include:
    1. that portion of the gross income from publication which reflects the ratio of circulation within this Town to circulation in all incorporated cities and towns in this State having substantially similar provisions; plus
    2. only when publication occurs within the Town, that portion of the remaining gross income from publication which reflects the ratio of circulation within this Town to the total circulation of all incorporated cities or towns in this State within which cities the taxpayer maintains a location of publication.
f. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of newspapers, magazines or other periodicals to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512. ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-440 Rental Occupancy
a. For the purposes of this section only, the following definitions shall apply:
    1. “Landlord” means any lessor of real property under a pre-existing lease.
    2. “Pre-existing lease” means any written lease, license for use, or rental agreement entered into prior to December 1, 1967; except for the following:
        A. any bilateral amendment to such written agreement which was entered into subsequent to December 1, 1967, wherein the length of the term or the size of the premises affected is changed or both.
        B. any such agreement for lodging or lodging space.
    3. “Rent” means all consideration paid by the tenant to his landlord or to another in payment of or diminution of his own or his landlord’s obligation in connection with the real property occupied by the tenant, whether or not such occupancy is designated as a rent, lease or license for use of real property.
    4. “Tenant” means any lessee of real property under a pre-existing lease.
b. The tax rate shall be at an amount of two percent (2%) of the gross rent paid by a tenant, to the extent of his occupancy of real property in this Town under a pre-existing lease, upon such tenant, for the privilege of such occupancy, subject to the provisions of this section.
c. Exclusions. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to:
    1. occupancy by a tenant which the Constitution or laws of the United States or of the State of Arizona prohibit the Town from taxing.
    2. occupancy by a tenant of a landlord which the Constitution or laws of the United States or of the State of Arizona prohibit the Town from taxing.
    3. occupancy of lodging or lodging space.
    4. occupancy of real property under other than a pre-existing lease.
d. Duty of landlords. Every landlord of a tenant subject to the tax:
    1. shall collect the tax imposed by this section from the tenant liable for the tax at the same time as and together with the tenant’s periodic or other payment of rent. The tax required to be collected shall constitute a debt owed by the landlord to the Town.
    2. shall be considered a taxpayer subject to all licensing, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements of this chapter.
e. Duty of tenants. Every tenant liable for the tax:
    1. shall, in any instance in which the tax has not been collected by his landlord, remit such tax to the Tax Collector, and in such case, be subject to all licensing and reporting requirements of this chapter.
    2. shall maintain, and provide upon request, books and records sufficient for the Tax Collector to determine the tax liability of such tenant.
f. Interest and civil penalties shall be the liability of the landlord collecting and remitting the tax; provided, however, that if the landlord can present clear and convincing evidence that the delinquency was caused by the tenant, then said interest and penalties shall be the liability of the tenant.
g. Extension of rights of appeal to include tenants and landlords.
    1. Any landlord or tenant may avail himself of the provisions of Sections 8A-570 through 8A-575, relating to appeals, and, except as modified hereunder, all provisions of said Sections shall apply.
    2. For the purposes of preserving appeal rights, an assessment against a landlord may be protested and appealed by any tenant paying or liable to pay the tax for the occupancy included in such assessment.
    3. Payment of the tax herein imposed to a landlord by a tenant shall be deemed payment of the tax for the tenant for the purposes of allowing a protest to be initiated under Sections 8A-570 through 8A-575.
    4. The filing of a protest petition by a tenant shall not relieve the landlord of his obligation to report and remit the protested tax, or any subsequent periodic payments of tax governed by the initial protest.
h. Refunds. Any refunds of taxes authorized by this chapter shall be made to the tenant. Any refunds of interest and civil penalties authorized by this chapter shall be made to the person liable for such, as provided in subsection (f) above. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-444 Hotels
The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of operating a hotel charging for lodging and/or lodging space furnished to any:
a. Person.
b. Exclusions. The tax imposed by this section shall not include:
    1. Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are under the jurisdiction of the United States, this State or any other state or a political subdivision of this State or of any other state in a privately operated prison, jail or detention facility.
    2. Gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is properly included in another business activity under this article and that is taxable to the person engaged in that business activity, but the gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed the consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.
    3. Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if engaged in by a person not subject to tax under this article.
    4. Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if engaged in by a person subject to taxation under Section 8A-410 or 8A-475 due to an exclusion, exemption or deduction.
    5. Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from commissions received from a person providing services or property to the customers of the hotel. However, such commissions may be subject to tax under Section 8A-445 or 8A-450 as rental, leasing or licensing for use of real or tangible personal property.
    6. Income from providing telephone, fax or Internet services to customers at an additional charge, that is separately stated to the customer and is separately maintained in the hotel’s books and records. However, such gross proceeds of sales or gross income may be subject to tax under Section 8A-470 as telecommunication services. ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-445 Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Real Property
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of leasing or renting real property located within the Town for a consideration, to the tenant in actual possession, or the licensing for use of real property to the final licensee located within the Town for a consideration including any improvements, rights, or interest in such property; provided further, that:
    1. Payments made by the lessee to, or on behalf of, the lessor for property taxes, repairs, or improvements are considered to be part of the taxable gross income.
    2. Charges for such items as telecommunications, utilities, pet fees, or maintenance are considered to be part of the taxable gross income.
    3. However, if the lessor engages in telecommunication activity, as evidenced by installing individual metering equipment and by billing each tenant based upon actual usage, such activity is taxable under Section 8A-470.
b. If individual utility meters have been installed for each tenant and the lessor separately charges each single tenant for the exact billing from the utility company, such charges are exempt.
c. Charges by a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization to patients of such facilities for use of rooms or other real property during the course of their treatment by such facilities are exempt.
d. Charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services to another person engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services are exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
e. Exempt from the tax imposed by this section is gross income derived from the rental, leasing, or licensing for use of real property to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property so rented, leased, or licensed is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
f. A person who has less than three (3) apartments, houses, trailer spaces, or other lodging spaces rented, leased or licensed or available for rent, lease, or license within the State and no units of commercial property for rent, lease, or license within the State, is not deemed to be in the rental business, and is therefore exempt from the tax imposed by this section on such income. However, a person who has one (1) or more units of commercial property is subject to the tax imposed by this section on rental, lease and license income from all such lodging spaces and commercial units of real estate even though said person may have fewer than three (3) lodging spaces.
g. (Reserved)
h. Except as may be provided in another section of this chapter, the tax prescribed by this section shall not include gross income from the rental, leasing or licensing of lodging or lodging space to an individual who resides therein.
i. (Reserved)
j. Exempt from the tax imposed by this section is gross income derived from the activities taxable under Section 8A-444 of this code.
k. (Reserved)
l. (Reserved)
m. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the tax imposed by this section does not apply to the rental, leasing or licensing for use of commercial property.
n. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8A-200(b), the fair market value of one (1) apartment in an apartment complex provided rent-free to an employee of the apartment complex is not subject to the tax imposed by this section. For an apartment complex with more than fifty (50) units, an additional apartment provided rent-free to an employee for every additional fifty (50) units is not subject to the tax imposed by this section.
o. Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are under the jurisdiction of the United States, this State or any other state or a political subdivision of this State or of any other state in a privately operated prison, jail or detention facility is exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
p. Charges by any hospital, any licensed nursing care institution, or any kidney dialysis facility to patients of such facilities for the use of rooms or other real property during the course of their treatment by such facilities are exempt.
q. Charges to patients receiving personal care or directed care by any licensed assisted living facility, licensed assisted living center or licensed assisted living home as defined and licensed pursuant to Chapter 4 Title 36 Arizona Revised Statutes and Title 9 of the Arizona Administrative Code are exempt.
r. Income received from the rental of any low-income unit as established under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code, including the low-income housing credit provided by IRC Section 42, to the extent that the collection of tax on rental income causes the gross rent defined by IRC Section 42 to exceed the income limitation for the low-income unit is exempt. This exemption also applies to income received from the rental of individual rental units subject to statutory or regulatory low-income unit rent restrictions similar to IRC Section 42 to the extent that the collection of tax from the tenant causes the rental receipts to exceed a rent restriction for the low-income unit. This subsection also applies to rent received by a person other than the owner or lessor of the low-income unit, including a broker. This subsection does not apply unless a taxpayer maintains the documentation to support the qualification of a unit as a low-income unit, the gross rent limitation for the unit and the rent received from that unit.
s. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a commercial lease in which a reciprocal insurer or a corporation leases real property to an affiliated corporation. For the purposes of this subsection:
    1. “Affiliated corporation” means a corporation that meets one of the following conditions:
        A. The corporation owns or controls at least eighty percent (80%) of the lessor.
        B. The corporation is at least eighty percent (80%) owned or controlled by the lessor.
        C. The corporation is at least eighty percent (80%) owned or controlled by a corporation that also owns or controls at least eighty percent (80%) of the lessor.
        D. The corporation is at least eighty percent (80%) owned or controlled by a corporation that is at least eighty percent (80%) owned or controlled by a reciprocal insurer.
    2. For the purposes of subsection (s)(1) of this section, ownership and control are determined by reference to the voting shares of a corporation.
    3. “Reciprocal insurer” has the same meaning as prescribed in A.R.S. Section 20-762. ((O)11-22, Amended,  07/06/2011; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-446 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-447 Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Real Property: Additional Tax Upon Transient Lodging
In addition to the taxes levied as provided in Section 8A-444, there is hereby levied and shall be collected an additional tax in an amount equal to six percent (6%) of the gross income from the business activity of any hotel engaging or continuing within the Town in the business of charging for lodging and/or lodging space furnished to any transient. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-450 Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of leasing, licensing for use, or renting tangible personal property for a consideration, including that which is semi-permanently or permanently installed within the Town as provided by regulation in Article 8A-7.
b. Special provisions relating to long-term motor vehicle leases. A lease transaction involving a motor vehicle for a minimum period of twenty-four (24) months shall be considered to have occurred at the location of the motor vehicle dealership, rather than the location of the place of business of the lessor, even if the lessor’s interest in the lease and its proceeds are sold, transferred, or otherwise assigned to a lease financing institution; provided further, that the city or town where such motor vehicle dealership is located levies a privilege tax or an equivalent excise tax upon the transaction.
c. Gross income derived from the following transactions shall be exempt from privilege taxes imposed by this section:
    1. rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property to persons engaged or continuing in the business of leasing, licensing for use, or rental of such property.
    2. rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property that is semi-permanently or permanently installed within another city or town that levies an equivalent excise tax on the transaction.
    3. rental, leasing, or licensing for use of film, tape, or slides to a theater or other person taxed under Section 8A-410, or to a radio station, television station, or subscription television system.
    4. rental, leasing, or licensing for use of the following:
        A. prosthetics.
        B. income-producing capital equipment.
        C. mining and metallurgical supplies.
    These exemptions include the rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property which, if it had been purchased instead of leased, rented, or licensed by the lessee or licensee, would qualify as income-producing capital equipment or mining and metallurgical supplies.
    5. rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property so rented, leased, or licensed is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512 or rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property in this State by a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and that engages in and uses such property exclusively for training, job placement or rehabilitation programs or testing for mentally or physically handicapped persons.
    6. separately billed charges for delivery, installation, repair, and/or maintenance as provided by regulation in Article 8A-7.
    7. charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services to another person engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services.
    8. the gross income from coin-operated washing, drying, and dry cleaning machines, or from coin-operated car washing machines. This exemption shall not apply to suppliers or distributors renting, leasing, or licensing for use of such equipment to persons engaged in the operation of coin-operated washing, drying, dry cleaning, or car washing establishments.
    9. rental, leasing, or licensing of aircraft that would qualify as aircraft acquired for use outside the State, as prescribed by regulation in Article 8A-7, if such rental, leasing, or licensing had been a sale.
    10. rental, leasing and licensing for use of an alternative fuel vehicle if such vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative fuel and equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as defined in A.R.S. Section 1-215.
    11. rental, leasing, and licensing of solar energy devices, for taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008. The lessor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy retailer. By registering, the lessor acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to leases of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and Town, as applicable, for examination. ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)09-16, Amended,  08/19/2009; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-452 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-455 Restaurants and Bars
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of preparing or serving food or beverage in a bar, cocktail lounge, restaurant, or similar establishment where articles of food or drink are prepared or served for consumption on or off the premises, including also the activity of catering. Cover charges and minimum charges must be included in the gross income of this business activity.
b. Caterers and other taxpayers subject to the tax who deliver food and/or serve such food off premises shall also be allowed to exclude separately charged delivery, set-up, and clean-up charges, provided that the charges are also maintained separately in the books and records. When a taxpayer delivers food and/or serves such food off premises, his regular business location shall still be deemed the location of the transaction for the purposes of the tax imposed by this section.
c. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when sold for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
d. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving food and beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. Section 42-1310.01(a)(48), that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional charge, for consumption in flight.
e. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of prepared food, beverages, condiments or accessories to a public educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes, to the extent such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours.
f. For the purposes of this section, “accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-460 Retail Sales: Measure of Tax; Burden of Proof; Exclusions
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail.
b. The burden of proving that a sale of tangible personal property is not a taxable retail sale shall be upon the person who made the sale.
c. Exclusions. For the purposes of this chapter, sales of tangible personal property shall not include:
    1. sales of stocks, bonds, options, or other similar materials.
    2. sales of lottery tickets or shares pursuant to Article I, Chapter 5, Title 5, Arizona Revised Statutes.
    3. sales of platinum, bullion, or monetized bullion, except minted or manufactured coins transferred or acquired primarily for their numismatic value as prescribed by regulation in Article 8A-7.
    4. gross income derived from the transfer of tangible personal property which is specifically included as the gross income of a business activity upon which another section of this article imposes a tax shall be considered gross income of that business activity, and is not includable as gross income subject to the tax imposed by this section.
    5. sales by professional or personal service occupations where such sales are inconsequential elements of the service provided.
d. (Reserved)
e. When this Town and another Arizona city or town with an equivalent excise tax could claim nexus for taxing a retail sale, the city or town where the permanent business location of the seller at which the order was received shall be deemed to have precedence, and for the purposes of this chapter such city or town has sole and exclusive right to such tax.
f. The appropriate tax liability for any retail sale where the order is received at a permanent business location of the seller located in this Town or in an Arizona city or town that levies an equivalent excise tax shall be at the tax rate of the city or town of such seller’s location.
g. Retail sales of prepaid calling cards or prepaid authorization numbers for telecommunications services, including sales of reauthorization of a prepaid card or authorization number, are subject to tax under this section. ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-465 Retail Sales: Exemptions
Income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by Section 8A-460:
a. sales of tangible personal property to a person regularly engaged in the business of selling such property.
b. out-of-Town sales or out-of-State sales.
c. charges for delivery, installation, or other direct customer services as prescribed by regulation in Article 8A-7.
d. charges for repair services as prescribed by regulation in Article 8A-7, when separately charged and separately maintained in the books and records of the taxpayer.
e. sales of warranty, maintenance, and service contracts, when separately charged and separately maintained in the books and records of the taxpayer.
f. sales of prosthetics.
g. sales of income-producing capital equipment.
h. sales of rental equipment and rental supplies.
i. sales of mining and metallurgical supplies.
j. sales of motor vehicle fuel and use fuel which are subject to a tax imposed under the provisions of Article I or II, Chapter 16, Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes; or sales of use fuel to a holder of a valid single trip use fuel tax permit issued under A.R.S. Section 28-5739, or sales of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.
k. sales of tangible personal property to a construction contractor who holds a valid privilege tax license for engaging or continuing in the business of construction contracting where the tangible personal property sold is incorporated into any structure or improvement to real property as part of construction contracting activity.
l. sales of motor vehicles to nonresidents of this State for use outside this State if the vendor ships or delivers the motor vehicle to a destination outside this State.
m. sales of tangible personal property which directly enters into and becomes an ingredient or component part of a product sold in the regular course of the business of job printing, manufacturing, or publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals. Tangible personal property which is consumed or used up in a manufacturing, job printing, publishing, or production process is not an ingredient nor component part of a product.
n. (Reserved)
    1. (Reserved)
    2. (Reserved)
o. sales to hotels, bars, restaurants, dining cars, lunchrooms, boarding houses, or similar establishments of articles consumed as food, drink, or condiment, whether simple, mixed, or compounded, where such articles are customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or off the premises, where the purchaser is properly licensed and paying a tax under Section 8A-455 or the equivalent excise tax upon such income.
p. sales of tangible personal property to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512 or sales of tangible personal property purchased in this State by a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and that engages in and uses such property exclusively for training, job placement or rehabilitation programs or testing for mentally or physically handicapped persons.
q. sales of food for home consumption.
r. sales of the following to persons engaging or continuing in the business of farming, ranching, or feeding livestock, poultry or ratites:
    1. seed, fertilizer, fungicides, seed treating chemicals, and other similar chemicals.
    2. feed for livestock, poultry or ratites, including salt, vitamins, and other additives to such feed.
    3. livestock, poultry or ratites purchased or raised for slaughter, but not including livestock purchased or raised for production or use, such as milch cows, breeding bulls, laying hens, riding or work horses.
    4. (Reserved)
This exemption shall not be construed to include machinery, equipment, fuels, lubricants, pharmaceuticals, repair and replacement parts, or other items used or consumed in the running, maintenance, or repair of machinery, equipment, buildings, or structures used or consumed in the business of farming, ranching, or feeding of livestock, poultry or ratites.
s. sales of groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. Section 45-604.
t. sales of paintings, sculptures or similar works of fine art; provided, that such works of fine art are sold by the original artist; and provided further, that sales of “art creations,” such as jewelry, macrame, glasswork, pottery, woodwork, metalwork, furniture, and clothing, when such art creations have a dual purpose, both aesthetic and utilitarian, are not exempt, whether sold by the artist or by another.
u. sales of aircraft acquired for use outside the State, as prescribed by regulation in Article 8A-7.
v. sales of food products by producers as provided for by A.R.S. Sections 3-561, 3-562 and 3-563.
w. (Reserved)
x. sales of food and drink to a properly licensed restaurant which provides such food and drink without monetary charge to its employees for their own consumption on the premises during such employees’ hours of employment.
y. (Reserved)
z. gross income received for tangible personal property consisting of manufactured items destroyed by being subjected to destructive stress, strain or similar testing, for the purpose of developing engineering information or for the purpose of quality control, but only to the extent that a sale of said property would otherwise be exempt by the provisions of this chapter.
aa. the sale of tangible personal property used in remediation contracting as defined in Section 8A-100 and Regulation 8A-100.5.
bb. sales of materials that are purchased by or for publicly funded libraries including school district libraries, charter school libraries, community college libraries, State university libraries or Federal, State, County or municipal libraries for use by the public as follows:
    1. printed or photographic materials.
    2. electronic or digital media materials.
cc. sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving food and beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. Section 42-5061(A)(49), that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional charge, for consumption in flight. For the purposes of this subsection, “accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food.
dd. in computing the tax base in the case of the sale or transfer of wireless telecommunication equipment as an inducement to a customer to enter into or continue a contract for telecommunication services that are taxable under Section 8A-470, gross proceeds of sales or gross income does not include any sales commissions or other compensation received by the retailer as a result of the customer entering into or continuing a contract for the telecommunications services.
ee. for the purposes of this section, a sale of wireless telecommunication equipment to a person who holds the equipment for sale or transfer to a customer as an inducement to enter into or continue a contract for telecommunication services that are taxable under Section 8A-470 is considered to be a sale for resale in the regular course of business.
ff. sales of alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. Section 1-215, to a used oil fuel burner who has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to burn used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. Section 49-426 or 49-480.
gg. sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a public educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes; to the extent such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours. For the purposes of this subsection, “accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food.
hh. sales of personal hygiene items to a person engaged in the business of and subject to tax under Section 8A-444 of this code if the tangible personal property is furnished without additional charge to and intended to be consumed by the person during his occupancy.
ii. for the purposes of this section, the diversion of gas from a pipeline by a person engaged in the business of operating a natural or artificial gas pipeline, for the sole purpose of fueling compressor equipment to pressurize the pipeline, is not a sale of the gas to the operator of the pipeline.
jj. sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization under 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and indigent on a continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection, “accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food.
kk. sales of motor vehicles that use alternative fuel if such vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative fuel and sales of equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as defined in A.R.S. Section 1-215.
ll. sales of solar energy devices, for taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008. The retailer shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy retailer. By registering, the retailer acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and Town, as applicable, for examination. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-470 Telecommunication Services
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to zero percent (0%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of providing telecommunication services to consumers within this Town.
    1. Telecommunication services shall include:
        A. two (2) way voice, sound, and/or video communication over a communications channel.
        B. one (1) way voice, sound, and/or video transmission or relay over a communications channel.
        C. facsimile transmissions.
        D. providing relay or repeater service.
        E. providing computer interface services over a communications channel.
        F. time-sharing activities with a computer accomplished through the use of a communications channel.
    2. Gross income from the business activity of providing telecommunication services to consumers within this Town shall include:
        A. all fees for connection to a telecommunication system.
        B. toll charges, charges for transmissions, and charges for other telecommunications services; provided that such charges relate to transmissions originating in the Town and terminating in this State.
        C. fees charged for access to or subscription to or membership in a telecommunication system or network.
        D. charges for monitoring services relating to a security or burglar alarm system located within the Town where such system transmits or receives signals or data over a communications channel.
        E. charges for telephone, fax or Internet access services provided at an additional charge by a hotel business subject to taxation under Section 8A-444.
b. Resale telecommunication services. Gross income from sales of telecommunication services to another provider of telecommunication services for the purpose of providing the purchaser’s customers with such service shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section; provided, however, that such purchaser is properly licensed by the Town to engage in such business.
c. Interstate transmissions. Charges by a provider of telecommunication services for transmissions originating in the Town and terminating outside the State are exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
d. (Reserved)
e. Gross income from the providing of telecommunication services by a cable television system, as such system is defined in A.R.S. Section 9-505, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
f. Prepaid calling cards. Telecommunications services purchased with a prepaid calling card that are taxable under Section 8A-460 are exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
g. Internet Access Services. The gross income subject to tax under this section shall not include sales of Internet access services to the person’s subscribers and customers. For the purposes of this subsection:
    1. “Internet” means the computer and telecommunications facilities that comprise the interconnected worldwide network of networks that employ the transmission control protocol or Internet protocol, or any predecessor or successor protocol, to communicate information of all kinds by wire or radio.
    2. “Internet access” means a service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail or other services over the Internet. Internet access does not include telecommunication services provided by a common carrier. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-475 Transporting for Hire
The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and a half percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of providing the following forms of transportation for hire from this Town to another point within the State:
a. transporting of persons or property by railroad; provided, however, that the tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply to transporting freight or property for hire by a railroad operating exclusively in this State if the transportation comprises a portion of a single shipment of freight or property, involving more than one (1) railroad, either from a point in this State to a point outside this State or from a point outside this State to a point in this State. For purposes of this paragraph, “a single shipment” means the transportation that begins at the point at which one (1) of the railroads first takes possession of the freight or property and continues until the point at which one (1) of the railroads relinquishes possession of the freight or property to a party other than one (1) of the railroads.
b. transporting of oil or natural or artificial gas through pipe or conduit.
c. transporting of property by aircraft.
d. transporting of persons or property by motor vehicle, including towing and the operation of private car lines, as such are defined in Article VII, Chapter 14, Title 42, Arizona Revised Statutes; provided, however, that the tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply to:
    1. gross income subject to the tax imposed by Article IV, Chapter 16, Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes.
    2. gross income derived from the operation of a governmentally adopted and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation.
    3. (Reserved)
    4. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
f. Deductions or exemptions. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this section:
    1. income that is specifically included as the gross income of a business activity upon which another section of this article imposes a tax, that is separately stated to the customer and is taxable to the person engaged in that classification, not to exceed consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.
    2. income from arranging amusement or transportation when the amusement or transportation is conducted by another person, not to exceed consideration paid to the amusement or transportation business.
g. The tax imposed by this section shall not include arranging transportation as a convenience to a person’s customers if that person is not otherwise engaged in the business of transporting persons, freight or property for hire. This exception does not apply to businesses that dispatch vehicles pursuant to customer orders and send the billings and receive the payments associated with that activity, including when the transportation is performed by third party independent contractors. For the purposes of this paragraph, “arranging” includes billing for or collecting transportation charges from a person’s customers on behalf of the persons providing the transportation. ((O)14-17, Amended,  12/17/2014; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-480 Utility Services
a. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to four percent (4%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of producing, providing, or furnishing utility services, including electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to:
    1. consumers or ratepayers who reside within the Town.
    2. consumers or ratepayers of this Town, whether within the Town or without, to the extent that this Town provides such persons utility services, excluding consumers or ratepayers who are residents of another city or town which levies an equivalent excise tax upon this Town for providing such utility services to such persons.
b. Exclusion of certain sales of natural gas to a public utility. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, the gross income derived from the sale of natural gas to a public utility for the purpose of generation of power to be transferred by the utility to its ratepayers shall be considered a retail sale of tangible personal property subject to Sections 8A-460 and 8A-465, and not considered gross income taxable under this section.
c. Resale utility services. Sales of utility services to another provider of the same utility services for the purpose of providing such utility services either to another properly licensed utility provider or directly to such purchaser’s customers or ratepayers shall be exempt and deductible from the gross income subject to the tax imposed by this section; provided, that the purchaser is properly licensed by all applicable taxing jurisdictions to engage or continue in the business of providing utility services; and further provided, that the seller maintains proper documentation, in a manner similar to that for sales for resale, of such transactions.
d. (Reserved)
e. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of utility services to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when sold for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
f. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.
g. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to:
    1. revenues received by a municipally owned utility in the form of fees charged to persons constructing residential, commercial or industrial developments or connecting residential, commercial or industrial developments to a municipal utility system or systems if the fees are segregated and used only for capital expansion, system enlargement or debt service of the utility system or systems.
    2. revenues received by any person or persons owning a utility system in the form of reimbursement or contribution compensation for property and equipment installed to provide utility access to, on or across the land of an actual utility consumer if the property and equipment become the property of the utility. This exclusion shall not exceed the value of such property and equipment.
h. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales of alternative fuel, as defined in A.R.S. Section 1-215, to a used oil fuel burner who has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to burn used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. Section 49-426 or 49-480. ((O)11-14, Amended,  05/04/2011; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-485 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Article 8A-5 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
8A-500       Administration of this Chapter; Rule Making
8A-510       Divulging of Information Prohibited; Exceptions Allowing Disclosure
8A-515       (Reserved)
8A-516       (Reserved)
8A-517       (Reserved)
8A-520       Reporting and Payment of Tax
8A-530       When Tax Due; When Delinquent; Verification of Return; Extensions
8A-540       Interest and Civil Penalties
8A-541       (Reserved)
8A-542       Prospective Application of New Law or Interpretation or Application of Law
8A-545       Deficiencies; When Inaccurate Return Is Filed; When No Return Is Filed; Estimates
8A-546       (Reserved)
8A-550       Limitation Periods
8A-555       Tax Collector May Examine Books and Other Records; Failure to Provide Records
8A-556       (Reserved)
8A-560       Erroneous Payment of Tax; Credits and Refunds; Limitations
8A-565       Payment of Tax by the Incorrect Taxpayer or to the Incorrect Arizona City or Town
8A-567       (Reserved)
8A-570       Administrative Review; Petition for Hearing or for Redetermination; Finality of Order
8A-571       Jeopardy Assessments
8A-572       (Reserved)
8A-575       Judicial Review
8A-577       (Reserved)
8A-578       (Reserved)
8A-580       Criminal Penalties
8A-590       Civil Actions
8A-595       Collection of Taxes When There Is Succession in and/or Cessation of Business
8A-596       (Reserved)
8A-597       (Reserved)

Section 8A-500 Administration of this Chapter; Rule Making
a. The administration of this chapter is vested in and exercised by the Town of Oro Valley, except as otherwise provided, and all payments shall be made to the Town of Oro Valley. The Town may, pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement, contract with the State of Arizona Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. In such cases, “Tax Collector” shall also mean the Arizona Department of Revenue, when acting as agent in administering this tax.
b. The Tax Collector shall prescribe the forms and procedures necessary for the administration of the taxes imposed by this chapter.
c. Except where such regulations would conflict with administrative regulations adopted by the Town Council or with provisions of this chapter, all regulations on the transaction privilege tax adopted by the Arizona Department of Revenue under the authority of A.R.S. Section 42-1005 shall be considered regulations of this chapter and enforceable as such.
d. Taxpayers shall be subject to the State Taxpayer Bill of Rights (A.R.S. Section 42-2051 et. seq).
e. The unified audit committee shall publish uniform guidelines that interpret the model city tax code and that apply to all cities and towns that have adopted the model city tax code as provided by A.R.S. Section 42-6005.
    1. Prior to finalization of uniform guidelines that interpret the model city tax code, the unified audit committee shall disseminate draft guidelines for public comment.
    2. Pursuant to A.R.S. Section 42-6005(D), when the State statutes and the model city tax code are the same and where the Arizona Department of Revenue has issued written guidance, the department’s interpretation is binding on cities and towns. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-510 Divulging of Information Prohibited; Exceptions Allowing Disclosure
a. Except as specifically provided, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee of the Town to make known information obtained pursuant to this chapter concerning the business financial affairs or operations of any person.
b. The Town Council may authorize an examination of any return or audit of a specific taxpayer made pursuant to this chapter by authorized agents of the Federal Government, the State of Arizona, or any political subdivisions.
c. The Tax Collector may provide to an Arizona county, city, or town any information concerning any taxes imposed in this chapter relative to the taxing ordinances of that county, city, or town.
d. Successors, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, executors, guardians, administrators, and assignees, if directly interested, may be given information by the Tax Collector as to the items included in the measure and amounts of any unpaid tax, interest, and penalties required to be paid.
e. Upon a written direction by the Town Attorney or other legal advisor to the Town designated by the Town Council, officials or employees of the Town may divulge the amount and source of income, profits, leases, or expenditures disclosed in any return or report, and the amount of such delinquent and unpaid tax, penalty, or interest, to a private collection agency having a written collection agreement with the Town.
f. The Tax Collector shall provide information to appropriate representatives of any Arizona city or town to comply with the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-6003, A.R.S. Section 42-6005, and A.R.S. Section 42-6056.
g. The Tax Collector may provide information to authorized agents of any other Arizona governmental agency involving the allocation of taxes imposed by Section 8A-435 upon publishing and distribution of periodicals.
h. The Tax Collector may provide information regarding the enforcement and collection of taxes imposed by this chapter to any governmental agency with which the Town has an agreement. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-515 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-516 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-517 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-520 Reporting and Payment of Tax
a. The taxpayer shall be required to use the report form authorized by the Tax Collector and shall mail or deliver the same, together with remittance for the amount of tax due, payable to the Town of Oro Valley, to the Tax Collector or any Town representative or agent authorized to receive such payment. The tax return shall be signed by the taxpayer or his authorized agent, and such signature shall be evidence that the person signing the return verifies the accuracy of the information supplied in the return.
b. Payment. If payment is made in any form other than United States legal tender, the tax obligation shall not be satisfied until the payment has been honored in funds.
c. Requirement of Security. If a taxpayer has remitted payment in the form of a check or other form of draw upon a bank or third party and such remittance has not been honored in funds, the Tax Collector may demand security for future payments.
d. Method of Reporting. Each taxpayer shall elect to report on either a cash receipts basis or an accrual basis and shall indicate the choice on the privilege license application. A taxpayer shall not change his reporting method without receiving prior written approval by the Tax Collector.
    1. Taxpayers must report all gross income subject to the tax using the same basis of reporting.
    2. Taxes imposed upon construction contracting shall be reported as follows:
        A. Construction contractors shall report on either a progressive billing (“accrual”) basis or cash receipts basis.
        B. Speculative builders shall report the gross income derived from sale of improved real property at close of escrow or at transfer of title or possession, whichever occurs earlier.
        C. Owner-builders who are not speculative builders shall report taxable amounts as provided in Section 8A-417. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-530 When Tax Due; When Delinquent; Verification of Return; Extensions
a. Except as otherwise specified in this section, the taxes levied under this chapter shall be due, payable, and delinquent on the dates specified for the State Transaction Privilege Taxes in A.R.S. Section 42-5014. The taxpayer shall report on the taxes imposed by this chapter at such frequency to be identical to the taxpayer’s reporting frequency for the reporting of State Transaction Privilege Taxes.
b. (Reserved)
c. (Reserved)
d. (Reserved)
e. The Tax Collector may for good cause extend the date for making any return required under the provisions of this section as prescribed by A.R.S. Section 42-1107. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-540 Interest and Civil Penalties
Any taxpayer who shall have failed to timely pay any taxes imposed by this chapter, or file a report for the same in a timely manner, or fail or refuse to allow examination of records by the Tax Collector, shall be subject to any interest or civil penalties on such tax in like manner as such interest and penalties are provided in A.R.S. Sections 42-1123 and 42-1125 for the State Transaction Privilege Tax.
a. (Reserved)
b. (Reserved)
c. (Reserved)
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
f. (Reserved)
g. (Reserved)
h. (Reserved)
i. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-541 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-542 Prospective Application of New Law or Interpretation or Application of Law
a. Unless expressly authorized by law, the Tax Collector shall not apply any newly enacted legislation retroactively or in a manner that will penalize a taxpayer for complying with prior law.
b. If the Tax Collector adopts a new interpretation or application of any provision of this chapter or determines that any provision applies to a new or additional category or type of business and the change in interpretation or application is not due to a change in the law:
    1. the change in interpretation or application applies prospectively only unless it is favorable to taxpayers.
    2. the Tax Collector shall not assess any tax, penalty or interest retroactively based on the change in interpretation or application.
c. For purposes of subsection (b), “new interpretation or application” includes policies and procedures which differ from established interpretations of this chapter.
d. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-545 Deficiencies; When Inaccurate Return Is Filed; When No Return Is Filed; Estimates
a. If a taxpayer has failed to file a return or if the Tax Collector is not satisfied with the return or payment of tax required, the Tax Collector may redetermine the tax due, plus penalties and interest, and notify the taxpayer, as provided and prescribed by A.R.S. Sections 42-118 and 42-1108.
    1. (Reserved)
    2. (Reserved)
b. Estimates by the Tax Collector. Any estimate made by the Tax Collector is to be made on a reasonable basis. The existence of another reasonable basis of estimation does not, in any way, invalidate the Tax Collector’s estimate. It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to prove that the Tax Collector’s estimate is not reasonable and correct, by providing sufficient documentation of the type and form required by this chapter or satisfactory to the Tax Collector. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-546 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-550 Limitation Periods
a. Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, deficiency assessments for the taxes imposed by this chapter must be issued within the limitation periods prescribed in A.R.S. Section 42-1104, and must meet the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1108.
b. (Reserved)
c. In cases of failure to file a return or a false or fraudulent return, the limitation period shall be as prescribed in A.R.S. Section 42-1109.
d. Special provisions relating to owner-builders. The limitation for an owner-builder subject to the tax as prescribed in Section 8A-417 shall be based upon the date such tax liability is reportable or was reported, as provided in Section 8A-417. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-555 Tax Collector May Examine Books and Other Records; Failure to Provide Records
a. The Tax Collector may require the taxpayer to provide and may examine any books, records, or other documents of any person who, in the opinion of the Tax Collector, might be liable for any tax under this chapter, for any periods available to him under Section 8A-550.
b. (Reserved)
c. (Reserved)
d. The Tax Collector may use any generally accepted auditing procedures, including sampling techniques, to determine the correct tax liability of any taxpayer. The Tax Collector shall ensure that the procedures used are in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
e. The fact that the taxpayer has not maintained or provided such books and records which the Tax Collector considers necessary to determine the tax liability of any person does not preclude the Tax Collector from making any assessment. In such cases, the Tax Collector is authorized to use estimates, projections, or samplings to determine the correct tax. The provisions of Section 8A-545(b), concerning estimates, shall apply.
f. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-556 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-560 Erroneous Payment of Tax; Credits and Refunds; Limitations
a. Except as provided in Section 8A-565, the period within which a claim, meeting the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, for credit may be filed, or refund allowed or made if no claim is filed, shall be as provided in A.R.S. Sections 42-1106 and 42-1118. For purposes of this section, “claimant” means a taxpayer that has paid a tax imposed under this article and has submitted a credit or refund claim under this section. Except where the taxpayer has granted a customer a power of attorney to pursue a credit or refund claim on the taxpayer’s behalf, “claimant” does not include any customer of such taxpayer, whether or not the claimant collected the tax from customers by separately stated itemization.
b. (Reserved)
c. A credit or refund claim submitted by a claimant for credit or refund of any taxes, penalties, or interest paid must be in writing and:
    1. Identify the name, address and city tax identification number of the taxpayer; and
    2. Identify the dollar amount of the credit or refund requested; and
    3. Identify the specific tax period involved; and
    4. Identify the specific grounds upon which the claim is based.
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
f. Interest shall be allowed on the overpayment of tax for any credit or refund authorized pursuant to this section at the rate and in the manner set forth in Section 8A-540. Interest shall be calculated from the date the Tax Collector receives the claimant’s written claim meeting the requirements of subsection (c) of this section.
g. The denial of a refund by the Tax Collector is subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1119.
h. Claimants shall be subject to the State Taxpayer Bill of Rights (A.R.S. Section 42-2051 et. seq.), except that reasonable fees and other costs may be awarded and are not subject to the monetary limitations of A.R.S. Section 42-2064 if the Tax Collector’s position was not substantially justified or was brought for the purpose of harassing the claimant, frustrating the credit or refund process or delaying the credit or refund. For the purposes of this section, “reasonable fees and other costs” means fees and other costs that are based on prevailing market rates for the kind and quality of the furnished services, not to exceed the amounts actually paid for expert witnesses, the cost of any study, analysis, report, test, project or computer program that is found to be necessary to prepare the claimant’s case and necessary fees for attorneys or other representatives.
i. (Reserved)
j. Any refund paid under the provisions of this section shall be paid from the privilege tax revenue accounts. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-565 Payment of Tax by the Incorrect Taxpayer or to the Incorrect Arizona City or Town
a. When it is determined that taxes have been reported and paid to the Town by the wrong taxpayer, any taxes erroneously paid shall be transferred by the Town to the privilege tax account of the person who actually owes and should have paid such taxes, provided that the Town receives an assignment and waiver signed by both the person who actually paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax.
b. An assignment and waiver provided under this section must:
    1. identify the name and Town privilege license number of the person who erroneously paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax.
    2. provide that the person who erroneously paid the tax waives any right such person may have to a refund of the taxes erroneously paid.
    3. authorize the Town Treasurer to transfer the erroneously paid tax to the privilege tax account of the person who should have paid the tax.
c. When it is determined that taxes have been reported and paid to the wrong Arizona city or town, such taxes shall be remitted to the correct city or town, provided that the city or town to whom the taxes were erroneously paid receives an assignment and waiver signed by both the person who actually paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax. Where the person who actually paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax are one and the same, no assignment and waiver need be provided. The Town shall neither pay nor charge any interest or penalty on any overpayment or underpayment except such interest and penalty actually paid by the taxpayer relating to such tax.
d. This Section in no way limits or restricts the applicability of any remedies which may otherwise be available under A.R.S. Section 42-6003. The limitations and procedures set forth in A.R.S. Section 42-6003 shall apply to all payments under this section.
e. When reference is made in this section to this Town or an Arizona city or town, and payments made to or requested from this Town or an Arizona city or town, the provisions shall be applicable to the Arizona Department of Revenue when it is acting for or on behalf of this Town or an Arizona city or town. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-567 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-570 Administrative Review; Petition for Hearing or for Redetermination; Finality of Order
a. Closing agreements between the Tax Collector and a taxpayer have no force of law unless made in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1113.
b. Administrative review.
    1. Petitions of appeal shall be made to, and hearings shall be conducted by, the Arizona Department of Revenue, in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1251, as modified by Section 8A-571.
    2. (Reserved)
    3. (Reserved)
    4. (Reserved)
    5. Hearings shall be held by the Arizona Department of Revenue in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1251. The Department’s decision may be appealed to the State Board of Tax Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1253.
    6. (Reserved)
    7. (Reserved)
    8. (Reserved)
c. (Reserved)
d. (Reserved)
e. Taxpayers shall be subject to the State Taxpayer Bill of Rights (A.R.S. Section 42-2051 et. seq.). ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-571 Jeopardy Assessments
a. If the Tax Collector believes that collection of any amounts imposed by this chapter will be jeopardized by delay, he shall issue notice to the taxpayer in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1111.
b. In cases where such jeopardy notice has been issued, the taxpayer must meet the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1111, concerning appeals of jeopardy assessments, before any request for administrative review shall be honored. Any bond or collateral that may be required shall meet the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1102.
c. (Reserved)
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-572 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-575 Judicial Review
a. Appeal of a State Board of Tax Appeals decision to the courts is valid only if all the provisions of A.R.S. Section 42-1254 are met.
b. (Reserved)
c. (Reserved)
d. (Reserved)
e. The Town has the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence in any court proceeding regarding any factual issue relevant to ascertaining the tax liability of a taxpayer. This subsection does not abrogate any requirement of this chapter that requires a taxpayer to substantiate an item of gross income, exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit. This subsection applies to a factual issue if a preponderance of the evidence demonstrates that:
    1. the taxpayer asserts a reasonable dispute regarding the issue.
    2. the taxpayer has fully cooperated with the Tax Collector regarding the issue, including providing within a reasonable period of time, access to and inspection of all witnesses, information and documents within the taxpayer’s control, as reasonably requested by the Tax Collector.
    3. the taxpayer has kept and maintained records as required by the Town.
f. The issuance of an adjusted or corrected assessment or notice of refund due to the taxpayer, where made by the Tax Collector pursuant to the decision of the Hearing Officer, shall not be deemed an acquiescence by the Town or the Tax Collector in said decision, nor shall it constitute a bar or estoppel to the institution of an action or counterclaim by the Town to recover any amounts claimed to be due to it by virtue of the original assessment.
g. After the initiation of any action in the appropriate court by either party, the opposite party may file such counterclaim as would be allowed pursuant to the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-577 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-578 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-580 Criminal Penalties
a. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully:
    1. fail or refuse to make any return required by this chapter.
    2. fail to remit as and when due the full amount of any tax or additional tax or penalty and interest thereon.
    3. make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent return.
    4. make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent statement in a return, in written support of a return, or to demonstrate or support entitlement to a deduction, exclusion, or credit or to entitle the person to an allocation or apportionment or receipts subject to tax.
    5. fail or refuse to permit any lawful examination of any book, account, record, or other memorandum by the Tax Collector.
    6. fail or refuse to remit any tax collected by such person from his customer to the Tax Collector before the delinquency date next following such collection.
    7. advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that any tax imposed by this chapter, as provided in this chapter, is not considered as an element in the price to the consumer.
    8. fail or refuse to obtain a privilege license or to aid or abet another in any attempt to intentionally refuse to obtain such a license or evade the license fee.
    9. reproduce, forge, falsify, fraudulently obtain or secure, or aid or abet another in any attempt to reproduce, forge, falsify, or fraudulently obtain or secure, an exemption from taxes imposed by this chapter.
b. The violation of any provision of subsection (a) above shall constitute a Class One Misdemeanor.
c. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who shall knowingly swear to or verify any false or fraudulent statement, with the intent aforesaid, shall be guilty of the offense of perjury and on conviction thereof shall be punished in the manner provided by law. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-590 Civil Actions
a. Liens.
    1. Any tax, penalty, or interest imposed under this chapter which has become final, as provided in this chapter, shall become a lien when the Town perfects a notice and claim of lien setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, penalty, and interest, the period or periods for which the same is due, and the date of accrual thereof, the amount of the recording costs by the county recorder in any county in which the taxpayer owns real property and the documentation and lien processing fees imposed by the Town Council and further, stating that the Town claims a lien therefor.
    2. The notice of claim of lien shall be signed by the Town Council designee under his official seal or the official seal of the Town, and, with respect to real property, shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of any county in which the taxpayer owns real property, and, with respect to personal property shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State. After the notice and claim of lien is recorded or filed, the taxes, penalties, interest and recording costs and lien processing fees referred to above in the amounts specified therein shall be a lien on all real property of the taxpayer located in such county where recorded, and all tangible personal property of the taxpayer within the State, superior to all other liens and assessments recorded or filed subsequent to the recording or filing of the notice and claim of lien.
    3. Every tax and any increases, interest, penalties, and recording costs and lien processing fees referred to above shall become from the time the same is due and payable a personal debt from the person liable to the Town, but shall be payable to and recoverable by the Tax Collector and may be collected in the manner set forth in subsection (b) below.
    4. Any lien perfected pursuant to this section shall, upon payment of the taxes, penalties, interest, recording costs and lien processing fees referred to above and lien release fees imposed by the county recorder in any county in which the lien was recorded, thereby, be released by the Tax Collector in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. The Tax Collector may, at his sole discretion, release a lien in part, that is, against only specified property, for partial payment of monies due the Town.
b. Actions to recover tax. The Arizona Department of Revenue, or any agent or representative authorized by that Department, may bring action, in the name of the Town, to recover taxes as provided in A.R.S. Section 42-1114. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-595 Collection of Taxes When There Is Succession in and/or Cessation of Business
a. In addition to any remedy provided elsewhere in this Town Code that may apply, the Tax Collector may apply the provisions of subsections (b) through (d) below concerning the collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or cessation of business.
b. The taxes imposed by this chapter are a lien on the property of any person subject to this chapter who sells his business or stock of goods, or quits his business, if the person fails to make a final return and payment of the tax within fifteen (15) days after selling or quitting his business.
c. Any person who purchases, or who acquires by foreclosure, by sale under trust deed or warranty deed in lieu of foreclosure, or by any other method, improved real property or a portion of improved real property for which the privilege tax imposed by this chapter has not been paid shall be responsible for payment of such tax as a speculative builder or owner-builder, as provided in Sections 8A-416 and 8A-417.
    1. Any person who is a creditor or an affiliate of creditor, who acquires improved real property directly or indirectly from the creditor’s debtor by any means set forth in this subsection, shall pay the tax based on the amount received by the creditor or its affiliate in a subsequent sale of such improved real property to a party unrelated to the creditor, regardless of when such subsequent sale takes place. Such tax shall be due in the month following the month in which the sale of the improved real property by the creditor or its affiliate occurs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the real property meets the definition of “partially improved residential real property” in Section 8A-416(a)(4) and all of the requirements of Section 8-416(b)(4) are met by the parties to the subsequent sale transaction, then the tax shall not apply to the subsequent sale.
    2. In the event a creditor or its affiliate uses the acquired improved real property for any business purpose other than operating the property in the manner in which it was operated, or was intended to be operated, before the acquisition or in any other manner unrelated to selling the property, the tax shall be due. The gross income upon which the tax shall be determined pursuant to Sections 8A-416 and 8A-417 shall be the fair market value of the improved real property as of the date of acquisition. The tax shall be due in the month following the month in which such first business use occurs. When applicable, the credit bid shall be deemed to be the fair market value of the property as of the date of acquisition.
    3. Once the subsequent sale by the creditor or its affiliate has occurred and the creditor or its affiliate has paid the tax due from it pursuant to this subsection, neither the creditor nor its affiliate, nor any future owner, shall be liable for any outstanding tax, penalties or interest that may continue to be due from the debtor based on the transfer from the debtor to the creditor or its affiliate.
    4. If the tax liability imposed by either Section 8A-416 or Section 8A-417 on the transfer of the improved real property to the creditor or its affiliate, or any part thereof, is paid to the Tax Collector by the debtor subsequent to payment of the tax by the creditor or its affiliate, the amount so paid may constitute a credit, as equitably determined by the Tax Collector in good faith, against the tax imposed on the creditor or its affiliate by either subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section.
    5. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, if a creditor or its affiliate is subject to tax as described in subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section and such creditor or affiliate has not previously been required to be licensed, such creditor or affiliate shall become licensed no later than the date on which the tax is due.
d. A person’s successors or assignees shall withhold from the purchase money an amount sufficient to cover the taxes required to be paid, and interest or penalties due and payable, until the former owner produces a receipt from the Tax Collector showing that all Town tax has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due as then shown by the records of the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall respond to a request from the seller for a certificate within fifteen (15) days by either providing the certificate or a written notice stating why the certificate cannot be issued.
    1. If a subsequent audit shows a deficiency arising before the sale of the business, the deficiency is an obligation of the seller and does not constitute a liability against a buyer who has received a certificate from the Tax Collector.
    2. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to obtain a certificate as provided by this section, he is personally liable for payment of the amount of taxes required to be paid by the former owner on account of the business so purchased, with interest and penalties accrued by the former owner or assignees. ((O)11-22, Amended,  07/06/2011; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-596 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-597 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Article 8A-6 USE TAX

Sections:
8A-600       (Reserved)
8A-601       (Reserved)
8A-602       (Reserved)
8A-610       (Reserved)
8A-620       (Reserved)
8A-630       (Reserved)
8A-640       (Reserved)
8A-650       (Reserved)
8A-660       (Reserved)

Section 8A-600 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-601 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-602 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-610 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-620 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-630 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-640 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-650 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Section 8A-660 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Article 8A-7 REGULATIONS

Regulations:
8A-100.1     Brokers
8A-100.2     Delivery, Installation, or Other Direct Customer Services
8A-100.3     Retailers
8A-100.4     Out-of-Town/Out-of-State Sales: Sales to Native Americans
8A-100.5     Remediation Contracting
8A-115.1     Computer Hardware, Software, and Data Services
8A-120.1     Food for Home Consumption: Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements
8A-200.1     When Deposits Are Includable in Gross Income
8A-250.1     Excess Tax Collected
8A-270.1     Proprietary Activities of Municipalities Are Not Considered Activities of a Governmental Entity
8A-270.2     Proprietary Clubs
8A-300.1     Who Must Apply for a License
8A-300.2     (Reserved)
8A-310.1     (Reserved)
8A-310.2     (Reserved)
8A-310.3     (Reserved)
8A-350.1     Recordkeeping: Income
8A-350.2     Recordkeeping: Expenditures
8A-350.3     Recordkeeping: Out-of-Town and Out-of-State Sales
8A-360.1     Proof of Exemption: Sale for Resale; Sale, Rental, Lease, or License of Rental Equipment
8A-360.2     Proof of Exemption: Exemption Certificate
8A-405.1     Local Advertising Examples
8A-405.2     Advertising Activity Within the Town
8A-407.1     (Reserved)
8A-415.1     Distinction Between the Categories of Construction Contracting
8A-415.2     Distinction Between Construction Contracting and Certain Related Activities
8A-415.3     Construction Contracting; Tax Rate Effective Date
8A-416.1     Speculative Builders: Homeowner’s Bona Fide Non-Business Sale of a Family Residence
8A-416.2     Reconstruction Contracting
8A-425.1     Distinction Between Job Printing and Certain Related Activities
8A-435.1     Distinction Between Publishing of Periodicals and Certain Related Activities
8A-435.2     Advertising Income of Publishers and Distributors of Newspapers and Other Periodicals
8A-445.1     When the Rental, Leasing, and Licensing of Real Property Is Exempt as “Casual”
8A-445.3     Rental, Leasing, and Licensing of Real Property as Lodging: Room and Board; Furnished Lodging
8A-450.1     Distinction Between Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property and Certain Related Activities
8A-450.2     Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property: Membership Fees; Other Charges
8A-450.3     Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Equipment with Operator
8A-450.4     Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property: Semi-Permanently or Permanently Installed Tangible Personal Property
8A-450.5     Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property: Delivery, Installation, Repair, and Maintenance Charges
8A-455.1     Gratuities Related to Restaurant Activity
8A-460.1     Distinction Between Retail Sales and Certain Other Transfers of Tangible Personal Property
8A-460.2     Retail Sales: Trading Stamp Company Transactions
8A-460.3     Retail Sales: Membership Fees of Retailers
8A-460.4     Retail Sales: Professional Services
8A-460.5     Retail Sales: Monitized Bullion; Numismatic Value of Coins
8A-460.6     Retail Sales: Consignment Sales
8A-465.1     Retail Sales: Repair Services
8A-465.2     Retail Sales: Warranty, Maintenance, and Similar Service Contracts
8A-465.3     Retail Sales: Sale of Containers, Paper Products, and Labels
8A-465.4     Retail Sales: Aircraft Acquired for Use Outside the State
8A-470.1     Telecommunication Services
8A-475.1     Distinction Between Transporting for Hire and Certain Related Activities
8A-520.1     (Reserved)
8A-520.2     Change of Method of Reporting
8A-555.1     (Reserved)
8A-571.1     Collection of Tax in Jeopardy

Regulation 8A-100.1 Brokers
a. For the purposes of proper administration of this chapter and to prevent evasion of taxes imposed, brokers shall be wherever necessary treated as taxpayers for all purposes, and shall file a return and remit the tax imposed on the activity on behalf of the principal. No deduction shall be allowed for any commissions or fees retained by such broker, except as provided in Section 8A-405, relating to advertising commissions.
b. Brokers for vendors. A broker acting for a seller, lessor, or other similar person deriving gross income in a category upon which this chapter imposes a tax shall be liable for such tax, even if his principal would not be subject to the tax if he conducted such activity in his own behalf, by reason of the activity being deemed a casual one. For example:
    1. An auctioneer or other sales agent of tangible personal property is subject to the tax imposed upon retail sales, even if such sales would be deemed casual if his principal had sold such items himself.
    2. A property manager is subject to the tax imposed upon rental, leasing, or licensing of real property, even if such rental, leasing, or licensing would be deemed casual if his principal managed such real property himself.
c. Brokers for vendees. A broker acting solely for a buyer, lessee, tenant, or other similar person who is a party to a transaction which may be subject to the tax, shall be liable for such tax and for filing a return in connection with such tax only to the extent his principal is subject to the tax.
d. The liability of a broker does not relieve the principal of liability except upon presentation to the Tax Collector of proof of payment of the tax, and only to the extent of the correct payment. The broker shall be relieved of the responsibility to file and pay taxes upon the filing and correct payment of such taxes by the principal.
e. (Reserved)
f. Location of Business. Retail sales by brokers acting for another person shall be deemed to have occurred at the regular business location of the broker, in a manner similar to that used to determine out-of-town sales; provided, however, that an auctioneer is deemed to be engaged in business at the site of each auction. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-100.2 Delivery, Installation, or Other Direct Customer Services
a. “Delivery charges” exist only when the total charges to the ultimate customer or consumer include, as separately charged to the ultimate customer, charges for delivery to the ultimate consumer, whether the place of delivery is within or without the Town, and when the taxpayer’s books and records show the separate delivery charges.
    1. Identification to the customer or consumer that the listed price has “delivery included” or other similar expression is insufficient to show the delivery as a separate charge. Only the separately stated charge for the delivery shall be deemed a “delivery charge.”
    2. Freight in. Charges for delivery from place of production or the manufacturer to the vendor either directly or through a chain of wholesalers or jobbers or other middlemen are deemed “freight in” and are not considered delivery.
b. “Installation,” as used in this definition, relates only to tangible personal property. Installation to real property is deemed construction contracting in this chapter. Examples of installation relating to tangible personal property are: installing a radio in an automobile; applying sun screens on the windows of a boat; installing cabinets, carpeting, or “built-in appliances” to a camper or motorized recreational vehicle.
c. Repair of tangible personal property is not included in this definition. See Regulation 8A-465.1.
d. “Direct customer services” means services other than repair rendered directly to the customer. Services or labor provided by any person prior to the transfer of tangible personal property to the customer or consumer are not included in this definition. In the following examples, the requirements of subsection (e) below are referred to by the words “identify” or “identification.”
    1. A retailer sells a customer a one hundred dollar ($100.00) “plug-in” appliance, with a twenty-five ($25.00) delivery and installation charge. If the retailer identifies the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) delivery and installation charge, it is a charge for direct customer services.
    2. A caterer charges his customer one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the food and drink served, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for setup and site cleanup, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for bartender and waiters. If all charges are properly identified, only the three hundred dollars ($300.00) for set up and cleanup is a charge for direct customer services, and the one thousand five hundred ($1,500) for food and service is restauranting gross income.
    3. Persons engaged in engraving on wood, metal, stone, etc. or persons engaged in retouching photographs or paintings may consider such charges for labor as direct customer services.
    4. All charges by a photographer resulting in the sale of a photograph (sitting charges, developing, making enlargements, retouching, etc.) for services that occur prior to transfer of tangible personal property are not direct customer services.
    5. An equipment rental company charging twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for delivery may consider such delivery charge as a charge for direct customer service only if such charge is properly identified.
    6. Even if identified, charges for labor incurred in the production of any manufactured article or of a custom-made article (jewelry, artwork, tailoring, draperies, etc.) are not included in this definition, as such labor occurs prior to the transfer of property.
e. Recordkeeping requirements. 
    1. Any person who engages in transactions involving these services must:
        A. Separately bill, invoice, or charge the customer for such services in a manner by which the customer or consumer may readily identify the specific dollar amount of the service charge; and
        B. Maintain business books and records in a manner in which the separate charge for such services can be clearly identified, to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector.
    2. Rendering a statement to a customer for a transaction involving such services and the transfer of tangible personal property which only indicates the total amount of the charges with words such as “services included” or “charge includes labor and parts” or similar a expression does not satisfy the requirements of this subsection. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-100.3 Retailers
When in the opinion of the Tax Collector it is necessary for efficient administration of this chapter, he may regard any salesman, representative, peddler, canvasser, or agent of any dealer, distributor, supervisor, or employer under whom he operates or from whom he obtains tangible personal property for sale, rental, lease, or license as a retailer for the purposes of this chapter, irrespective of whether he is making sales, rentals, leases, or licenses on his own behalf or on behalf of others. The Tax Collector may also regard such dealer, distributor, supervisor, or employer as a retailer for the purposes of this chapter. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-100.4 Out-of-Town/Out-of-State Sales: Sales to Native Americans
Sales to Native Americans or tribal councils by vendors located within the Town shall be deemed sales within the Town, unless all of the following conditions exist:
    1. the vendor has properly accounted for such sales, in a manner similar to the recordkeeping requirements for out-of-Town sales; and
    2. all of the following elements of the sale exist:
        a. solicitation and placement of the order occurs on the reservation; and
        b. delivery is made to the reservation; and
        c. payment originates from the reservation. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-100.5 Remediation Contracting
The following activities are considered remediation contracting and are exempt:
    1. excavation, transportation, treatment, and/or disposal of contaminated soil for purposes of site remediation (rather than characterization);
    2. installation of groundwater extraction and/or injection wells for purposes of groundwater remediation;
    3. installation of pumps and piping into groundwater extraction wells for remediation purposes;
    4. installation of vapor extraction wells for the purpose of soil or groundwater remediation;
    5. construction of remediation systems, such as groundwater treatment plants, vapor extraction systems, or air injection systems;
    6. connection of remediation systems to utilities;
    7. abandonment of groundwater or vapor extraction wells;
    8. removal/demolition of remediation systems;
    9. capping/closure construction activities; and
    10. service or handling charges for subcontracted remediation contracting activities. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-115.1 Computer Hardware, Software, and Data Services
a. Definitions. 
    1. “Computer hardware” (also called “computer equipment” or “peripherals”) is the components and accessories which constitute the physical computer assembly, including but not limited to: central processing unit, keyboard, console, monitor, memory unit, disk drive, tape drive or reader, terminal, printer, plotter, modem, document sorter, optical reader and/or digitizer, network.
    2. “Computer software” (also called “computer program”) is tangible personal property, and includes:
        A. “Operating program (software)” (also called “executive program (software)”), which is the programming system or technical language upon which or by means of which the basic operating procedures of the computer are recorded. The operating program serves as an interface with user-applied programs and allows the user to access the computer’s processing capabilities.
        B. “Applied program (software),” which is the programming system or technical language (including the tape, disk, cards, or other medium upon which such language or program is recorded) designed either for application in a specialized use, or upon which or by means of which a plan for the solution of a particular problem is based. Typically, applied programs can be transferred from one (1) computer to another via storage media. Examples of applied programs include: payroll processing, general ledger, sales data, spreadsheet, word processing, and data management programs.
    3. “Storage medium” is any hard disk, compact disk, floppy disk, diskette, diskpack, magnetic tape, cards, or other medium used for storage of information in a form readable by a computer, but not including the memory of the computer itself.
    4. A “terminal arrangement” (also called “‘on-line’ arrangement”) is any agreement allowing access to a remote central processing unit through telecommunications via hardware.
    5. A “computer services agreement” (also called “data services agreement”) is an agreement allowing access to a computer through a third-party operator.
b. For the purposes of this chapter, transfer of title and possession of the following are deemed sales of tangible personal property and any other transfer of title, possession, or right to use for a consideration of the following is deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property:
    1. Computer hardware or storage media. Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of computer hardware or storage media includes the lessee’s use of such hardware or storage media on the lessor’s premises.
    2. Computer software which is not custom computer programming. Such prewritten (“canned”) programs may be transferred to a customer in the form of punched cards, magnetic tape, or other storage medium, or by listing the program instructions on coding sheets. Transfer is deemed to have occurred whether title to the storage medium upon which the program is recorded, coded, or punched passes to the customer or the program is recorded, coded, or punched on storage medium furnished by the customer. Gross income from the transfer of such prewritten programs includes:
        A. the entire amount charged to the customer for the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of the storage medium or coding sheets on which or into which the prewritten program has been recorded, coded, or punched.
        B. the entire amount charged for the temporary transfer or possession of a prewritten program to be directly used or to be recorded, coded, or punched by the customer on the customer’s premises.
        C. license fees, royalty fees, or program design fees; any fee present or future, whether for a period of minimum use or of use for extended periods, relating to the use of a prewritten program.
        D. the entire amount charged for transfer of a prewritten (“canned”) program by remote telecommunications from the transferor’s place of business to or through the customer’s computer.
        E. any charge for the purchase of a maintenance contract which entitles the customer to receive storage media on which prewritten program improvements or error corrections have been recorded or to receive telephone or on-site consultation services; provided, that:
            i. if such maintenance contract is not optional with the customer, then the charges for the maintenance contract, including the consultation services, are deemed gross income from the transfer of the prewritten program.
            ii. if such maintenance contract is optional with the customer but the customer does not have the option to purchase the consultation services separately from the storage media containing the improvements or error corrections, then the charges for the maintenance contract, including the consultation services, are deemed gross income from the transfer of the prewritten program.
            iii. if such maintenance contract is optional with the customer and the customer may purchase the consultation services separately from the storage media containing the improvements or error corrections, then only the charges for such improvements or error corrections are deemed gross income from the transfer of a prewritten program and charges for consultation are deemed to be charges for professional services.
c. Producing the following by means of computer hardware is deemed to be the activity of job printing for the purposes of this chapter:
    1. statistical reports, graphs, diagrams, microfilm, microfiche, photorecordings, or any other information produced or compiled by a computer; except as provided in subsection (e) below.
    2. additional copies of records, reports, manuals, tabulations, etc. “Additional copies” are any copies in excess to those produced simultaneously with the production of the original and on the same printer, whether such copies are prepared by running the same program, by using multiple printers, by looping the program, by using different programs to produce the same output, or by other means.
d. Charges for the use of a communications channel in conjunction with a terminal arrangement or data services agreement are deemed gross income from the activity of providing telecommunication services.
e. The following transactions are deemed direct customer services; provided, that charges for such services are separately stated and maintained as provided by Regulation 8A-100.2(e):
    1. “Custom (computer) programming,” which is any computer software which is written or prepared for a single customer, including those services represented by separately stated charges for the modification of existing prewritten programs.
        A. Custom computer programming is deemed a professional service regardless of the form in which the programming is transferred.
        B. Custom programming includes such programming performed in connection with the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of computer hardware; provided, that the charges for such are separately stated from the charges for the hardware.
c. Custom computer programming includes a program prepared to the special order of a customer who will use the program to produce copies of the program for sale, rental, lease, or license. The subsequent sale, rental, lease, or license of such a program is deemed the sale, rental, lease, or license of a prewritten program.
    2. Training services related to computer hardware or software; provided further, that:
        A. the provider of such training services is deemed the ultimate consumer of all tangible personal property used in training others or provided to such trainees without separately itemized charge for the materials provided.
        B. training deemed a direct customer service does not include:
            i. training materials, books, manuals, etc. furnished to customers for a charge separate from the charge for training services.
            ii. training provided to customers without separate charge as part of the sale, rental, lease, or license of computer hardware or software, or as part of a terminal arrangement or data services agreement.
    3. The use of computer time through the use of a terminal arrangement or a data service agreement, but not charges for computer hardware located at the customer’s place of business (for example, the terminal, a printer attached to the terminal, a modem used to communicate with the remote central processing unit over a telephone line).
    4. Compiling and producing, as part of a terminal arrangement or computer services agreement, original copies of statistical reports, graphs, diagrams, microfilm, microfiche, photorecordings, or other information for the same person who supplied the raw data used to create such reports.
f. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-120.1 Food for Home Consumption: Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements
a. Reporting. Such persons who sell food for home consumption shall, in conjunction with the return required pursuant to Section 8A-520, report to the Tax Collector in a manner prescribed by the Tax Collector all sales of food for home consumption exempted from taxes imposed by this chapter.
b. Recordkeeping. 
    1. Retailers shall maintain accurate, verifiable, and complete records of all purchases and sales of tangible personal property in order to verify exemptions from taxes imposed by this chapter. A retailer may use any method of reporting that properly reflects all purchases and sales of food for home consumption, as well as all purchases and sales of items subject to taxes imposed by this chapter; provided, that such records are maintained in accordance with Article 8A-3, and regulations of the Tax Collector.
    2. Any person who fails to maintain records as provided herein shall be deemed to have had no sales of food for home consumption, and if upon request by the Tax Collector a person cannot demonstrate to the Tax Collector that such records and reports do properly reflect all sales of food for home consumption, the Tax Collector may recompute the amount of tax to be paid as provided in Sections 8A-370 and 8A-545(b). ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-200.1 When Deposits Are Includable in Gross Income
a. Refundable deposits shall be includable as gross income of the taxpayer for the month in which the deposits are forfeited by the lessee.
b. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-250.1 Excess Tax Collected
If a taxpayer collects taxes in excess of the combined tax rate from any customer in any transaction, all such excess tax shall be paid to the taxing jurisdictions in proportion to their effective rates. The right of the taxpayer to charge his customer for his own liability for tax does not allow the taxpayer to enrich himself at the cost of his customers. Tax paid on an activity that is not subject to tax or that qualifies for an exemption, deduction, exclusion or credit is not excess tax collected. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-270.1 Proprietary Activities of Municipalities Are Not Considered Activities of a Governmental Entity
The following activities, when performed by a municipality, are considered to be activities of a person engaged in business for the purposes of this chapter, and not excludable by reason of Section 8A-270:
a. rental, leasing, or licensing for use of real property to other than another department or agency of the municipality.
b. producing, providing, or furnishing electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to consumers or ratepayers.
c. sale of tangible personal property to the public, when similar tangible personal property is available for sale by other persons, as, for example, at police or surplus auctions. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-270.2 Proprietary Clubs
a. Equity requirements. In order to qualify for exclusion under Section 8A-270, a proprietary club must actually be owned by the members. For the purposes of qualification, a club will be deemed to be member-owned if at least eighty-five percent (85%) of the equity of the total amount of club-owned property is owned by bona fide individual members whose membership is represented in the form of shares, certificates, bonds, or other indicia of capital interest. A corporation may be considered an individual owner provided that it owns a membership solely for the benefit of one (1) or more of its employees and it is not engaged in any business activity connected with the operation of the club.
b. Gross revenue requirements. In computing gross revenue for the computation of this fifteen percent (15%) rule of subsection 8A-270(c)(1),
    1. the following shall be excluded:
        A. membership dues.
        B. membership fees which relate to the general admission to the club on a periodic (or perpetual) basis.
        C. assessments.
        D. special fund raising events, raffles, etc.
        E. donations, gifts, or bequests.
        F. gate receipts, admissions, and program advertising for not more than one (1) tournament in any calendar year.
    2. the following must be included:
        A. green fees, court use fees, and similar charges for the actual use of a facility or part thereof.
        B. pro shop sales if the shop is owned by the club.
        C. golf cart rental if the carts are owned by the club.
        D. rentals, percentages, or commissions received for permitting the use of the premises or any portion thereof by a caterer, concessionaire, professional, or any other person for sales, rental, leasing, licensing, catering, food or beverage service, or instruction.
        E. all receipts from food or beverage sales, room use or rental charge, corkage and catering charges, and similar receipts.
        F. locker and locker room fees and attendants charges if paid to the club.
        G. tournament entry fees other than entry fees for the one (1) annual tournament exempt under subsection (b)(1)(F) above. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-300.1 Who Must Apply for a License
a. For the purposes of determining whether a license is required under Section 8A-300, a person shall be deemed to be engaged in or continuing in business within the Town if he meets any of the following conditions:
    1. He is engaged in any activity subject to the Town’s privilege taxes as principal or broker.
    2. He has or maintains within the Town directly, or if a corporation by a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this Town under the authority of such person or if a corporation its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily or whether such person or subsidiary is authorized or licensed to do business in this State or this Town.
    3. He is soliciting sales, orders, contracts, leases, and other similar forms of business relationships within the Town from customers, consumers, or users located within the Town, by means of salesmen, solicitors, agents, representatives, brokers, and other similar agents or by means of catalogs or other advertising, whether such orders are received or accepted within or without this Town.
    4. (Reserved)
    5. He is required to report and pay the tax upon rental occupancy imposed by Section 8A-440.
b. For the purposes of obtaining a privilege license, a person who has less than three (3) apartments, houses, trailer spaces, or other lodging spaces available for rent, lease, or license within the State is not considered to be regularly engaged in business and need not obtain a privilege license; provided, however, if that person is also receiving income from the activity of renting, leasing, or licensing one (1) or more commercial properties or units within a commercial property, he is considered to be regularly engaged in business and must obtain licenses for all his rental, lease, or license property. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-300.2 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-310.1 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-310.2 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-310.3 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-350.1 Recordkeeping: Income
The minimum records required for persons having gross income subject to, or exempt or excluded from, tax by this chapter must show:
a. the gross income of the taxpayer attributable to any activity occurring in whole or in part in the Town.
b. the gross income taxable under this chapter, divided into categories as stated in the official Town tax return.
c. the gross income subject to Arizona Transaction Privilege Taxes, divided into categories as stated in the official State tax return.
d. the gross income claimed to be exempt, and with respect to each activity or transaction so claimed:
    1. if the transaction is claimed to be exempt as a sale for resale or as a sale, rental, lease, or license for use of rental equipment:
        A. the Town privilege license number and State Transaction Privilege Tax License number of the customer (or the equivalent city, if applicable, and state tax numbers of the city and state where the customer resides), and
        B. the name, business address, and business activity of the customer, and
        C. evidence sufficient to persuade a reasonably prudent businessman that the transaction is believed to be in good faith a purchase for resale, or a purchase, rental, lease, or license for use of rental equipment, by the vendee in the ordinary and regular course of his business activity, as provided by regulation.
    2. if the transaction is claimed to be exempt for any other reason:
        A. the name, business address, and business activity of the customer, and
        B. evidence which would establish the applicability of the exemption to a reasonably prudent businessman acting in good faith. Ordinary business documentation which would reasonably indicate the applicability of an exemption shall be sufficient to relieve the person on whom the tax would otherwise be imposed from liability therein, if he acts in good faith as provided by regulation.
e. with respect to those allowed deductions or exclusions for tax collected or charges for delivery or other direct customer services, where applicable, evidence that the deductible income has been separately stated and shown on the records of the taxpayer and on invoices or receipts provided to the customer. All other deductions, exemptions, and exclusions shall be separately shown and substantiated.
f. with respect to special classes and activities, such other books, records, and documentation as the Tax Collector, by regulation, shall deem necessary for specific classes of taxpayer by reason of the specialized business activity of any such class.
g. In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate both individual transaction amounts and totals for each reporting period for each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded income defined by this chapter. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-350.2 Recordkeeping: Expenditures
The minimum records required for persons having expenditures, costs, purchases and rental or lease or license expenses subject to, or exempt or excluded from, tax by this chapter are:
a. the total price of all goods acquired for use or storage in the Town.
b. the date of acquisition and the name and business address of the seller or lessor of all goods acquired for use or storage in the Town.
c. documentation of taxes, freight, and direct customer service labor separately charged and paid for each purchase, rental, lease, or license.
d. the gross price of each acquisition claimed as exempt from tax, and with respect to each transaction so claimed, sufficient evidence to satisfy the Tax Collector that the exemption claimed is applicable.
e. as applicable to each taxpayer, documentation sufficient to the Tax Collector, so that he may ascertain:
    1. all construction expenditures and all privilege and use taxes claimed paid, relating to owner-builders and speculative builders.
    2. disbursement of collected gratuities and related payroll information required of restaurants.
    3. (Reserved)
        A. (Reserved)
        B. (Reserved)
    4. the validity of any claims of proof of exemption, as provided by regulation.
    5. a claimed alternative prior value for reconstruction.
    6. (Reserved)
    7. (Reserved)
    8. payments of tax to the Arizona Department of Transportation and computations therefor, when a motor-vehicle transporter claims such the exemption.
    9. payments by tenants subject to the tax upon rental occupancy imposed by Section 8A-440.
f. any additional documentation as the Tax Collector, by regulation, shall deem necessary for any specific class of taxpayer by reason of the specialized business activity of specific exemptions afforded to that class of taxpayer.
g. In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate both individual transaction amounts and totals for each reporting period for each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded expenditures as defined by this chapter. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-350.3 Recordkeeping: Out-of-Town and Out-of-State Sales
a. Out-of-Town Sales. Any person engaging or continuing in a business who claims out-of-Town sales shall maintain and keep accounting records or books indicating separately the gross income from the sales of tangible personal property from such out-of-Town branches or locations.
b. Out-of-State Sales. Persons engaged in a business claiming out-of-State sales shall maintain accounting records or books indicating for each out-of-State sale the following documentation:
    1. documentation of location of the buyer at the time of order placement; and
    2. shipping, delivery, or freight documents showing where the buyer took delivery; and
    3. documentation of intended location of use or storage of the tangible personal property sold to such buyer. ((O)09-16, Amended,  08/19/2009; (O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-360.1 Proof of Exemption: Sale for Resale; Sale, Rental, Lease, or License of Rental Equipment
A claim of purchase for resale or of purchase, rental, lease, or license for rent, lease, or license is valid only if the evidence is sufficient to persuade a reasonably prudent businessman that the particular item is being acquired for resale or for rental, lease, or license in the ordinary course of business. The fact that the acquiring person possesses a privilege license number, and makes a verbal claim of “sale for resale or lease” or “lease for re-lease” does not meet this burden and is insufficient to justify an exemption. The reasonable evidence must be evidence which exists objectively, and not merely in the mind of the vendor, that the property being acquired is normally sold, rented, leased, or licensed by the acquiring person in the ordinary course of business. Failure to obtain such reasonable evidence at the time of the transaction will be a basis for disallowance of any claimed deduction on returns filed for such transactions. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-360.2 Proof of Exemption: Exemption Certificate
For the purpose of proof of exemption, in transactions other than those in which the proof is set by standard documentation as detailed in Regulations 8A-350.1 and 8A-360.1, the minimum acceptable proof and documentation for each transaction shall be the completion, at the time of the transaction, in all material respects, of a certificate containing all the information set forth below. For the purpose of validating the vendor’s claim of exemption, such certificate is sufficient if executed by any person with apparent authority to act for the customer, and the information provided validates the claim.
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| INVALID UNLESS COMPLETED IN FULL                                                    |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| VENDOR’S NAME      |                |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Sales Invoice      |                |               |                               |
| No.                |                |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Customer’s Exemption Claim                                                          |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Town of Oro Valley Privilege License (Sales) Tax                                    |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Customer’s Business Name:           |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Customer’s Business Address:        |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Specific Business Activity:         |               |                               |
| (e.g., if retailer, lessor,         |               |                               |
| or manufacturer, specify items      |               |                               |
| leased, sold or made, i.e.,         |               |                               |
| cars, computers, clothes, etc.)     |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| "                                   |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| "                                   |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| "                                   |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Customer’s License | Town:          |               | State:        |               |
| Nos.               |                |               |               |               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| ITEMS CLAIMED AS EXEMPT FROM TAX                                                    |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|                    | : All Items on This Invoice or Purchase Order.                 |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| or                                                  |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|                    | : Only Those Items Marked with an “E”.                         |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| REASON FOR CLAIMED EXEMPTION:                                                       |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|                    | : The items claimed as exempt are sold, rented, leased, or     |
|                    | licensed by the above named customer in the normal course      |
|                    | of its business activity.                                      |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|                    | "                                                              |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| or                                                                                  |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|                    | : The items claimed as exempt are exempt from the Town of      |
|                    | Oro Valley Privilege Tax for the following specific reason(s): |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|                    | "                                                              |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| CUSTOMER’S CERTIFICATE                                                              |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| I certify that the above information is accurate to the best of my information      |
| and belief, and that I am authorized by the Customer above to acquire the           |
| items claimed as exempt on a tax-free basis on its behalf. I further understand     |
| that the making of a false or fraudulent claim to obtain a tax exemption            |
| is a Class One Misdemeanor under Town Code Section 8A-580.                          |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| ______________________________________       ______________________________________ |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Name               |                |               | Date                          |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| Title              |                |               |                               |
+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

+--------------------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-405.1 Local Advertising Examples
For the purposes of illustration only, and not by way of limitation, the following are provided as examples of local advertising subject to the tax:
1. retail sales and rental establishments doing business within the State when only one (1) commonly designated business entity is identified by name in the advertisement.
2. financial institutions doing business within the State whether part of a national chain or local business only.
3. sales of real estate located within the State.
4. health care facilities located within the State.
5. hotels, motels, and apartments, whether a national chain or local, so long as the advertisement identifies any location within the State.
6. brokers doing business within the State whether stockbrokers, real estate brokers, insurance brokers, etc.
7. nonprofit organizations, which even though tax exempt have an office, whether national, local, or branch, within the State.
8. political activity, except United States Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates.
9. restaurants or food service establishments which have one (1) or more branches, outlets, or franchises within the State even though the local franchisee or licensee may not be responsible for the placement of the advertisement.
10. services provided by individuals or entities within the State such as doctors, lawyers, architects, hairdressers, auto repair shops, counseling services, utilities, contractors, auction houses, etc.
11. coupons redeemable only at a single commonly designated business entity within the State.
12. theater, sports, and other entertainment events held at locations within the State. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-405.2 Advertising Activity Within the Town
a. In General. Except as provided elsewhere in this regulation, a person engaged in advertising activity shall be considered to be doing business entirely within the Town if all or a major portion of the dissemination facilities such as broadcasting studios, printing plants, or distribution centers are located within the Town limits. Remote studios patched to an in-Town studio and subject to engineering modulation or control at the in-Town studio are considered studios doing business in the Town.
b. Billboards and other outdoor advertising companies shall be considered to be doing business within the Town to the extent they have billboards or similar displays within the Town.
c. Publishers and distributors of newspapers and other periodicals shall be subject to the tax upon advertising imposed by Section 8A-405 and such tax shall be allocated in the manner prescribed by subsection (e) of Section 8A-435. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-407.1 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-415.1 Distinction Between the Categories of Construction Contracting
For the purposes of this chapter, transactions involving improvements to, or sales of, real property are designated into one (1) of the following categories, and these categorizations shall apply, whether or not a person designates himself as a contractor, construction manager, developer, or otherwise:
a. A person performing improvements to real property is one (1) of the following:
    1. an owner-builder when the work is performed by the owner or lessor or lessee-in-possession. An owner-builder may also be a speculative builder.
    2. a construction contractor when performing work for the owner or lessor or lessee-in-possession of the real property, unless that person has provided a written declaration stating that:
        A. the owner-builder is improving the property for sale; and
        B. the owner-builder is liable for the tax for such construction contracting activity; and
        C. the owner-builder has provided the contractor his Town privilege license number.
    3. a subcontractor as provided in Section 8A-415(c).
b. An owner or lessor (“owner-builder”) of improved real property is one (1) of the following:
    1. a speculative builder as provided in Section 8A-100; or
    2. an owner-builder who is not a speculative builder in all other cases.
c. The terms “owner,” “lessor,” and “lessee-in-possession” shall be deemed to include any authorized agent for such person. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-415.2 Distinction Between Construction Contracting and Certain Related Activities
a. Certain rentals, leases, and licenses for use in connection with construction contracting. Rental, leasing, or licensing of earthmoving equipment with an operator shall be deemed construction contracting activity. Rental, leasing, or licensing of any other tangible personal property (with or without an operator) or of earthmoving equipment without an operator shall be deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property. For example:
    1. Rental of a backhoe, bulldozer, or similar earthmoving equipment with operator is construction contracting.
    Rental of these items without an operator is rental of tangible personal property.
    2. Rental of scaffolding, temporary fences, or barricades is rental of tangible personal property.
    3. Rental of pumps or cranes is rental of tangible personal property, whether or not an operator is provided with the equipment rented.
b. Distinction between construction contracting, retail, and certain direct customer service activities.
    1. When an item is attached or installed on real property, it is a construction contracting activity and any subsequent repair, removal, or replacement of that item is construction contracting.
    2. Items attached or installed on tangible personal property are retail sales.
    3. Transactions where no tangible personal property is attached or installed are considered direct customer service activities (for example: carpet cleaning, lawn mowing, landscaping maintenance).
    4. Demolition, earthmoving, and wrecking activities are considered construction contracting.
c. Sale of consumable goods incorporated into or applied to real property is considered a retail sale and not construction contracting. Examples of consumable goods are lubricants, faucet washers, and air conditioning coolant, but not paint.
d. Installation or removal of tangible personal property which has independent functional utility is considered a retail activity.
    1. “Tangible personal property which has independent functional utility” must be able to substantially perform its function(s) without attachment to real property. “Attachment to real property” must include more than connection to water, power, gas, communication, or other service.
    2. Examples of tangible personal property which has independent functional utility include artwork, furnishings, plug-in kitchen equipment, or similar items installed by bolts or similar fastenings.
    3. Examples of tangible personal property which does not have independent functional utility include wall-to-wall carpeting, flooring, wallpaper, kitchen cabinets, or built-in dishwashers or ranges.
    4. The installation of window coverings (drapes, mini-blinds, etc.) is always a retail activity. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-415.3 Construction Contracting; Tax Rate Effective Date
A. In the event of a tax rate change, the rate imposed on gross income construction contracting shall be computed based upon the rate in effect when the contract was executed, subject to the enactment date as defined in this section. Gross income from a contract executed prior to the enactment date shall not be subject to the tax rate change, provided the contract contains no provision that entitles the construction contractor to recover the amount of the tax.
B. In the event of a rate increase, in order to qualify for the lower rate, the construction contractor shall, upon request, provide sufficient documentation, in a manner and form prescribed by the Tax Collector, to verify that a contract was entered into before the enactment date.
C. For the purposes of this section, “enactment date” shall be:
    1. In the event an election is held, the date of the election.
    2. In the event no election is held, the date of final adoption by the mayor and council.
    3. Notwithstanding the above, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Town from establishing a later enactment date. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-416.1 Speculative Builders: Homeowner’s Bona Fide Non-Business Sale of a Family Residence
a. A sale of a custom home, regardless of the stage of completion of such home, shall be considered a “homeowner’s bona fide non-business sale” and not subject to the tax on speculative builders if:
    1. the property was actually used as the principal place of family residence or vacation residence by the immediate family of the seller for the six (6) months next prior to the offer for sale; and
    2. the seller has not sold more than two (2) such residences (or, if the residence is a vacation residence, two (2) such vacation residences) within the thirty-six (36) months immediately prior to the offer for sale; and
    3. the seller has not licensed, leased, or rented the sold premises for any period within twenty-four (24) months prior to the offer for sale.
b. In the event that a homeowner of a family residence contracts with a licensed construction contractor for improvements to a residence, the construction contracting on a family residence shall be presumed to be for an owner’s bona fide non-business purpose and all construction contractors shall be required to report and pay the tax imposed on all such improvements.
c. Purchases by a homeowner of tangible personal property for inclusion in any construction, alteration, or repair of his residence shall be subject to tax as retail sales to the ultimate consumer.
d. “Owner” and “homeowner” as used in this regulation shall only mean an individual, and no other entity, association, or representative shall qualify; except that an administrator, executor, personal representative, or guardian in guardianship or probate proceedings, for the estate of a deceased or incompetent person or a minor, may claim homeowner status for such person if such person would have otherwise qualified with respect to the specific property involved. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-416.2 Reconstruction Contracting
a. “Reconstruction (of real property)” shall mean the subdividing of real property and, in addition, all construction contracting activities performed upon said real property; provided, however, that each of the following conditions are met:
    1. a structure existed on said real property prior to the reconstruction activity; and
    2. the prior value of said structure exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the prior value of the integrated property (land, improvements, and structure); and
    3. the total cost of all construction contracting activities performed on said real property in the twenty-four (24) month period prior to the sale of any part of the real property exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the prior value of the real property; and
    4. the structure which existed on the real property prior to the reconstruction activity still exists in some form upon the property, and is included, in whole or in part, in the property sold.
b. Except as provided in subsection (c) below, “prior value” means the value of the total integrated property, with improvements, as existing immediately prior to any reconstruction activity. Where, according to Title 42 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, a property’s full cash value for secondary tax purposes is intended to represent the property’s fair market value, prior value shall be the property’s full cash value for secondary property tax purposes as determined by the County Assessor in the year which is immediately preceding the year in which the reconstruction improvement(s) are or could have been included in the County Assessor’s valuation. If the County Assessor’s valuation is contested or appealed, the final determination at either the administrative or judicial level shall apply. Where, according to Title 42 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, a property’s full cash value for secondary property tax purposes is not intended to represent the property’s fair market value, prior value shall be the property’s fair market value prior to the reconstruction improvements(s).
c. “Alternative prior value” shall mean that as an alternative to the prior value defined above, the taxpayer may use his actual cost of the reconstructed property prior to reconstruction, provided that evidence of such cost is presented to the Tax Collector and is determined by the Tax Collector, in his sole discretion, to be satisfactory. Such evidence shall consist, at a minimum, of proof of the actual, arms-length acquisition price, accompanied by a full appraisal of all property involved which appraisal shall have been performed by a real estate broker or MAI appraiser specifically for the purpose of assisting in the acquisition and further shall have been performed on behalf of the seller or a lending institution which has lent at least sixty-five percent (65%) of the acquisition price. (Only long-term lending, not interim or construction financing, will be considered.) This alternative value shall be used only if the property was acquired by the reconstruction taxpayer not more than thirty-six (36) months prior to a sale as defined below.
d. A “sale” for the purpose of determining alternative prior value or reconstruction only shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of the execution of a contract of sale or a deed (joint tenancy or warranty), whichever is earlier, to a purchaser or grantee of any single residential or other occupancy unit. In addition to the foregoing, a lease with option to purchase a single residential unit shall be considered a sale at the date of execution of such lease if said option is exercisable by the lessee in not later than nine (9) months. Further in the case of cooperative apartments, the sale date shall be the date of execution of the contract selling (subject or not to encumbrances, liens or security interests) of a share, or a sufficient number of shares which entitle the purchaser to the occupancy of a residential unit. In all cases a person shall include a husband and wife as a community, or any co-occupants of a single unit as joint tenants. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-425.1 Distinction Between Job Printing and Certain Related Activities
a. Computerized Printing. Computerized versions of all items which would be taxable under Section 8A-425 if performed without computerized assistance are considered taxable under that Section, and therefore are not exempt services.
b. Book publishing. The printing of books shall be deemed job printing. Sales of books shall be deemed retail sales.
c. Publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals shall not be considered job printing for the purposes of this chapter. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-435.1 Distinction Between Publishing of Periodicals and Certain Related Activities
a. Book publishing shall not be considered publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals for purposes of this chapter. Sales of books shall be deemed retail sales. The printing of books shall be deemed job printing.
b. Publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals shall not be considered job printing for the purposes of this chapter. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-435.2 Advertising Income of Publishers and Distributors of Newspapers and Other Periodicals
Publishers and distributors of newspapers and other periodicals shall be subject to the tax upon advertising imposed by Section 8A-405 and such tax shall be allocated in the manner prescribed by subsection (e) of Section 8A-435. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-445.1 When the Rental, Leasing, and Licensing of Real Property Is Exempt as “Casual”
a. The person who has less than three (3) apartments, houses, trailer spaces, or other lodging spaces rented, leased or licensed or available for rent, lease, or license within the State and no units of commercial property for rent lease, or license within the State is deemed not to be in the business of renting, leasing, or licensing real property, and is therefore exempt from the tax imposed by Section 8A-445 on such income. However, a person who has one (1) or more units of any other real property is deemed to be in the business of renting, leasing, or licensing real property, and subject to the tax imposed by Section 8A-445 on rental, lease, and license income from all such lodging spaces and commercial units of real estate even though said person may have fewer than three (3) lodging spaces within the State.
b. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-445.3 Rental, Leasing, and Licensing of Real Property as Lodging: Room and Board; Furnished Lodging
a. Room and board. 
    1. Rooming houses, lodges, or other establishments providing both lodging and meals, shall maintain a record of the separate charges made for the lodging and the meals.
    2. The charge for lodging shall be subject to the tax imposed by Section 8A-444 or 8A-445. The charge for meals is subject to the tax upon restaurants and bars prescribed by Section 8A-455.
b. Furnished lodging. A person who provides lodging with furnishings shall be deemed to be only in the business of rental, leasing, and licensing of lodging, and not in the business of rental, leasing, and licensing of such furnishings as tangible personal property, unless:
    1. Any tenant of any lodging space may choose to rent, lease, or license such lodging space either furnished or unfurnished; and
    2. The lessor separately charges tenants for lodging and for furnishings; and
    3. The lessor separately maintains his gross income from lodging and from furnishings in his accounting books and records.
If all of the above conditions are met, such person shall report both sources of income separately to the Town. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-450.1 Distinction Between Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property and Certain Related Activities
a. Certain rentals, leases, and licenses for use in connection with construction contracting. Rental, leasing, or licensing of earthmoving equipment with an operator shall be deemed construction contracting activity. Rental, leasing, or licensing of any other tangible personal property (with or without an operator) or of earthmoving equipment without an operator shall be deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property. For example:
    1. Rental of a backhoe, bulldozer, or similar earthmoving equipment with operator is construction contracting. Rental of these items without an operator is rental of tangible personal property.
    2. Rental of scaffolding, temporary fences, or barricades is rental of tangible personal property.
    3. Rental of pumps or cranes is rental of tangible personal property, regardless of whether or not an operator is included with the equipment rented.
b. Distinction between equipment rental, leasing, or licensing for use and transporting for hire. The hiring of mobile equipment (cranes, airplanes, limousines, etc.) is considered rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property whenever the charge is for a fixed sum or hourly rate. By comparison, the activity of a common carrier conveying goods or persons for a fee based upon distance, and not time, shall be considered transporting for hire. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-450.2 Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property: Membership Fees; Other Charges
a. Membership, admission, or other fees charged by any rental club or limited access lessor are considered part of taxable gross income.
b. Gross income from rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property must include all charges by the lessor to the lessee for repair, maintenance, or other service upon the tangible personal property rented, leased, or licensed.
c. Sale of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract as a requirement of, or in conjunction with, a rental, leasing, or licensing contract is exempt. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-450.3 Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Equipment with Operator
In cases where the tangible personal property is rented, leased, or licensed with an operator provided by the lessor, the charge for the operator shall not be includable in the gross income from the rental, lease, or license of such tangible personal property if the charge for the operator and the charge for the use of the equipment are separately itemized to the lessee and separately maintained on the books and records of the lessor. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-450.4 Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property: Semi-Permanently or Permanently Installed Tangible Personal Property
a. The term “semi-permanently or permanently installed” means that the item of tangible personal property has and is expected to have at the time of installation a permanent location at the site installed, as under a long-term lease agreement, except that the person using or applying said property may eventually replace it because it has become worn out or has become obsolete or the person ceases to have the right to possession of said property.
b. An item of tangible personal property is deemed permanently installed if its installation requires alterations to the premises.
c. Examples of semi-permanently or permanently installed tangible personal property include, but are not limited to: computers, duplicating machines, furniture not of portable design, major appliances, store fixtures.
d. The term does not include mobile transportation equipment or tangible personal property designed for regular use at different locations or customarily used at different locations, as under numerous short-term rental, lease, or license agreements, whether or not such property is in fact so used.
    1. For example, use of a mobile crane, trencher, automobile, or other similar equipment shall be considered a rental, lease, or license transaction subject to taxation only by the city or town in which such business office of the lessor is based.
    2. Other similar examples include, but are not limited to: camping equipment, contracting equipment, chain saw, forklift, household items, invalid needs, janitorial equipment, reducing equipment, furniture of portable design, trucks or trailers, tools, towbars, sump pumps, arc welders.
e. A rental, lease, or license agreement which specifies that the item in question shall remain, under the terms of the agreement, located within the same city or town for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall be sufficient evidence that such rented, leased, or licensed item is permanently or semi-permanently installed in said city or town, except when the item is mobile transportation equipment or one (1) of the other types of portable equipment or property described in subsection (d) above. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-450.5 Rental, Leasing, and Licensing for Use of Tangible Personal Property: Delivery, Installation, Repair, and Maintenance Charges
a. Delivery and installation charges in connection with the rental, leasing, and licensing of tangible personal property are exempt from the tax imposed by Section 8A-450; provided, that the provisions of Regulation 8A-100.2 have been met.
b. Gross income from the sale of a warranty, maintenance, or similar service contract in connection with the rental, leasing, and licensing of tangible personal property shall be exempt.
c. Separately stated charges for repair not included as part of a warranty, maintenance, or similar service contract relating to the rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property are exempt from the tax imposed by Section 8A-450; however, such income is subject to the provisions of Sections 8A-460 and 8A-465, and the provisions of Regulation 8A-465.1. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-455.1 Gratuities Related to Restaurant Activity
Gratuities charged by or collected by persons subject to the tax imposed by Section 8A-455 may be excluded from gross income if:
1. such charge is separately stated upon the bill, invoice, etc. provided the customer, and such amounts are maintained separately in the books and records of the taxpayer; and
2. such gratuities are distributed in total to employees of the taxpayer in addition to customary and regular wages. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-460.1 Distinction Between Retail Sales and Certain Other Transfers of Tangible Personal Property
a. Charges for transfer of tangible personal property included in the gross income of the business activity of persons engaged in the following business activities shall be deemed only as gross income from such business activity and not sales at retail taxed by Section 8A-460:
    1. tangible personal property incorporated into real property as part of reconstruction or construction contracting, per Sections 8A-415 through 8A-418.
    2. (Reserved)
    3. job printing, per Section 8A-425.
    4. mining, timbering, and other extraction, but not sales of sand, gravel, or rock extracted from the ground, per Section 8A-430.
    5. publication of newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals, per Section 8A-435.
    6. rental, leasing, and licensing of real or tangible personal property, per Section 8A-445 or 8A-450.
    7. restaurants and bars, per Section 8A-455.
    8. telecommunications services, per Section 8A-470.
    9. utility services, per Section 8A-480.
b. Distinction between construction contracting, retail, and certain direct customer service activities.
    1. When an item is attached or installed on real property, it is a construction contracting activity and any subsequent repair, removal, or replacement of that item is construction contracting.
    2. Items attached or installed on tangible personal property are retail sales.
    3. Transactions where no tangible personal property is attached or installed are considered direct customer service activities (for example: carpet cleaning, lawn mowing, landscape maintenance).
    4. Demolition, earthmoving, and wrecking activities are considered construction contracting.
c. The sale of sand, rock, and gravel extracted from the ground shall be deemed a sale of tangible personal property and not mining or metallurgical activity.
d. Sale of consumable goods incorporated into or applied to real property is considered a retail sale and not construction contracting. Examples of consumable goods are lubricants, faucet washers, and air conditioning coolant, but not paint.
e. Installation or removal of tangible personal property which has independent functional utility is considered a retail activity.
    1. Tangible personal property which has independent functional utility must be able to substantially perform its function(s) without attachment to real property. Attachment to real property must include more than connection to water, power, gas, communication, or other service.
    2. Examples of tangible personal property which has independent functional utility include artwork, furnishings, plug-in kitchen equipment, or similar items installed by bolts or similar fastenings.
    3. Examples of tangible personal property which does not have independent functional utility include wall-to-wall carpeting, flooring, wallpaper, kitchen cabinets, or built-in dishwashers or ranges.
    4. The installation of window coverings (drapes, mini-blinds, etc.) is always a retail activity. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-460.2 Retail Sales: Trading Stamp Company Transactions
A trading stamp transaction is defined as follows: the trading stamp company issues stamps to a vendor; the vendor then provides them to its customers; and the customer then exchanges the stamps for merchandise from the trading stamp company.
The exchange transaction for the merchandise shall be deemed a retail sale and the trading stamp company a retailer. All taxes imposed by this chapter applicable to retail transactions are therefore applicable to such exchange transactions.
The rate of tax shall be the retail rate based upon the retail dollar value of the redeemed merchandise as expressed in the redemption dollar value per book of stamps or portion thereof. The tax imposition described herein is in lieu of any privilege or use tax upon the business of issuing stamps, redeeming the same, or using or storing property redeemed. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-460.3 Retail Sales: Membership Fees of Retailers
Membership, admission, or other fees charged by limited access retailers are considered part of taxable gross income of the business activity of selling tangible personal property. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-460.4 Retail Sales: Professional Services
a. “Professional services” refers to services rendered by such persons as doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects, etc. for their customers or clients where the services meet particular needs of a specific client and only apply in the factual context of the client and the final product has no retail value in itself. For example, opinion letters, workpapers, reports, etc. are not in a form which would be subject to retail sales to customers. However, transfer of items in a form which would be subject to retail sales (e.g., artwork, forms, manuals, etc.) would not be considered professional services. The issue is one of fact which must be resolved in each situation.
b. Creative (“idea”) labor and design labor that do not result in tangible personal property that will be or can be sold are deemed professional services and, if charged separately and maintained separately in the taxpayer’s books and records, are not includable in gross income.
c. “Professional services” shall be deemed to include those items of tangible personal property which are incidental to the services rendered, provided such tangible personal property is inconsequential.
    1. Incidental transfers of tangible personal property shall be regarded as inconsequential if:
        A. the purchase price of the tangible personal property to the person rendering the professional services represents less than fifteen percent (15%) of the charge, billing, or statement rendered to the purchaser in connection with the transaction, and
        B. the tangible personal property transferred is not itself in a form which is subject to retail sale.
    2. In cases where the tangible personal property transferred is deemed inconsequential, the provider of the tangible personal property so transferred is deemed the ultimate consumer of such tangible personal property, and subject to all applicable taxes imposed by this chapter upon such transfer.
d. Examples:
    1. The transfer of paper embodying the result or work product of the services rendered by an attorney or certified public accountant is regarded as inconsequential to the charges for professional services.
    2. An appraisal report issued by an appraiser, reflecting such appraiser’s efforts to appraise real estate, is regarded inconsequential.
    3. Use of a hair care product on a client’s hair by a barber or beautician in connection with performing professional services is usually inconsequential. On the other hand, if the barber or beautician supplies the customer with a bottle of the product for the client’s use thereafter and without the professional’s assistance, the transfer of the bottle of hair care product is deemed not inconsequential.
    4. If a mortician properly segregates his professional services from other taxable activities on his bill (invoice, contract), his gross income would include only the income derived from the sale of tangible personal property (casket, cards, flowers, etc.) and rental, leasing, or licensing of real and tangible personal property. His charges for professional services (embalming, cosmetic work, etc.) would not be includable in gross income. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-460.5 Retail Sales: Monitized Bullion; Numismatic Value of Coins
a. “Monetized bullion” means coins or other forms of money manufactured or minted from precious metals or other metals and issued as legal tender or a medium of exchange by or for any government authorized to do so.
b. Any coin shall be considered to have been transferred or acquired primarily for its numismatic value if the sale or acquisition price:
    1. is equal to or greater than twice (2 times) the value of the metallic content of the coin as of the date of transfer or acquisition; and
    2. is equal to or greater than twice (2 times) its face value, in the case of a coin which, at the time of transfer or acquisition, was legal tender or a medium of exchange of the government issuing or authorizing its issuance. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-460.6 Retail Sales: Consignment Sales
Sales of merchandise acquired on consignment are taxable as retail sales. In cases where the merchant is acting as an agent on behalf of another dealer, sales of the consigned merchandise are taxable to the principal, provided the merchant makes full disclosure to customers that he is acting only as an agent for the named principal. However, when the principal is not deemed to be a dealer, such sales are considered to be those of the merchant and are taxable to him. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-465.1 Retail Sales: Repair Services
a. Fair market value of parts and labor charges. The Tax Collector may examine the reporting of all transactions covered by this section to determine if an “arms-length” price is charged for the parts and materials. The applicable tax may not be avoided by pricing a part, which ordinarily sells to the customer at ten dollars ($10.00), at five dollars ($5.00) and including the difference as “service” or “labor.” In the absence of satisfactory evidence supplied by the taxpayer as to industry or business practice, the Tax Collector may use the cost of the parts or materials to the taxpayer, marked up by a reasonable profit, to estimate the gross income subject to tax.
b. (Reserved) ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-465.2 Retail Sales: Warranty, Maintenance, and Similar Service Contracts
a. Gross income from sales of warranty, maintenance, and service contracts is exempt from the tax imposed by Section 8A-460.
b. Transfers of tangible personal property in connection with a service, warranty, guaranty, or maintenance agreement between a vendor and a vendee shall be subject to tax under Section 8A-460 only to the extent of gross income received from separately itemized charges made for the items of property transferred.
c. The gross income derived from a maintenance insurance agreement, which agreement is entered into between the purchaser and any person other than the seller, is not subject to tax imposed by Section 8A-460. If the provider of the maintenance insurance agreement pays for tangible personal property on behalf of the insured in the performance of the agreement, such sales are subject to all applicable taxes imposed by this chapter.
d. Charges for tangible personal property provided under the terms of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract exempted under Section 8A-465 are subject to tax as retail sales.
e. However, gross income received by a dealer from a manufacturer for work performed under a manufacturer’s warranty is not taxable under Section 8A-460. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-465.3 Retail Sales: Sale of Containers, Paper Products, and Labels
a. The sale of a container or similar packaging material which contains personal property and which is transferred to the customer with the sale of the product is not taxable as a sale for resale. Examples of such nontaxable containers include but are not limited to:
    1. packaging materials sold to a manufacturer of video equipment for containment of the product during shipment.
    2. cellophane-type wrap sold to a meat department or butcher for containment of the individually wrapped or contained meat.
    3. bags used to contain loose fungible goods such as fruits, vegetables, and other products sold in bulk, where such bags or containers are used to contain and measure the amount purchased by the customer.
    4. shopping bags and similar merchandising bags sold to grocery stores, department stores or other retailers.
    5. gift wrappings and gift boxes sold to department stores or other retailers.
b. Sales of non-returnable or disposable paper (and similar products such as plastic or styrofoam) cups, lids, plates, bags, napkins, straws, knives, forks and other similar food accessories to a restaurant or others taxable under Section 8A-455 for transfer by the restaurant to its customer to contain or facilitate the consumption of the food, drink or condiment are sales for resale and not taxable.
c. Where a retailer imposes a charge for gift wrapping and the charge includes the container, paper, and other appropriate materials, the wrapping charge shall be considered a sale.
d. Charges for returnable containers, where the charges are imposed on the customer, are subject to tax at the time of the transaction. A credit may be taken for the amount of refund after such refund is made.
e. The sale of labels to a purchaser who affixes them to a primary container is a sale for resale and not taxable.
Directional or instructional material included with products sold are considered to be part of the product and a sale for resale. However, the sale of items such as price tags, shipping tags, and advertising matter delivered to the customer in connection with the retail sale is taxable to the retailer as a retail sale to it, and is not exempt as a sale for resale. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-465.4 Retail Sales: Aircraft Acquired for Use Outside the State
“Aircraft acquired for use outside the State” means aircraft, navigational and communication instruments, and other accessories and related equipment sold to:
    a. Any foreign government for use by such government outside of this State.
    b. Persons who are not residents of this State and who will not use such property in this State other than in removing such property from this State. This subsection also applies to corporations that are not incorporated in this State, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this State, if the principal corporate office is located outside this State and the property will not be used in this State other than in removing the property from this State. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-470.1 Telecommunication Services
a. Gross income from the business activity of providing telecommunication services to consumers within this Town shall not include:
    1. charges for installation, maintenance, and repair of telecommunication equipment which are subject to the provisions of Section 8A-415, 8A-416, or 8A-417 (construction contracting); 8A-445 (real property rental); 8A-450 (tangible personal property rental); or 8A-460 (retail sales); depending upon the nature of the work performed.
    2. separately billed advertising charges which are subject to the provisions of Section 8A-405 or 8A-435.
b. Mobile equipment. In cases where the customer is being provided telecommunication services to receiving/transmission equipment designed to be mobile in nature (for example, mobile telephones, portable hand-held two (2) way radios, paging devices, etc.), the provider shall, for the purposes of the tax imposed by this section, determine whether such provider’s customers are within this Town as follows:
    1. by the billing address of the customer, provided that such address is a permanent residence or business location of the consumer within the State.
    2. in all other cases, the business location of the telecommunications provider. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-475.1 Distinction Between Transporting for Hire and Certain Related Activities
The hiring of mobile equipment (cranes, airplanes, limousines, etc.) is deemed rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property whenever the charge is for a fixed sum or hourly rate. By comparison, the activity of a common carrier conveying goods or persons for a fee based upon distance, and not time, shall be considered transporting for hire. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-520.1 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-520.2 Change of Method of Reporting
a. Any taxpayer electing to change his reporting method shall be permitted to do so only upon filing a written request to the Tax Collector and after receiving written approval of the Tax Collector. The approval shall state the effective date of the change.
b. The Tax Collector may postpone such approval to allow for examination of the records of the taxpayer and may further require that all tax liability be satisfied up to the effective date of the change.
c. Failure of the taxpayer to notify the Tax Collector and await approval before changing the method of reporting will subject the taxpayer to interest and penalties if his original method of reporting would produce high taxes due the Town. When a person makes such change without the consent of the Tax Collector, the Tax Collector may audit his books and records to verify the tax liability as of the date of the change.
d. Any taxpayer who has failed to indicate a choice of reporting method upon the application for a privilege license shall be deemed to have chosen the accrual method of reporting. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-555.1 (Reserved)
((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

Regulation 8A-571.1 Collection of Tax in Jeopardy
Evidence that collection of tax due is in jeopardy shall include documentation that:
a. the taxpayer is going out of business.
b. the taxpayer has no Town Privilege License or has no permanent business location in the State.
c. the taxpayer has failed to timely pay any tax (or penalties and interest thereon) due to the Town on three (3) or more occasions within the previous thirty-six (36) calendar months.
d. the taxpayer has remitted payment by check, which has been dishonored.
e. the taxpayer has failed to comply with a formal written request of the Tax Collector made pursuant to Regulation 8A-555.1. ((O)08-08, Enacted,  04/16/2008)

CHAPTER 9 GARBAGE AND LITTER

Articles:
9-1          Definitions
9-2          Garbage and Trash Collection
9-3          Hauling and Dumping Provisions
9-4          Removal of Litter

Article 9-1 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
9-1-1        Definitions Generally

Section 9-1-1 Definitions Generally
In this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Aggregate Material: means any rock fragments, pebbles, sand, gravel, cobbles, crushed base, asphalt, dirt or similar material.
B. "Closed Container" means a container designed for transporting loose material such as garbage, refuse or aggregate material, with sides, top and bottom made of solid and durable material, such as metal or plastic, which will resist normal wear and tear, and without any holes, cracks or openings through which materials contained therein may escape, regardless of the degree to which the container is filled.
C. "Enclosed Cargo Area" means a part of a vehicle designed for carrying objects or materials, with all of the following characteristics:
    1. Bottom and vertical sides made of solid and durable material, such as metal or plastic, which will resist normal wear and tear, and without any holes, cracks or openings through which materials contained therein may escape, regardless of the degree to which the cargo area is filled;
    2. A tailgate or equivalent device;
    3. Seals or any opening used to empty a load from the cargo area, including bottom dump gates and tailgages, sufficient to prevent material from escaping; and
    4. A cover or tarpaulin covering the top of the cargo area, securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner, a hazard to other users of the roadway, public thoroughfare or right-of-way. 
"Enclosed Cargo Area" shall not include any part of a vehicle’s cab or passenger compartment, nor shall it include any frame rails, fenders or decks of low bed or flat beds.
D. "Garbage, Refuse, Litter or Trash" means any garbage, rubbish, trash, weeds, filth or debris which constitutes a hazard to public health and safety. "Garbage or Refuse" includes, but is not limited to, all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste; and any deposit, accumulation, pile or heap of any clippings of brush, grass, or weeds, and any debris, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish or other unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind whatsoever.
E. "Premises" means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, whether inhabited or temporary or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibules belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structures; and any vacant lot. ((O)03-34, Amended,  11/05/2003)

Article 9-2 GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION

Sections:
9-2-1        Collection Agency
9-2-2        Collection Hours
9-2-3        Rates
9-2-4        Preparation or Disposal of Refuse
9-2-5        Location for Pick Up
9-2-6        Lids and Covers
9-2-7        Use of Containers

Section 9-2-1 Collection Agency
The town, or other collectors authorized by the town, shall collect all refuse within the town. No person, except as provided in this chapter, shall collect or gather refuse within the town.

Section 9-2-2 Collection Hours
The hours of collection of refuse shall be designated by the council.

Section 9-2-3 Rates
The council shall from time to time fix the rates and classifications for garbage and trash collection within the town and shall make such other rules and regulations as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce this chapter.

Section 9-2-4 Preparation or Disposal of Refuse
All refuse shall be prepared for collection or disposed of as follows:
A. Garbage. The customer shall furnish containers for the accumulation, storage and collection of all garbage. Such containers shall be tightly covered and be of rust-resistant metal or plastic and shall have handles on the outside. The maximum capacity of each container shall not exceed twenty gallons and loaded for collection shall not exceed fifty pounds in weight. Such containers shall be kept in good repair and in a sanitary condition.
B. Trash. Trash shall be placed in containers or tied in bundles by the customer and set out for collection. Containers may be garbage containers described above, or boxes not exceeding three square feet by four feet deep. In any event, the weight of a loaded container or bundle shall not exceed fifty pounds. Customers wishing to retain disposal boxes should mark the box "SAVE" in a readily seen manner.
C. Brush. Brush shall be cut into such a size that one person can readily load the individual pieces into a truck or chipper and shall be piled in neat order with all long branches parallel to one another and shall have all metal or foreign materials removed to facilitate chipping.
D. Appliances and Vehicles. The customer shall remove or cause to be removed all discarded appliances, vehicles or equipment from their premises or the public right-of-way.
E. Building Materials. All owners, contractors and builders of structures shall, upon the completion of any structure, gather up and haul away, at their sole cost and expense, all refuse of every nature, description or kind, which has resulted from the building of such structure, including all lumber scraps, shingles, plaster, brick, stone, concrete and other building material, and shall place the lot and all nearby premises utilized in such construction in a sightly condition. Residential customers may dispose of small amounts of building materials from time to time, providing the building materials are placed in a container as described above and contain no concrete, masonry or soil.
F. By-products. Any commercial or manufacturing establishment which by the nature of its operations creates an unusual amount of by-product refuse may be required by the town to dispose of its own wastes as opposed to having the town or authorized collection agency provide the service.
G. Dangerous Waste. Dangerous wastes shall be placed in a proper container, plainly marked "DANGER". The town or the authorized collection agency may deny service for certain dangerous wastes and require the customer to properly dispose of it by other means.
H. Soil and Concrete. Waste soil, concrete, masonry blocks, sod and rocks shall be disposed of by the owner, tenant or occupant of the premises.

Section 9-2-5 Location for Pick Up
A. All refuse prepared for collection shall be placed on the curb, or if no curb, the right-of-way line, along a dedicated street or alley, except that by mutual contractual agreement between the garbage collection agency and the customer, collection may be made on the premises. All containers and piles of refuse shall be so located as to not be a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. When necessary to set containers at the front curb, they may be set out after six o’clock p.m.of the day preceding regular collection and shall be removed from the curb by six o’clock a.m. of the day after collection.

Section 9-2-6 Lids and Covers
The lids or covers of all containers shall at all times be kept secure so that flies and other insects may not have access to the contents and shall only be removed while the containers and receptacles are being filled, emptied or cleaned.

Section 9-2-7 Use of Containers
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, any refuse in any container that he does not own or is not entitled to use as a tenant.

Article 9-3 HAULING AND DUMPING PROVISIONS

Sections:
9-3-1        Transportation of Garbage, Refuse, Litter or Aggregate Materials
9-3-2        Spilled Refuse
9-3-3        Dumping Refuse

Section 9-3-1 Transportation of Garbage, Refuse, Litter or Aggregate Materials
A. It is illegal to transport garbage, refuse, aggregate material, or like material within the town limits in an open vehicle unless the material is in a closed container or in an enclosed cargo area.
B. Vehicles transporting the following materials are not required to be equipped with a cover or tarpaulin:
    1. Loads composed solely of asphalt.
    2. Loads composed solely of petroleum coke, if loaded with a chemical surfactant (surface active agent) designed to prevent blowing, spilling or escaping.
    3. Aggregate materials loaded so that no portion of the load contacts the side of the cargo area closer than six inches from the top of the sides and no portion of the load crowns or peaks above the top of the sides of the cargo area.
C. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any roadway within the town limits unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping there from, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
D. Vehicles transporting aggregate material within the Town limits shall be equipped with the following equipment:
    1. Splash flaps behind every tire or set of tires.
    2. Fenders that cover the tops and treads of tires beginning at the top of the splash flap and extending at least six inches forward of the top center of the axle. No gap is permitted between the fender and splash flap. Tandem axels may be covered by a single fender and splash flap.
E. Vehicles transporting garbage, refuse or aggregate material within the Town limits and equipped with a bottom dump gate shall be equipped with the following equipment:
    1. Shed boards designed to prevent material deposit on the vehicle body during top loading.
    2. A center flap behind the bottom dump gate, which may be located either directly behind the gate, or to the rear of the rear axle and in line with the splash flaps. The outside edge of the center flap shall not extend more than one inch from the sidewall of the adjacent tire. The center flap shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height and shall be within 5 inches of the roadway service.
F. Vehicles with cargo areas comprised of full rigid enclosures are exempt from the requirements of Subsection E of this section. ((O)03-34, Amended,  11/05/2003)

Section 9-3-2 Spilled Refuse
A. Any person hauling any refuse along the streets of the town shall immediately replace in the conveyance used for such hauling any refuse which may fall upon any street. ((O)03-34, Amended,  11/05/2003)

Section 9-3-3 Dumping Refuse
A. It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse upon any public or private property within the town, except as specifically permitted in this chapter. ((O)03-34, Amended,  11/05/2003)

Article 9-4 REMOVAL OF LITTER

Sections:
9-4-1        Litter on Private Property
9-4-2        Owner to Maintain Premises
9-4-3        Procedure to Compel Removal of Litter
9-4-4        Notice to Remove
9-4-5        Service of Notice
9-4-6        Appeal to Council
9-4-7        Removal by Town
9-4-8        Lien for Removal
9-4-9        Placement of Debris

Section 9-4-1 Litter on Private Property
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied private property within the town, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place.

Section 9-4-2 Owner to Maintain Premises
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.

Section 9-4-3 Procedure to Compel Removal of Litter
The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of Sections 9-4-1 and 9-4-2 by prosecuting violators of said sections in the town magistrate’s court pursuant to the penalty provisions of this code. If such prosecution fails to secure compliance with the provisions of said sections, or in the event of inability to prosecute violators by reason of failure to secure jurisdiction over their persons, the chief of police shall compel the removal of litter by the procedure outlined in Sections 9-4-4 through 9-4-8 hereof.

Section 9-4-4 Notice to Remove
To compel the removal of litter through the provisions of this section and of Sections 9-4-5 through 9-4-8 hereof, if a person owning or controlling any property fails, neglects or refuses to remove or properly dispose of litter, located on property owned or controlled by such person, he shall be given written notice by the chief of police to remove all litter from such property within thirty days from the date the notice was received by him. Such notice shall contain an estimate of the cost of removal by the town, a statement that unless the person owning or controlling such property complies therewith within thirty days from the date such written notice is received that the town will, at the expense of the person owning or controlling said property, perform the necessary work at a cost not to exceed the estimate given in the notice, and that such person may appeal in writing to the council within thirty days from the date the notice is received by him.

Section 9-4-5 Service of Notice
Notice shall be personally served on the owner or person controlling such property, by a police officer of the town in the manner provided in Rule 4(d) of the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, or mailed to the owner or person controlling such property at his last known address by certified or registered mail, or the address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on such property, a duplicate notice shall also be sent to him by certified or registered mail at his last known address.

Section 9-4-6 Appeal to Council
Prior to the date set for removal, the owner or person controlling such property may appeal in writing to the council from the demand of the chief of police. The council shall, at its next regular meeting after receiving the appeal, hear and determine the same, and the decision of the council shall be final. The council may either affirm or reverse the decision of the chief of police or modify the scope of the work as required in the notice.

Section 9-4-7 Removal by Town
When any such person to whom notice, as aforesaid, has been given, and on or before the required date of removal, or within such further time as may have been granted by the council on appeal, fails, neglects or refuses to move from such property any or all litter, the chief of police is authorized and directed to cause same to be removed and disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling such property. Upon completion of the work, the chief of police shall prepare a verified statement of account of the actual cost of such removal or abatement, the date the work was completed, and the street address and the legal description of the property on which said work was done, including five percent for additional inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, and shall serve a duplicate copy of such verified statement upon the person owning or controlling such property in the manner prescribed in Section 9-4-5. The owner or person controlling such property shall have thirty days from the date of service upon him to appeal in writing to the council from the amount of the assessment as contained in the verified statement. If an appeal is not filed with the chief of police within such thirty day period, then the amount of the assessment as determined by the chief of police shall become final and binding. If an appeal is taken, the council shall, at its next regular meeting, hear and determine the appeal and may affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the amount thereof, or determine that no assessment at all shall be made. The decision of the council shall be final and binding on all persons.

Section 9-4-8 Lien for Removal
If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an appeal is taken and the council has affirmed or modified the amount of the assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and, from the date of its recording, shall be a lien on said lot or tract of land until paid. Such liens shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The town shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the lien in the superior court at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by such action shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof. A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for such purposes, and any number of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action.

Section 9-4-9 Placement of Debris
It is unlawful for any person to place any rubbish, trash, filth or debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of said person. In addition to any fine which may be imposed for violation of any provision of this section, such person shall be liable for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this article for the removal of said rubbish, trash, filth or debris.

CHAPTER 10 OFFENSES

Articles:
10-1         Miscellaneous Offenses
10-2         Guest Registers
10-3         Weapons
10-4         Aggressive Solicitation
10-5         Alarm Systems
10-6         Anti-Graffiti
10-7         Regulating Picketing of a Private Residence in Residentially Zoned Districts
10-8         Laser Pointers
10-9         Handbills
10-10        Loud or Unruly Gatherings
10-11        Newsrack
10-12        Parade and Public Assembly
10-13        Fireworks
10-14        Distracted Driving

Article 10-1 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES

Sections:
10-1-1       Searchlights
10-1-2       Excavations to be Covered
10-1-3       Driving on Shared Use Path
10-1-4       Noise
10-1-5       Nuisances
10-1-6       Obstruction of View
10-1-7       Offensive Business
10-1-8       Offensive Premises
10-1-9       Prostitution
10-1-11      Signs and Banners
10-1-12      Water - Flow Upon Streets Prohibited
10-1-13      Urinating or Defecating In Public
10-1-14      Solicitating Passengers or Baggage
10-1-15      Public Property; Injuring
10-1-16      Abandoned Refrigerator, Icebox or Container
10-1-17      Curfew
10-1-18      Weapons in Parks and Public Buildings
10-1-19      Keeping of Junk Restricted
10-1-20      Willful Failure to Return Library Property
10-1-21      Expectorating on Sidewalks or in Public Buildings
10-1-22      Weapons in Parks or Other Public Places Prohibited
10-1-23      Penalties
10-1-24      Impersonating a Police Officer
10-1-25      Prohibited Use of Public Right-of-Way
10-1-26      Prohibited Use of Town Logo
10-1-27      Unlawful Parking
10-1-28      Weapons Near A School Prohibited
10-1-29      Town Property-Squatting on Prohibited
10-1-30      Throwing Stars and Nunchuckas; Possession By Minors Prohibited; Sale to Minors Prohibited
10-1-31      Possession of Butterfly Knives and Brass Knuckles Prohibited
10-1-32      Obstructing Government Operations
10-1-33      Unlawful Use of 9-1-1 Emergency Line
10-1-34      Indecent Exposure
10-1-35      Loitering
10-1-36      Narcotics - Keeping Paraphernalia; Acting as Lookout
10-1-37      Same - Seizure, Destruction of Paraphernalia
10-1-38      Open Container in Public Prohibited
10-1-39      Severability
10-1-40      Methamphetamine
10-1-41      Destruction of Election Signs

Section 10-1-1 Searchlights
It is unlawful for any person to operate within the town any incandescent or arc-type searchlight, beacon light or similar lighting device designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light into the sky for a distance in excess of one-half mile. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency searchlights or beacons operated pursuant to public authority.

Section 10-1-2 Excavations to be Covered
A. It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the town without providing a sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable obstruction around or in front of such excavation during the day.
B. It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other excavation of more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot, without providing substantial curbing, covering or protection of such excavation.

Section 10-1-3 Driving on Shared Use Path
It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle on the shared use paths at any time and for any reason except for golf carts and registered neighborhood vehicles as defined by the State of Arizona in signed designated areas. Use of the vehicles beyond posted limits is prohibited. ((O)05-10, Amended,  02/16/2005; (O)04-36, Amended,  10/20/2004)

Section 10-1-4 Noise
A. No person shall negligently make, cause, or permit unreasonable noise.
B. Noise made for the following purposes is exempt from subsection (A) of this section:
    1. Emergency activities necessary to restore property to a safe condition after a natural disaster or occurrence;
    2. Protecting people or property from imminent danger;
    3. Governmental activities;
    4. Activities sponsored or sanctioned by the Town Council;
    5. Operation, maintenance, or repair of heavy equipment between sunrise or 6:00 a.m., whichever is later, and sunset.
    6. Noise generated by construction, demolition, excavation or grading according to the following restrictions:
        a. Concrete. The pouring of concrete and all associated work may be conducted from April 15th through October 15th between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and from October 16th through April 14th between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or as authorized pursuant to an Extended Construction Hours Work Permit (ECHWP) issued under Oro Valley Town Code Section 6-6-2.
        b. All Other Construction. Within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zone, all other construction may occur between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Construction sites more than five hundred (500) feet from a residential zone may conduct work between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Construction hours may be extended pursuant to an ECHWP issued under Oro Valley Town Code Section 6-6-2. The distance from a residential zone shall be determined by measuring from all property lines of the construction site.
C. The exact time of sunrise and sunset will be as reported by the National Weather Service.
D. Factors that may be considered in determining the reasonableness of the noise are, but not limited to:
    1. The level, character, frequency and duration of the noise;
    2. The necessity of the noise;
    3. The proximity of the source to inhabited structures;
    4. Hardship to the perpetrator if noise discontinued or limited;
    5. Character and zoning of neighborhood;
    6. Time of noise.
E. Violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor. ((O)08-09, Amended,  05/07/2008)

Section 10-1-5 Nuisances
A. It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance. Anything which is injurious to health or indecent or offensive to the senses, or which interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood or by any considerable number of persons, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use in a customary manner of any public place, street, sidewalk or alley in the town is a public nuisance and subject to summary abatement.
B. Idling Motor Vehicles. 
    1. No commercial vehicle or diesel-powered vehicle shall be left with engine idling or auxiliary motor running while directly adjacent to a developed residential zone within the Town.
        a. Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., any commercial or diesel-powered vehicle left idling for any length of time will be presumed in violation of this section.
        b. At all other times, a commercial or diesel-powered vehicle left idling for thirty (30) minutes or more shall constitute a violation of this section.
    2. This section does not apply to emergency vehicles, public works or public utility vehicles engaged in the performance of emergency or operational duties.
    3. For the purpose of this section the following definitions apply:
        a. “Commercial vehicle” means a motor vehicle designed or regularly used to carry freight, merchandise, or more than ten (10) passengers, whether loaded or empty, including buses, but not including vehicles used for vanpools or vehicles built and operated as recreational vehicles.
        b. “Engine idling” refers to a commercial or diesel-powered vehicle parked or not in use with its engine running. ((O)08-06, Amended,  04/02/2008)

Section 10-1-6 Obstruction of View
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.

Section 10-1-7 Offensive Business
It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any slaughterhouse or make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep or any other kind of animal, or establish or maintain any soap factory, render tallow, or pursue, maintain or carry on any other business or occupation offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health within the limits of the town.

Section 10-1-8 Offensive Premises
It is unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any premises belonging to or occupied by him, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, sewer or private drain therein to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort.

Section 10-1-9 Prostitution
It is unlawful for any prostitute to solicit, or any person to solicit for a prostitute or a place of prostitution or to solicit persons to visit or patronize a prostitute or place of prostitution, or make such solicitation upon the streets or in any public place of the town.

Section 10-1-11 Signs and Banners
It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any streetlight pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole within the town without first obtaining authorization from the council.

Section 10-1-12 Water - Flow Upon Streets Prohibited
A. It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the town.
B. It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the town through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any irrigation structure, delivery ditch or waste ditch in which said person has a vested right or interest or through the willful or negligent failure of said person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him.

Section 10-1-13 Urinating or Defecating In Public
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public place, or any place exposed to any public view, except in an established lavatory or toilet. Any violation of this provision shall be a class one misdemeanor. ((O)02-07, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-14 Solicitating Passengers or Baggage
It is unlawful for any person to enter into or upon any transportation terminal or shelter, or any hotel, motel, resort, or any grounds thereof, for the purposes of soliciting passengers for any purpose, or soliciting passengers, guests or baggage to be transported or carried in such a manner, without the consent of the owner of such grounds or the person in charge thereof. ((O)02-07, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-15 Public Property; Injuring
Any person who shall negligently, willfully or maliciously injure, deface, pull down, change the placement of, prohibit removal of, or in any manner break or destroy any traffic signage, signpost or board containing the name or number of any street in the Town, or who shall pull down, obliterate, deface or destroy any house or door number placed upon any house or door in the Town, or who shall mutilate, deface, destroy, or shall attempt to move, mutilate, deface or in any manner damage any public fountain, water tank or tower, public art, public exhibit, public bench, public amphitheater, music stand, sidewalk or path or other property belonging to the Town shall be guilty of a Class One Misdemeanor. ((O)02-07, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-16 Abandoned Refrigerator, Icebox or Container
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling, or in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released from the inside of such.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling or a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snaplock or other device thereon without first removing the said snaplock or doors from said icebox, refrigerator or container. ((O)02-07, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-17 Curfew
A. Definitions:
    1. Juvenile is any person who has not yet attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
    2. Parent is any natural or adoptive parent of a juvenile.
    3. Guardian is any person, other than a parent, who has legal guardianship of the person of a juvenile.
    4. Custodian is any person, not a juvenile, who is in loco parentis to a juvenile.
B. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile, prior to his/her sixteenth birthday, to be, remain, loiter or cruise in any vehicle in, about or upon any place in the town away from his/her dwelling, house or usual place of abode between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m.
C. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile, on or after his/her sixteenth birthday, but prior to his/her eighteenth birthday, to be, remain, loiter or cruise in any vehicle in, about or upon any place in the town away from his/her dwelling, house or usual place of abode between the hours of twelve midnight and five a.m.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any juvenile when accompanied by a parent, guardian or custodian, or when lawfully married, or when on an emergency errand, or when it is reasonable, legitimate and specific business or activity directed or permitted by a parent, guardian or custodian.
E. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or custodian of any juvenile to permit the juvenile to remain, loiter or cruise in any vehicle, in, about or upon any place in the town away from the dwelling, house or usual place of abode of the juvenile in violation of this section.
F. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. ((O)96-17, Enacted, )

Section 10-1-18 Weapons in Parks and Public Buildings
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or otherwise possess any deadly weapon (as defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes, town statutes, and below), anywhere within a public park within the Oro Valley Town limits. Deadly weapons includes, but is not limited to: firearms, air rifles, spring bows, bows and arrows, shurikens, throwing stars, slings, knives with blades over 2", or any other form of weapon(s) potentially injurious to either wildlife or to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device. As an exception to the above, "Firearms" as defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes will not be allowed in a park unless the person possesses a currently valid concealed weapons permit issued pursuant to Arizona Revised Statute 13-3112. Any person carrying a firearm with a valid concealed weapon permit may carry such weapon either openly or concealed on their person while within the park. Such a permit mentioned above must be produced immediately upon demand by any peace officer or any authorized park personnel or Town employee. In order for this ordinance to be effective, notices must have been posted at such park which shall state "Carrying a firearm in this park or in any developed or improved area thereof is limited to persons who possess a permit issued pursuant to Arizona Revised Statute 13-3112." Lack of attention to such signs or damage to or missing signs shall not constitute a defense to the charge. Such notices shall be conspicuously posted at all public entrances and at intervals of 1/4 mile or less where the park has an open perimeter.
B. Penalty - Any violation of this ordinance for carrying an openly displayed or concealed firearm within a park without currently possessing a concealed weapon permit shall be a Class Two (2) misdemeanor punishable by up to four (4) months in jail, a fine not to exceed $750, and up to two (2) years of supervised probation, all specified pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes.
C. Penalty - Any violation of carrying any deadly weapon within the park grounds, except as specified elsewhere, shall be a Class One misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $2500, six (6) months jail and three (3) years of probation.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or otherwise possess any deadly weapon as defined above or in the Arizona State Statutes anywhere within any Town of Oro Valley public building unless specifically authorized by law pursuant to Arizona Revised Statute 13-3102 Subsection (C); or if such a person is an Oro Valley Town employee or personnel, and such an item is normally used as a tool within the normal scope of their duties. All persons shall remove their weapon(s) and place it/them in the custody of the operator of the establishment or sponsor of the event immediately upon entering. Failure to do so shall be punishable as a Class One (1) misdemeanor unless the state statutes designate such action as a more serious offense, in which case the more serious designation shall be in effect.
E. Should the Arizona Legislature pass any law or legislation, and such law or legislation is upheld by any court of competent jurisdiction which invalidates any or all of the provisions of this ordinance, the state law shall supercede any provision of this ordinance and any such provision or provisions in this ordinance in conflict with State law shall be null and void. ((O)00-27, Enacted,  08/16/2000)

Section 10-1-19 Keeping of Junk Restricted
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep, maintain or fail to completely remove and properly dispose of all junk on and visible from beyond the property lines of property owned, leased, occupied, maintained, used, or controlled by such person for more than thirty (30) days. All junk must be removed within thirty (30) days of placement. Junk for purposes of this article is defined as the accumulation of (1) any waste product; (2) discarded furniture; (3) discarded glass, metal, plastic or paper; (4) machinery parts, including vehicles; (5) inoperative machines or material wastes; (6) animal waste (7) litter; (8) discarded or empty containers, except those in authorized recycling containers; or (9) items that in their present state are of minimal value without being transported or processed; which is not confined within a junkyard as properly licensed by the Town and in an appropriately zoned area. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-20 Willful Failure to Return Library Property
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail to return any book, pamphlet, record, magazine or other property of any library located within the municipal boundaries within five (5) calendar days after receipt of notice from the library demanding return of such property. For purposes of this Section, any library record showing a notification being sent will be authomatically admissible in any court proceeding without any further action. Any such mailing will be presumed by the court to be received by the person three (3) days after the date of such mailing. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-21 Expectorating on Sidewalks or in Public Buildings
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate upon any of the sidewalks or upon the floors of any indoor or outdoor theater, public building, church or room used for public assemblies. Such violation shall be a Class Three misdemeanor. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-22 Weapons in Parks or Other Public Places Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or otherwise possess a weapon anywhere within a public park or public building. State Law shall govern all firearm prohibition at a park or public building. All other weapons shall be governed by this Code. This provision shall not apply to small pocket knives or any items intended for immediate use for sporting or other recreational activities; to duly sworn peace officers before, during or after the normal course of their duties; or to Town personnel if such an item is normally used as a tool within the course of their duties. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-23 Penalties
Unless otherwise specified, all violations of Chapter 10 of the Oro Valley Town Code, all violations of the Oro Valley Zoning Code, all violations of the adopted Building and Fire Codes and other Town Codes shall be designated as class one misdemeanors. Any person found guilty of violating this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days; or placed on probation up to three (3) years or any combination thereof. In the case of a minor person, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severably liable with the minor for the payment of all fines and terms of probation, if the appropriate court so orders. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-24 Impersonating a Police Officer
No person shall impersonate or hold himself out to be a police officer of this State, or use, wear or display an insignia, badge or indicia of a peace officer of this State, as may be evidenced by the use of the words police, sheriff, federal agent on such various insignia; nor shall such person operate or permit to be operating a motor vehicle with a siren, or red light, blue light or white light whether flashing or steady beam, in conjunction with any insignia used by peace officers of this State unless such person is currently employed as a peace officer of this State. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-25 Prohibited Use of Public Right-of-Way
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a public street, highway, alley, lane, parkway, sidewalk or other right-of-way, whether such right-of-way has been dedicated to the public in fee or by easement or othersise, for lying sleeping or remaining in a sitting position thereof, except in the case of a physical emergency or the administration of medical assistance. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-26 Prohibited Use of Town Logo
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, make, sell, design, transfer or use any item which has the Oro Valley Town logo contained on it without the express prior consent of the Oro Valley Town Council or their designee, or, in an emergency situation, or day-to-day Town ordering activities, with the approval of the Town Manager. Nor may any item or insignia, regardless of shape or design, which has the words "Town" or "Oro" or "Valley", either used separately, together or in a connection to an official Town sponsorship, be used without the prior approval of the Town Council or their designee. This shall include election materials and/or any publications. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-27 Unlawful Parking
It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to stand, stop, and park or otherwise block, any main traveled portion of any roadway on all roads within the Town. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-28 Weapons Near A School Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for anyone to carry or otherwise possess any weapon as defined in the state statutes or Town Code within 250 feet of any school or school grounds, public or private, such weapon is located within a private residence already located within 250 feet of any school or school grounds, and is possessed by the authorized owner/occupant. This provision also shall not apply to areas such as a park where state law provisions regarding firearms take precedence if a such a Park is within 250 feet of a school. However, the person possessing such a firearm in such an area must comply with the current state law or this Code shall take effect. This provision shall apply whether the school is in session at the time or not. This provision shall not apply to any items being transported past the school, and intended for immediate use for sporting or other recreational activities; to any duly qualified peace officer, or any Town or school personnel for which the weapon is reasonably classified as a "tool" for the scope of their duties. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-29 Town Property-Squatting on Prohibited
All persons entering upon, or assisting to enter upon; enclosing, or assisting to enclose; locating, or assisting to locate upon; or in any manner connected with taking up, occupying, enclosing or assisting to enclose, or obstructing any property under the authority of the Town, for the purpose of taking possession, directly or indirectly, of any of the vacant or unoccupied lands, or lands occupied by governmental structures, owned, claimed or held in trust by the Town, or in conflict with the ordinances providing for and regulating the sale of public lands, owned, claimed, or held in trust by the Town, shall be guilty of a Class One Misdemeanor. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-30 Throwing Stars and Nunchuckas; Possession By Minors Prohibited; Sale to Minors Prohibited
A. It is unlawful for any person in this Town to sell, lend, or give to a minor, or to allow a minor to possess, any instrument, without handles, consisting of a metal plate having three (3) or more radiating points with one (1) or more sharp edges and designed in the shape of a polygon, trefoil, cross, star, diamond, or any other geometric shape that can be used as a weapon for throwing. It is also unlawful for any person in this Town to sell, lend or give to a minor, or allow a minor to possess, any instrument consisting of two handles of any hard material connected by a chain, rope, wire or other connecting device, that can be used as a weapon.
B. It is unlawful for any minor in this Town to manufacture or cause to be manufactured, imported into the Town, keep for sale, or offer or expose for sale or give, lend or possess any instrument as defined in subsection (A) of this Section.
C. It is a defense to this statute that the items in question are only being used in a martial arts class or tournament currently in session and properly sanctioned by the governing body of such martial arts discipline. It is a defense to this charge if such items are simply on display as part of a regular exhibit open to the public or in the possession of a certified martial arts instructor to be used for teaching purposes. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-31 Possession of Butterfly Knives and Brass Knuckles Prohibited
It is unlawful for any person to possess, store, own or give away any knive or cutting instrument with a blade longer than one and one half inches opening on a central pivot and capable of being opened and locked by one hand commonly known as a "butterfly knife" or any instrument designed to slip onto the hand and commonly known as "brass knuckles" anywhere within the town limits of Oro Valley unless such items are part of a regular exhibit capable of being viewed by the public or are being used as a tool in the regular course of employment. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-32 Obstructing Government Operations
A person commits obstructing a government operation is such person knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders:
A. A governmental function by a public servant acting under color of his official authority; or
B. The enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer acting under color of his official authority. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-33 Unlawful Use of 9-1-1 Emergency Line
It is unlawful for any person to dial the 9-1-1 line any hang up without speaking except for a serious medical emergency. It is unlawful to use 9-1-1 for a situation that is not an emergency if such a person does so on more than one occasion within any ninety (90) day period and has been previously instructed not to call the number for the purpose called for previously. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-34 Indecent Exposure
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or willingly expose or display his or her anus, buttocks, genitals, pubic areas, aerola and/or the nipple of the female breast to view by any member of the public, or recklessly or willfully aid or assist in the exposure or display of another’s anus, buttocks, genitals, pubic areas, areola and/or the nipple of the female breast in any place viewable by a member of the public, including police officers, including, but not limited to, a street, alleyway, driveway, right-of-way, parking lot, park, bus stop, hallways, aisle, places of assembly whether indoor or outdoor, such as bingo halls, fairs, carnivals, businesses, swap meets, museums, or any other place of public accommodation, but not to include:
    1. Regular or authorized performers or performances on theater, concert hall, music hall or nightclub stages, or movie house screens, bars or restaurants, except as prohibited in other sections of this Code.
B. It shall be no defense that the viewer or viewers:
    1. Consented to the exposure or display; or
    2. Voluntarily subjected himself or herself to the exposure or display; or
    3. Was not, or were not, annoyed, offended, shocked or outraged by the exposure or display.
C. In this Section, unless the context requires otherwise, "exposure or display" means:
    1. To submit to public view the named areas without cover; or
    2. To submit to public view the named areas with cover or less than one (1) layer of opaque covering. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-35 Loitering
A person is guilty of loitering when he:
1. Loiters, remains or wanders about in a public place for the purpose of begging; or
2. Loiters or remains in a public place for the purpose of gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia; or
3. Loiters or remains in a public place for the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in deviate sexual intercourse or other sexual behavior of a deviate nature; or
4. Loiters or remains in or about a school, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a pupil or student, or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and not having written permission from anyone authorized to grant the same; or
5. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable suspicion that a person has violated a federal law, state law or town code provision, that person shall provide proof of identity upon request Proof of Identity shall be defined as that described in Arizona Revised Statute 28-1595(b) or its progeny; or
6. Loiters or remains in any transportation facility, unless specifically authorized to do so, for the purpose of soliciting or engaging in any business, trade or commercial transaction involving the sale of merchandise or services; or for the purpose of entertaining persons by singing, dancing or playing any musical instrument; or
7. Loiters or remains in any transportation facility, bus stop, etc., or is found sleeping therein, and is unable to give a satisfactory explanation of his presence; or
8. Loiters or remains in any place with one (1) or more persons for the purpose of lawfully using or possessing marijuana, or a narcotic or dangerous drug as defined in Arizona Revised Statute 13-3400 et. seq. or its progeny. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-36 Narcotics - Keeping Paraphernalia; Acting as Lookout
If any person shall keep or exhibit any box, pipe, cup, hypodermic needle, thing, or apparatus used for unlawfully smoking, eating, inhaling, injecting or consuming any substance defined as a narcotic by Arizona Revised Statute 13-3401, or if any person shall act as a lookout or tender at any place where such acts are practiced or carried on, s/he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-37 Same - Seizure, Destruction of Paraphernalia
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Town to seize and safely keep all cups, pipes, apparatus, boxes, hypodermic needles and things used for the purpose of unlawfully eating, smoking, inhaling, injecting or otherwise consuming any substance defined as a narcotic by Arizona Revised Statute 13-3401, and produce the same in court. Such articles shall be retained until the final disposition of any case in which they may be required as evidence, to be then destroyed by order of the court; but nothing herein contained shall prevent the destruction of such articles no longer required to be retained as evidence. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-38 Open Container in Public Prohibited
It is unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage in public, or to be in possession of any open container of an alcoholic beverage in public with a proper permit. For purposes of this Section, non-alcoholic beers are included within the definition of alcoholic beverages as they do contain minute traces of alcohol and to aid in the enforcement of this Section by avoiding the taking of samples of and analysis of every beverage. "In public" shall include the common areas of apartment complexes in its definition. A person located on their private balcony area of an apartment building is not considered to be "in public". ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-39 Severability
Should any portion of any provision of the Oro Valley Town Code be found to be unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that provision or portion of any provision shall be severable and not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the provision or other provisions. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-1-40 Methamphetamine
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following shall have the following meanings:
    1. "Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine and Ephedrine" are drugs commonly used in decongestants and can be illegally processed to make Methamphetamine ("Meth") whether alone or in combination with other active ingredients.
    2. "Proper Identification" shall mean a recognized government issued photo identification of a Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine or Ephedrine purchaser, including, but not limited to, a driver’s license or passport.
B. Security of Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine, and Esphedrine Products. Any establishment that has products containing Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine, or Ephedrine for sale shall keep said products in an area that is inaccessible to the public to prevent the theft or uncontrolled sale of said products.
C. Quantity that May be Sold. Any establishment that has products containing Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine or Ephedrine for sale shall sell no more than nine (9) grams of any product containing Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine or Ephedrine to any individual within a thirty (30) day period. This section does not apply to Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine or Ephedrine dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription.
D. Purchaser Identification Requirements. Any person purchasing a Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine or Ephedrine product shall be required to present proper identification prior to being allowed to purchase such product.
E. Retail Establishment’s Right to Refuse Sale. Any retail establishment may refuse to sell any Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine or Ephedrine product to any person if the seller has reason to believe that the product will be used in the unlawful manufacture of Meth or other controlled substance. Facts that give rise to such a belief include but are not limited to a "suspicious transaction" as defined in ARS 13-3401; the attempted purchase of Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine or Ephedrine products in excess of the amounts permitted by Arizona law; the attempt to purchase Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolamine or Ephedrine in a series of transactions to circumvent the limitation on sales; or the attempt to purchase Pseudoephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine, Phenylpropanolanine or Ephedrine in conjunction with other products, such as red phosphorus or iodine known to be used in the manufacture of Meth. Any person who refuses to make a retail sale in accordance with this section is not liable to its customer or any other person for any loss or damage caused in whole or in part by the refusal to sell.
F. Penalty. Each violation of this Section shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of $1,000. ((O)05-45, Enacted,  11/16/2005)

Section 10-1-41 Destruction of Election Signs
A. It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously deface, pull down, change the placement of, or in any manner break or destroy any election sign which is placed in an approved location within the Town of Oro Valley. Violation of this Section shall be considered a civil violation and anyone found guilty of violating this Section shall be fined as follows:
    1. First offense: $100.00;
    2. Second offense: $300.00;
    3. Third offense or subsequent offenses: $500.00. ((O)09-06, Enacted,  05/20/2009)

Article 10-2 GUEST REGISTERS

Sections:
10-2-1       Registration Required
10-2-2       False Entries on Register

Section 10-2-1 Registration Required
An owner, operator, or person in charge of any hotel, rooming house, motel, or resort in the Town shall provide and keep a suitable guest register for the registration of all persons provided with sleeping, housekeeping, camping or other accommodation at the hotel, rooming house, motel, or resort and all those guests must be registered in it. Upon the arrival of a guest the owner, operator, or person in charge must require the guest to enter in the register, or must enter for the guest, the following:
A. The name and home address of the guest and of all other persons in the guest’s party;
B. The date of the arrival.
Upon the departure of the guest, the owner, operator, or person in charge must enter the date of departure in the register. Such register shall be available for the inspection of any police officer of the Town at all times upon request. ((O)15-09, Amended,  07/01/2015)

Section 10-2-2 False Entries on Register
It is unlawful for any person to enter in the register of guests of any hotel, rooming house, motel or auto court within the Town a false or fictitious name, or a false or fictitious address, knowing it to be false.

Article 10-3 WEAPONS

Sections:
10-3-1       Discharge of Weapons

Section 10-3-1 Discharge of Weapons
A. It shall be a civil violation punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any person to negligently or purposely discharge any dart gun, BB gun, slingshot or other similar firearm or instrument or any air gun, air pistol, airsoft weapon or bow and arrow, crossbow or similar instrument within the corporate limits, except:
    1. In necessary self-defense as provided by State law.
    2. For the purpose of target shooting or practice on a range operated by qualified personnel and approved by the Town Council. Qualified personnel for purposes of this section shall consist of AZPOST, or its progeny, State-certified instructors, or as otherwise approved by the Town Council.
    3. Target shooting on private premises with BB guns, pellet guns, air guns or slingshots, providing:
        a. Target shooting or other discharge of projectiles from the firearms, instruments or weapons described in subsection (A) of this section allowed solely within the boundaries of private properties with the consent of the owner or owners of said property. However, the deliberate or negligent discharge of any projectiles from any of the various weapons or firearms described in this section on or toward any property without the consent of the owner(s) shall be deemed a violation of this section.
    4. Airsoft weapons may also be discharged off of private property and within the Oro Valley town limits only under the following circumstances:
        a. Any person discharging airsoft guns within the town limits must use biodegradable airsoft rounds.
        b. That no person shall be permitted to discharge any airsoft weapon within one hundred (100) feet of any home, business, or government building.
        c. Any person discharging an airsoft weapon must have and use protective eyewear.
        d. Any airsoft weapon must have a bright color attachment on the muzzle of the weapon similar to those required under Federal law currently attached to the weapon indicating the gun is not a real weapon, but is solely intended for use as a nonlethal instrument.
B. For the purpose of this section, a “firearm” is defined as any device that expels a projectile or projectiles other than by means of expanding gases. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to firearms as defined in A.R.S. 13-3101(4) nor to firearms regulated by A.R.S. 13-3107.
C. Every person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a civil violation and may be required to forfeit the gun or instrument so fired or discharged, in accordance with applicable procedures for forfeiture.
D. Every officer upon making any arrest and taking weapons used in violation of this section shall deliver the same to be held as evidence until the final determination of the prosecution for the offense. Upon a finding of guilty, the Court may order the weapon forthwith to be forfeited to the Chief of Police who shall make disposition of the weapon in the manner prescribed by law.
E. For special events or public or private properties where ten (10) or more persons are present and utilize target practice, firearms demonstrations or any of the weapons or other instruments listed in subsection (A) of this section are to be discharged, a permit shall be obtained from the Chief of Police prior to such event(s). Applicants for a permit shall submit to the Chief of Police information detailing the location proposed for such event, the type of use(s) proposed and all safety precautions being taken. The applicant(s) shall certify that proper safety procedures will be taken. ((O)10-09, Amended,  09/01/2010; (O)10-03, Amended,  02/03/2010)

Article 10-4 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION

Sections:
10-4-1       Definitions
10-4-2       Prohibited Acts
10-4-3       Penalties
10-4-4       Construction and Severability

Section 10-4-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this ordinance:
A. SOLICIT means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor’s purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication.
B. AGGRESSIVE MANNER means and includes:
    1. Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person’s consent;
    2. Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: (i) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
    3. Continuing to solicit within five (5) feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is: (i) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
    4. Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the Town Code shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
    5. Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures: (i) intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (ii) words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or
    6. Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: (i) is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (ii) is intended to or is likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
C. AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE means a device, linked to a financial institution’s account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments.
D. AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.
E. BANK means any banking corporation.
F. CHECK CASHING BUSINESS means any person duly licensed by the superintendent of banks to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking laws.
G. PUBLIC AREA means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, and doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them. ((O)97-01, Enacted,  01/21/1997)

Section 10-4-2 Prohibited Acts
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit the sale of goods and services:
A. In an aggressive manner in a public area;
B. In any public transportation vehicle, or bus or Vantran/Coyote Run station or stop;
C. Within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing businesses or within fifteen (15) feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility;
D. On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or
E. From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicles windows, or for blocking, occupying or reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a public parking space; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. ((O)97-01, Enacted,  01/21/1997)

Section 10-4-3 Penalties
A. A violation of this Ordinance may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by both. If the person has been convicted of a violation of this section within the previous period of one (1) year, the person shall not be fined more than five hundred ($500) dollars and imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both.
B. In lieu of, or in addition to the penalty provided in this section, a person in violation of this Ordinance may be required to perform community service work as prescribed by the court. ((O)97-01, Enacted,  01/21/1997)

Section 10-4-4 Construction and Severability
A. Severability is intended throughout and within the provision of the Ordinance. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such judgement shall in no way affect or impair the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
B. This Ordinance is not intended to prescribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered.
C. This Ordinance is not intended to create a result through enforcement that is absurd, impossible or unreasonable. The Ordinance should be held inapplicable in any such cases where its application would be unconstitutional under the Constitution of the State of Arizona or the Constitution of the United States of America. ((O)97-01, Enacted,  01/21/1997)

Article 10-5 ALARM SYSTEMS

Sections:
10-5-1       Applicability
10-5-2       Definitions
10-5-3       Oro Valley Police Department Responsibilities
10-5-4       Alarm Business Duties
10-5-5       Alarm Subscriber Duties
10-5-6       Proprietor Alarm Responsibilities
10-5-7       Permits and Exemptions
10-5-8       Warning Notices and Penalties
10-5-9       Alarm System Prohibitions
10-5-10      Grace Period
10-5-11      Prohibition of Automatic or Prerecorded Messages or Signals Directly to the Town of Oro Valley
10-5-12      Confidentiality

Section 10-5-1 Applicability
This article is intended to regulate alarm systems or devices. It is further intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of these systems, devices and services and to ensure that Police Department personnel will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual criminal activity as a result of responding to false alarms. This article specifically encompasses subscriber "Burglar Alarms," "Robbery Alarms," "Panic Alarms," "Holdup Alarms," and "Proprietor Alarms," both audible and inaudible (silent). The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm systems which are owned or maintained by the Town of Oro Valley and installed on premises in which the Town has a property interest. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-2 Definitions
Act of God. An unusual, extraordinary, sudden and unexpected manifestation of the forces of nature, which cannot be prevented by reasonable human care, skill or foresight.
Alarm or Alarm System. Any electrical instrument(s) or other device(s) which as one of its purposes is used to protect buildings, premises or persons from criminal acts or unauthorized entry through the emission or transmission of a sound or signal.
Alarm Business. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who (which) owns or conducts the business of any one or more of the following: selling, leasing, renting, maintaining or monitoring alarm systems, devices or services.
Common Cause. A common technical difficulty or malfunction which causes an alarm system to generate a series of false alarms. Said series of false alarms shall be counted as one false alarm only if the false alarms have all occurred within a seventy-two (72) hour period, and the responsible alarm business has documented, to the Police Chief, or his designee, the action taken to rectify the cause and a thirty (30) day grace period expires with the alarm system generating no additional false alarms from the documented cause.
False Alarms. Any activation of an alarm not caused by or a result of a criminal act or unauthorized entry, except for activation for testing purposes when the Police Department has been given advance notice of such testing, or activation caused by the Police Department.
Proprietor Alarms. Any alarm or alarm system which is not leased or rented from, or owned or maintained under contract by an alarm business. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-3 Oro Valley Police Department Responsibilities
The provisions of this article shall be administered in a manner prescribed by the Police Chief. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-4 Alarm Business Duties
The duties of an alarm business shall be as follows:
A. To install an alarm or alarm system compatible with the environment and be available to maintain the alarm or alarm system in good working oder and to take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms.
B. To instruct each of its alarm subscribers and/or principal occupants of the buildings or premises protected by an alarm system in the proper use and operation of the system. Such instructions will specifically include all necessary instructions in turning the alarm on and off in avoiding false alarms.
C. To provide each purchase and subscriber with a copy of the provisions of this article relating to alarm subscriber duties, false alarm assessments and appeal procedures.
D. Upon leasing or renting an alarm system:
    1. To conspicuously place on the premises a tag identifying the pertinent alarm business including the telephone number to call when the alarm has been activated.
    2. To maintain records of the location of these alarm systems, devices or services and the name and telephone number of the person and two alternates to be notified whenever the alarm is activated and to readily report such information to the Police Department upon request.
    3. To inactivate or cause to be inactivated the audible alarm within thirty (30) minutes of the notification of its activation in the event the primary and alternate cannot be contacted or do not respond.
E. Upon leasing, renting, selling or monitoring an alarm system:
    1. To establish a central receiving station in order to monitor these alarm systems.
    2. To organize its central receiving station in order to be able to readily and positively identify the type of alarm and if there is more than one system.
    3. To maintain records as to each of these alarm systems, devices or services which should include the name of the owner, or occupant of the premises, the name and telephone number of the subscriber, or primary person and at least two alternates responsible for responding to the premises when the alarm is activated and information concerning whether the alarm system includes an audible alarm.
    4. To make notification of activated alarm systems in the manner prescribed by the Police Chief, or his designee, including such reasonable information concerning the alarm system as the Police Department may request.
    5. If requested, to arrange for either the alarm subscriber, an alarm agent or other responsible representative to go to the premises of an activated alarm system within thirty (30) minutes of the activation of the alarm in order to be available to assist the Police in determining the reason for the activation and securing the premises. In no event shall there be an unreasonable delay in arriving at the location of the alarm.
F. Alarm businesses which do not monitor, maintain, service or install alarms or alarm systems shall not be subject to subsections A, B, C, D, E, or F of this section, but shall be responsible for instructing each person who purchases an alarm or alarm system in the proper use and operation of the alarm, informing each alarm subscriber or alarm purchaser to contact the Oro Valley Police Department for information regarding this Article, and advising each alarm subscriber of the problem of false alarms. Such instructions will specifically include all necessary instructions in turning off said alarm(s) and in avoiding false alarms. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-5 Alarm Subscriber Duties
The duties of an alarm subscriber shall be as follows:
A. To instruct all personnel who are authorized to place the system or device into operation in the appropriate method of operation, and to lock and secure all points of entry, such as doors and windows.
B. To inform all personnel who are authorized to place the alarm system into operation of the provisions of this article emphasizing the importance of avoiding false alarms. A current copy of the provisions of this article shall be maintained on the premises and be made available to persons who are authorized to place an alarm system into operation.
C. To respond to the scene of an activated alarm within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm activation after being notified by the subscriber’s alarm company or the Oro Valley Police Department. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-6 Proprietor Alarm Responsibilities
A. To be familiar with the provisions of this article.
B. To maintain the alarm or alarm system in good working order and take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms.
C. Upon the purchase of any alarm system, device or service which includes an audible alarm:
    1. To inactivate or cause to be inactivated the alarm system within thirty (30) minutes of notification of its activation. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-7 Permits and Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles and audible fire alarms. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-8 Warning Notices and Penalties
A. Any alarm system which has four (4) or more false alarms within any consecutive three hundred sixty-five day (365) period shall be subject to assessment as provided herein. Warning letters detailing dates and times of the first three (3) false alarms along with information on assessments for future false alarms will be mailed to the subscriber and their alarm company within seven (7) days of the third false alarm.
B. If the Police Department records four (4) or more false alarms within any consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period:
    1. The Police Department shall notify both the alarm subscriber and alarm business or the proprietor alarm owner by mail or fax of such fact and direct that a report be submitted to the Police Chief within twenty (20) calendar days of the date of the mailing. The report shall contain:
        a. A description of the action taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarm.
        b. Specific defenses, if any, why the alleged false alarms should not be considered false alarms. Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act of God, common-cause or action of the telephone company shall constitute affirmative defenses to an assessment for the particular false alarm.
    2. The report required in paragraph (1) shall be received by the Police Chief or his designee within the time specified. If the report is not timely submitted, any notified party shall be deemed to have waived his right to any further review or hearing as provided herein and the alarm business and the alarm subscriber or the proprietor alarm owner operating the alarm system generating the false alarms will be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) of this subsection.
    3. If the report required in paragraph (1) is submitted, the Police Chief or his designee shall review the corrective action taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms and the specific defenses, if any, set forth in the report to the initial determination of the false alarms has been accepted, a notice shall be sent to all notified parties that no citation will be made at that time. The notice shall specifically set forth the findings and conclusions of the Police Chief with respect to the review of the report submitted.
    4. If the Police Chief or his designee determine that a defense to the initial determination of false alarms has not been alleged or accepted, a citation shall be sent forth by mail to both the alarm subscriber and the alarm business or the proprietor alarm owner that they will be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) of this subsection upon a fourth false alarm.
    5. The assessment(s) imposed pursuant to paragraphs (2) and (4) of this subsection shall be a minimum civil fine in an amount of fifty-five dollars ($55) per false alarm up to the fifth false alarm and one hundred fifty dollars ($150) per alarm thereafter (sixth false alarm or up). The property owner or resident and the alarm business will be jointly and severally responsible for the payment of any assessments imposed upon their alarm system. The owner or resident of the alarm site shall be responsible for the payment of any assessments imposed upon a proprietor alarm system. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-9 Alarm System Prohibitions
Upon a final determination of assessment, the responsible party shall tender the fee assessed immediately or discontinue operation of the alarm system. In the event the operation of said alarm system is not discontinued and the assessment not tendered, its continued operation by the alarm subscriber, alarm business or proprietor alarm owner is unlawful and the unpaid balance will be subject to a charge of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month, compounded monthly, in addition to the assessment, plus whatever other conditions the Court may require. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-10 Grace Period
Newly installed and reinstalled alarm systems shall not be subject to the provisions of this article relating to the counting and assessment of false alarms for a period of thirty days from the date the alarm system becomes operational. For the purpose of this section, reinstalled alarm system means the installation of a new control panel. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-11 Prohibition of Automatic or Prerecorded Messages or Signals Directly to the Town of Oro Valley
No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects or dials a published emergency telephone number or any Town of Oro Valley telephone number and then reproduces any prerecorded message or signal; provided that this section shall not apply to a life safety alert system utilizing residential transmitting equipment designated for direct telephone access to dedicated control receiving equipment. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Section 10-5-12 Confidentiality
Information furnished and secured pursuant to this ordinance shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection, except in case of court action. ((O)98-07, Enacted,  03/18/1998)

Article 10-6 ANTI-GRAFFITI

Sections:
10-6-1       Purpose Statement
10-6-2       Definitions
10-6-3       Prohibited Acts
10-6-4       Accessibility of Graffiti Implements
10-6-5       Penalties
10-6-6       Removal of Graffiti by Perpetrator
10-6-7       Removal of Graffiti on Property by Owner or Town
10-6-8       Prevention Provisions

Section 10-6-1 Purpose Statement
The Town of Oro Valley is dedicated to providing Oro Valley residents with a safe and clean environment. Graffiti vandals jeopardize the integrity of this community and its residents. Oro Valley has a direct interest in expeditiously eradicating graffiti on all property within the town limits. Studies have shown that an immediate removal of all signs of graffiti is necessary. ((O)10-12, Enacted,  10/20/2010)

Section 10-6-2 Definitions
For the purposes of this code, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property.
B. Broad-tipped marker means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth (1/4) of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.
C. Etching equipment means any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface.
D. Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the Town Council.
E. Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, or brush.
F. Paint stick or graffiti means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in width.
G. Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
H. Public property means any asset owned by the Town of Oro Valley.
I. Residential property means a building, walls and structures surrounding or attached to property whose main purpose is for a place of dwelling or home.
J. Commercial property means buildings, walls, structures intended to generate a profit either from capital gain or rental income.
K. Utility company means public or privately owned electricity, natural gas, water, sewer, and/or communications companies.
L. Cover graffiti means to conceal graffiti with paint in lieu of removal of graffiti.
M. Remove graffiti means to eradicate by means of hydro-blasting or by using a chemical component or combination of techniques to remove graffiti. ((O)10-12, Enacted,  10/20/2010)

Section 10-6-3 Prohibited Acts
A. Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface on any Town-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant on any private property.
B. Possession of Graffiti Implements. 
    1. By Minors at or near School Facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, or upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession of broad-tipped markers or other instruments by a minor attending or traveling to or from school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a class at the school that formally requires the possession of broad-tipped markers or other such instruments. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of this section shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a broad-tipped marker.
    2. In Designated Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the Town or while in or within fifty (50) feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar type of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the Town. ((O)10-12, Enacted,  10/20/2010)

Section 10-6-4 Accessibility of Graffiti Implements
A. Furnishing to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause to permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, or paint stick to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the person.
B. Display and Storage. 
    1. Every person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers shall store the containers, sticks, or markers in an area continuously observable, through direct visual observation of surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course of business.
    2. In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers in an area as provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section, the establishment shall store the containers, sticks, and markers in an area not accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance.
C. Signage Required.  Every person who operates a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall:
    1. Place a sign in clear, public view or near the display of such products stating: “Graffiti is against the law. Any person who defaces real or personal property with paint or any other liquid or device is guilty of a crime punishable by imprisonment of up to 180 days and/or a fine up to $2,500.00.”
    2. Place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating: “Selling spray paint, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers to persons under 18 years of age is against the law and punishable by a fine of $2,500.00.” ((O)10-12, Enacted,  10/20/2010)

Section 10-6-5 Penalties
A. Fines and Imprisonment. Any person violating this code shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense; five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense; and one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each subsequent offense, or by imprisonment in jail or probation or by both fine and imprisonment and probation at the discretion of the court.
    1. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severably liable with the minor for payment of all fines.
    2. Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment may result in the filing of a lien on the parent’s or legal guardian’s property that includes the fine and administrative costs.
    3. Upon an application and finding of indigence, the court may decline to order fines against the minor, parents or guardian.
B. Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator’s offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severably liable with the minor to make the restitution.
C. Forfeiture of Personal Property. All personal property, including, but not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles and bicycles, used or intended to be used in violating this code may be forfeitable to the Town. In forfeiting such personal property, the Town may follow the procedures outlined in State statutes concerning forfeitures of personal property. In any forfeiture proceeding under this section, the court shall not order forfeiture unless it finds that the forfeiture is commensurate with the severity of the violation to the extent required by the Arizona and United States Constitutions.
D. Community Service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in this section, a minor or adult may be required to perform community service as described by the court based on the following minimum requirements:
    1. The minor or adult shall perform at least thirty (30) hours of community service within the Town boundaries of Oro Valley.
    2. At least one (1) parent or guardian of the minor or responsible adult may be in attendance a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the period of assigned community service.
    3. The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider.
    4. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have a rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that involves graffiti removal.
    5. Any minor determined to be a ward of the court under Arizona State law as a result of committing an offense in the town shall be required, at the Town’s option, to perform community service, including graffiti removal service of not less than thirty (30) hours nor more than eighty (80) hours.
E. Civil Responsibility for Damages for Wrongful Sale, Display or Storage. Any person who sells, displays or stores, or permits the sale, display or storage, of graffiti implements in violation of the provisions of this code shall be liable for all costs, including attorney’s fees and court costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, or such party’s prosecution of a civil claim for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or property repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully sold, displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this code; provided, that such liability shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500). ((O)11-09, Amended,  03/16/2011; (O)10-12, Enacted,  10/20/2010)

Section 10-6-6 Removal of Graffiti by Perpetrator
Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the Town or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the Chief of Police, the Town Engineer, or any Town department head, as authorized by the Town Council. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this code. Where an unemancipated minor applies graffiti, the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. ((O)10-12, Enacted,  10/20/2010)

Section 10-6-7 Removal of Graffiti on Property by Owner or Town
Once graffiti is identified, the Town will notify the owner of the defaced property that the Town will be sending a graffiti abatement team to eradicate the graffiti within five (5) business days unless it is eradicated sooner by the property owner. ((O)10-12, Enacted,  10/20/2010)

Section 10-6-8 Prevention Provisions
A. Design of Potential Graffiti-Attracting Surfaces. Any applicant for design review approval, conditional use permit, special use permit, unclassified use permit, development agreement, or other form of development or building permit shall, to the extent feasible, consider and employ site and architectural measures to discourage graffiti. The specific design criteria and standards are identified in the adopted design criteria and standards of the Oro Valley Zoning Code revised. The site and architectural measures to be addressed where appropriate include, but are not limited to, the following:
    1. Use of protective coating or other paint product specifically manufactured to provide for the effective and expeditious removal of graffiti;
    2. Use of additional lighting;
    3. Use of non-solid fencing;
    4. Use of landscaping to discourage access to large expansive building and site walls; or
    5. Use of architectural design to break up long continuous walls or solid areas.
B. Design of Existing Graffiti-Attracting Surfaces. 
    1. At Owner’s Expense. Any surface of a structure on a parcel of land that has been defaced with graffiti equal to or more than five (5) times in twelve (12) months shall be declared a public nuisance and required to be retrofitted, at the cost of the property owner, with features or qualities as may be established by the Town as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal of graffiti. The Town will provide support in the retrofit by providing information sources. In exercising the authority hereunder, the Town may not impose a cost on the property owner of greater than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).
    2. At Town’s Cost. The owner of property containing a surface that has been defaced with graffiti equal to or more than five (5) times in twelve (12) months shall permit the Town, at the Town’s discretion, to enter the property and, at the Town’s cost, make modifications as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal of graffiti if the Town chooses to do so. The Town of Oro Valley Police Department shall provide increased surveillance in high activity areas. ((O)11-09, Amended,  03/16/2011; (O)10-12, Enacted,  10/20/2010)

Article 10-7 REGULATING PICKETING OF A PRIVATE RESIDENCE IN RESIDENTIALLY ZONED DISTRICTS

Sections:
10-7-1       Definitions
10-7-2       Picketing of Private Residence Prohibited
10-7-3       Exemptions
10-7-4       Time Restrictions
10-7-5       Warning
10-7-6       Defense to Prosecution
10-7-7       For Penalty Provisions; See Section 10-1-23

Section 10-7-1 Definitions
A. Directed, focused, or targeted at means that a particular private residence or any of its occupants has been made the sole object of picketing and that the picketing takes place directly in front of the particular private residence or the private residence on either side of the targeted residence.
B. Picket means to station or post one or more persons, with or without a sign, before or about a particular residence.
C. Private residence means a single-family, duplex, or multi-family dwelling.
D. Reserved.
E. Residential zoned district means a section of the Town, which the General Plan has designated, for single-family, duplex, or multi-family dwellings. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-7-2 Picketing of Private Residence Prohibited
It shall be unlawful to picket any private residence for any reason except as provided for elsewhere within this article. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-7-3 Exemptions
Nothing herein shall prohibit:
A. The picketing of a residence which is used as the occupant’s sole place of business.
B. The picketing of a residence used as a place of public meeting.
C. A person or group of persons from marching in a residential zoned area without stopping at a particular private residence; or
D. A person or group of persons from marching in a residential zoned area on a defined route without stopping at any particular residence or residences. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-7-4 Time Restrictions
Picketing in residential zoned areas is permitted only during the following hours:
A. Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
B. Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
C. Sunday 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-7-5 Warning
Before a person may be arrested for violating Section 10-7-2, the person must have been ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation by:
A. A police officer;
B. A member of the fire department; or
C. A person with authority to control the use of the residence which is the "focus" or "target" of the picketing. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-7-6 Defense to Prosecution
It is a defense to prosecution under this Section that a person:
A. Was not given a warning as provided in Section 10-7-5; or
B. Promptly obeyed a warning as provided in Section 10-7-5. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-7-7 For Penalty Provisions; See Section 10-1-23

Article 10-8 LASER POINTERS

Sections:
10-8-1       Purpose and Intent
10-8-2       Definitions
10-8-3       Reserved
10-8-4       Prohibited Uses
10-8-5       For Penalty Provision; See Section 10-1-23

Section 10-8-1 Purpose and Intent
The Town Council of Oro Valley enacts this Code to address public safety, health and nuisance concerns created by the mishandling of laser pointer devices.
The Council finds that:
A. The Federal Drug Administration and other agencies have issued warnings on the misuse of laser pointers, particularly in connection with minors;
B. Laser pointers misuse has been associated with visual impairment, such as temporary "flashblindness", headaches and "afterimages";
C. In addition to visual impairment, exposure to lasers can cause temporary distraction or panic, posing the potential for serious physical harm in some cases;
D. Laser pointer beams have been misused by minors and others to distract, harass, alarm or annoy persons or animals, and can be mistaken for the laser sighting device of a firearm; and
E. Laser pointer use with the Town threatens public peace, safety and welfare, and should be regulated.
The Council enacts this Code pursuant to its police powers, as specified in the Arizona Revised Statutes. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-8-2 Definitions
In this Code, the following words and terms shall have these defined meanings;
A. Town is the Town of Oro Valley.
B. Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of the age of a minor.
C. Laser pointer means any hand-held device containing a small diode laser that is capable of emitting an intense beam of light.
D. Minor means an unemancipated person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
E. Person means an individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, trustee, receiver, assignee or any other legal entity. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-8-3 Reserved

Section 10-8-4 Prohibited Uses
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to direct the light from a laser pointer into the eye or eyes of another person.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to direct the light from a laser pointer upon another person, a person’s vehicle, or upon an animal, without consent.
C. This Section shall not apply to:
    1. A person who is licensed or otherwise authorized by law to use a laser device in the person’s profession if the laser device is used by the person in discharging or attempting to discharge the person’s official duties; or
    2. A law enforcement officer who uses a laser device in discharging or attempting to discharge the officer’s official duties. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-8-5 For Penalty Provision; See Section 10-1-23

Article 10-9 HANDBILLS

Sections:
10-9-1       Intent and Purpose
10-9-2       Definitions
10-9-3       Posting Notice, Placard, Bill, Etc., Prohibited
10-9-4       Throwing Handbills in Public Places Prohibited
10-9-5       Placing Handbills In or Upon Vehicles Prohibited
10-9-6       Distribution of Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant Private Premises Prohibited
10-9-7       Distribution of Handbills Where Prohibition Properly Posted
10-9-8       Distributing Handbills At Private Premises; Exceptions
10-9-9       Handbills Depicting Certain Matter Prohibited
10-9-10      Existing Ordinances Not Affected
10-9-11      For Penalty Provision; See Section 10-1-23

Section 10-9-1 Intent and Purpose
The Town Council of the Town of Oro Valley finds and declares that to protect the people against the nuisance of and incident to the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the regulation thereof and to that end the purposes of this Code are specifically declared to be as follows:
A. To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter;
B. To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial and non-commercial handbills; and
C. To preserve the people’s constitutional right to receive and disseminate information. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-2 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. Commercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
    1. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing;
    2. Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales;
    3. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be derived to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this State, or under any ordinance of this Town; or
    4. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. This shall not apply to political materials.
B. Newspaper shall mean and include any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.
C. Non-Commercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or a newspaper.
D. Obscene means material which depicts or describes sexual conduct that is objectionable or offensive to accepted standards of decency which the average person, applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interests or material which depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable State law, which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
E. Person shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
F. Private premises shall mean and include any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited, uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtent to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
G. Public place shall mean and include any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, business parking lots, grounds, and buildings. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-3 Posting Notice, Placard, Bill, Etc., Prohibited
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any public way or public place, or any lamp post, electric light, telegraph, telephone or trolley line pole, or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree-box, or upon the piers, columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the United States, or the State of Arizona, and the Ordinances of the Town. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-4 Throwing Handbills in Public Places Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any public place within the Town. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any commercial or non-commercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such handbill. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-5 Placing Handbills In or Upon Vehicles Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of ths Section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any commercial or non-commercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle, who is willing to accept the same. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-6 Distribution of Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant Private Premises Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are uninhabited or vacant. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-7 Distribution of Handbills Where Prohibition Properly Posted
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisements", or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such commercial or non-commercial handbills left upon such premises. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-8 Distributing Handbills At Private Premises; Exceptions
A. No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon private premises except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, that, except where the premises are posted as provided in this Code or where anyone upon the premises requests otherwise, a person may place or deposit any such commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon such private premises, if such handbill is contained in a plastic bag ventilated with airholes throughout the surface of the bag, or unventilated plastic bag no greater than six (6) inches in width, or if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law regulations.
B. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or to newspapers; except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-9 Handbills Depicting Certain Matter Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or transmit any sign, or any handbill:
A. Which is reasonably likely to incide or to produce imminent lawless action; or
B. Which is obscene or unlawful. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-10 Existing Ordinances Not Affected
This Code shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any Ordinance ever ordained, either prohibiting, regulating or licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, or any person using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise, or for commercial sales, not covered herein. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-9-11 For Penalty Provision; See Section 10-1-23

Article 10-10 LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERINGS

Sections:
10-10-1      Definition - Loud Gathering Unlawful
10-10-2      Notice of Unruly Gathering Posting
10-10-3      Notification of Property Owner
10-10-4      Subsequent Unruly Gathering a Civil Infraction; Parties Liable
10-10-5      Penalty
10-10-6      Enforcement

Section 10-10-1 Definition - Loud Gathering Unlawful
An unruly gathering is a gathering of five (5) or more persons on any private property, including property used to conduct business, in a manner which causes a disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property by any person or persons, and shall be unlawful. Such disturbances include, but are not limited to, excessive noise or traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, drinking in public, the service of alcohol to minors or consumption of alcohol by minors, fighting, disturbing the peace, and littering. An unruly gathering may be abated by reasonable means including, but not limited to, citation or arrest of violators under applicable ordinances or state statutes, including this one. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-10-2 Notice of Unruly Gathering Posting
A. The premises at which the unruly gathering occurs shall be posted with a notice stating that the intervention of the police has been necessitated by the occurrence of an unruly gathering at the premises. The notice shall state the date of the police intervention, and that any subsequent unruly gathering on the same premises within a one hundred and twenty (120) day period shall result in liability for the penalties provided for in this article. Parties liable include any persons in attendance causing the gathering to be unruly, or any owner, occupant or tenant of the premises at which the unruly gathering occurred, or any sponsor of the event constituting the unruly gathering.
B. Premises shall be posted with a notice as provided in this section each time an unruly gathering occurs. In the event that premises are already posted at the time of the subsequent posting, the one hundred twenty day period from the date of the existing posting shall be extended to one hundred twenty days from the date of the subsequent posting. Once premises are initially posted as a result of an unruly gathering and the conduct causing the gathering to be unruly has ceased, a resumption of unruly behavior on the premises resulting in another police response shall constitute a new and separate unruly gathering for the purposes of this article.
C. The owner, occupant, or tenant of the posted premises shall be responsible for ensuring that the notice is not removed, moved, defaced or concealed. The removal, movement, defacement, or concealment of a posted notice shall be a civil infraction carrying a penalty of a minimum mandatory two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed under this article. The owner, occupant or tenant of the premises or sponsor of the event constituting the unruly gathering, if present, shall be consulted as to the location in which such notice is posted in order to achieve the security of the notice and to provide for its prominent display.
D. An owner, occupant or tenant of the posted premises may contest the posting of the notice by filing a written application for hearing with the Oro Valley Magistrate Court requesting that the court determine whether justification existed for posting of the notice under the provisions of this article. The application shall be filed within ten (10) days after the initial posting of the notice, or, if the notice is given by mail, within ten (10) days after mailing the notice, and in no circumstances thereafter. The court shall set a time and date for a hearing to be held not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the written application for a hearing and shall notify both the applicant and the town prosecutor’s office of the hearing date. At the hearing, the Town shall prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the posting of the notice was justified pursuant to the provisions of this article. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-10-3 Notification of Property Owner
Notification of the posting of the notice of the unruly gathering shall be mailed to any property owner at the address shown on the Pima County property tax assessment records. The notification shall advise the property owner that any subsequent unruly gathering within one hundred and twenty (120) days on the same premises shall result in liability of the property owner for all applicable penalties as provided in this article. Notification shall be made by certified mail. The return receipt shall be prima facie evidence of service for court proceedings. The owner of the property may also be notified by telephone and will be documented once individual contact with the owner has been made and the owner notified of the unruly gathering and posting. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-10-4 Subsequent Unruly Gathering a Civil Infraction; Parties Liable
The occurrence of an unruly gathering on the same premises more than once in any one hundred and twenty day period shall be a civil infraction. The following parties, if found responsible for such an infraction, shall be liable for the penalties provided for in Section 10-10-5.
A. The owner of the property where the unruly gathering occurred, provided that notification of posting was mailed to the owner of the property as provided for in Section 10-10-3, and that the unruly gathering occurred not less than two (2) weeks after the mailing of such notification.
B. The owner, occupant or tenant of the property where the unruly gathering occurred.
C. The person or persons who organized or sponsored the event constituting the unruly gathering.
D. Any person in attendance at the unruly gathering who engaged in any conduct causing the gathering to be unruly.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose liability on the owner, occupant or tenant of the premises or sponsor of the event constituting the unruly gathering, for the conduct of the perons who are in attendance without the express or implied consent of the owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor, as long as the owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor has taken all steps reasonably necessary to exclude the uninvited persons from the premises. Where an invited person engages in unlawful conduct which the owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor could not reasonably foresee and could not reasonably control without the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct of the person shall not be attributable to the owner, occupant, tenant, or sponsor for the purposes of determining liability under this Section. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-10-5 Penalty
The penalty for a party found responsible for the occurrence of a subsequent unruly gathering, as provided in Section 10-10-4, shall be a minimum mandatory fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first violation, a minimum mandatory fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second violation, and minimum mandatory fines of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the third or each subsequent violation thereafter.
The civil fines provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed by law for particular violations of the law committed during the course of an unruly gathering.
The court may also enter an order of abatement against a party found responsible for a violation of this article. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-10-6 Enforcement
The police department is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article provided that enforcement is initiated by a complaint from a member of the public. The complaining member of the public shall not necessarily be required to appear in court before a violator may be found responsible. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Article 10-11 NEWSRACK

Sections:
10-11-1      Purpose
10-11-2      Definitions
10-11-3      Newsracks Prohibited
10-11-4      Permit Required
10-11-5      Application for Permit
10-11-6      Conditions for Permit
10-11-7      Hold Harmless
10-11-8      Newsrack Identification Required
10-11-9      Location, Placement, and Number of Newsracks
10-11-10     Standards for Maintenance and Installation
10-11-11     Display of Certain Matter Prohibited
10-11-12     Violations
10-11-13     Appeals
10-11-14     Abandonment

Section 10-11-1 Purpose
A. Purpose. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, morals and general welfare of persons in the Town of Oro Valley in their use of public rights-of-ways through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size and servicing of newsracks on the public rights-of-ways so as to:
    1. Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;
    2. Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress to, or egress from, any place of business or from the street to the sidewalk;
    3. Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mailboxes and similar appurtenances, and access to locations used for public transportation purposes;
    4. Reduce visual blight on the public rights-of-way, protect the aesthetics and value of surrounding properties, and protect the quiet of residential areas;
    5. Reduce exposure of the town to personal injury or property damage claims and litigation; and
    6. Protect the right to distribute information protected by the United States and Arizona Constitutions through the use of newsracks.
B. Preservation of Constitutional rights. It is not the intent of this Code in any way to discriminate against, regulate or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution or dissemination of any printed material that is constitutionally protected. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-2 Definitions
As used in this Code, unless the content otherwise clearly indicates:
A. Block means one (1) side of a street between two (2) consecutive interacting streets.
B. Distributor means the person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way.
C. Explicit sexual acts means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of genitals; whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.
D. Newsrack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or other news periodicals.
E. Obscene means material which depicts or describes sexual conduct that is objectionable or offensive to accepted standards of decency which the average person, applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interests; or material which depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable State law, and taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
F. Parkway means the area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel.
G. Person means any person or persons, or entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or joint venture.
H. Pictorial material means any material suggesting or conveying a visual image, and includes, but is not limited to, a photograph, painting or drawing. Any pictorial material is "obscene" if all of the following apply:
    1. The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that it appeals to prurient interests when the publication or material is considered as a whole; and
    2. It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive manner, sexual behavior as defined in Section 1; and
    3. It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value when the publication or material is considered as a whole.
I. Public Works Director refers to the Public Works Director or the designee of the Public Works Director.
J. Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
K. Sexual arousal, gratification or affront when used in this Code to state the purpose or effect of statements, words, pictures or illustrations means depictions of the following subjects or acts:
    1. Sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal contact, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprolagnia, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
    2. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or
    3. Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or
    4. Fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast; or
    5. Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or
    6. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or
    7. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
L. Sexual behavior means the patently offensive representation, depiction or description of any of the following:
    1. Ultimate sexual acts, actual or simulated, including vaginal intercourse between a male and a female, and anal intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of gender.
    2. Masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals.
    3. The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one individual upon another, or by an individual upon himself, for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast.
    4. Ultimate sexual acts, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal.
M. Sidewalk means any surface provided or the exclusive use of pedestrians.
N. Street means all the area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-3 Newsracks Prohibited
A. No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon the roadway of any public street.
B. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway:
    1. When such installation, use, or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property;
    2. When such site or location is used for public utility purposes, roadside right-of-way public transportation purposes, or other governmental use;
    3. When such newsrack unreasonably interfers with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including parked or stopped vehicles; the ingress in or egress from any residence or place of business; the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location;
    4. When such newsrack interfers with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery; or
    5. In any other manner inconsistent with or in violation of the provisions of this Code. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-4 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place, maintain or operate on any public street or sidewalk, or in any other public street or sidewalk, or in any other public way or place, in the Town of Oro Valley any newsrack without first having obtained a permit from the Public Works Director specifying the exact location of such newsrack. One permit may be issued to include any number of newsracks, and shall be signed by the applicant. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-5 Application for Permit
A. Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the Public Works Director upon such form as shall be provided by him, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the proposed specific location of said newsrack, and shall be signed by the applicant.
B. From the above application information the Public Works Director shall approve the locations. He shall be guided therein solely by the standards and criteria set forth in this Code. In any case where the Public Works Director disapproves of a particular location, such disapproval shall be without prejudice to the registrant designating a different location or locations. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-6 Conditions for Permit
A. Permits shall be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks without prior inspection of the location but such newsrack or newsracks and the installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon observance of the provisions of this Code. Permits shall be issued within twenty-four (24) hours (excluding Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays) after the application has been filed. A permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be required. This fee shall only cover the expense (including staff time) of processing the paperwork. The above fee is based on these expenses
B. Such permits shall be valid for three (3) years and shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for original applications referred to in Section 10-11-5 and upon payment of the ten dollar ($10.00) permit fee. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-7 Hold Harmless
Every owner of a newsrack who places or maintains a newsrack on a public sidewalk or parkway in the Town of Oro Valley shall file a written statement with the Public Works Director in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney, whereby such owner agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Town, its officers, and employees, from any loss, liability, or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use and/or maintenance of a newsrack within the Town of Oro Valley. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-8 Newsrack Identification Required
Every person who places or maintains a newsrack on the streets of the Town of Oro Valley shall have his permit number, name, address, and telephone number affixed to the newsrack in a place where such information may be easily seen. Prior to the designation of location by the Public Works Director under Section 10-11-9 herein, the registrant shall present evidence of compliance with this Section. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-9 Location, Placement, and Number of Newsracks
A. Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into, or over any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the following provisions of this Section:
    1. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.
    2. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture located in the public right-of-way, except to other newsracks.
    3. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than eight (8) feet along a curb, and a space of not less than three (3) feet shall separate each group of newsracks.
    4. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
        a. Within five (5) feet of any marked crosswalk.
        b. Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
        c. Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or other emergency facility.
        d. Within five (5) feet of any driveway.
        e. Within three (3) feet ahead or twenty-five (25) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop.
        f. Within five (5) feet of the outer end of any bus bench.
        g. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet.
        h. Within three (3) feet of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping, or within three (3) feet of any display window or any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes.
        i. Within one hundred (100) feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the street in the same block containing the same issue or edition of the same publication.
        j. On any access ramp for disabled persons.
        k. Within three (3) feet of any pole for a street light, telephone poles, etc.
    5. No more than eight (8) newsracks shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of two hundred (200) feet in any direction within the same block of the same street; provided, however, that no more than sixteen (16) newsracks shall be allowed on any one block. In determining which newsracks shall be permitted to be located or to remain if already in place, the Public Works Director shall be guided solely by the following criteria:
        a. First priority shall be daily publications (published five (5) or more days per week).
        b. Second priority shall be publications published one (1) day per week.
        c. Third priority shall be publications published one (1) day per week.
        d. Fourth priority shall be publications published less than one (1) day per week. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-10 Standards for Maintenance and Installation
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:
A. No newsrack shall exceed five (5) feet in height, three (3) inches in width, or two (2) feet in thickness.
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event the person is unable to receive the paid for publication. The coin-return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism, or to give the notices provided for in this Code.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be served and maintained so that:
    1. It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
    2. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof;
    3. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon;
    4. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations; or, the opaque material should not have visible tears or openings;
    5. The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; and
    6. The structural parts thereof are not broken, dented or unduly misshapen. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-11 Display of Certain Matter Prohibited
Publications offered for sale from newsracks, placed or maintained on or projecting over the street or sidewalk, shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from the street or sidewalk any of the following:
A. Any publication or material which exposes to public view any pictorial material that is obscene;
B. Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual interest and arousal, gratification or affront;
C. Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts as defined in this Code where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual interest and arousal, gratification or affront; or
D. Any picture or illustration depecting explicit sexual acts as defined in this Code where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual interest and arousal, gratification or affront. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-12 Violations
Upon determination by the Public Works Director that a newsrack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Code, an order to correct the offending condition shall be issued to the distributor of the newsrack. Such order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition, suggest actions necessary to correct the condition, and inform the newsrack distributor of the right to appeal. Failure to properly correct the offending condition within five (5) days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the mailing date of the order or to appeal the order within three (3) days after its receipt shall result in the offending newsrack being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If the offending newsrack is not properly identified as to owner under the provisions of Section 10-11-8 hereof, it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property. An impound fee, which shall be measured by the Town’s cost and expense of impounding, shall be assessed against each newsrack summarily removed. The Public Works Director shall cause inspection to be made of the corrected condition or of a newsrack reinstalled after removed under this Section. The distributor of said newsrack shall be charged an inspection fee for each newsrack so inspected. This charge shall be in addition to all other fees and charges required pursuant to this Code. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-13 Appeals
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action taken under the provisions of this Code may appeal and shall be appraised of his right to appeal to the Town’s Appeals Board. An appeal must be perfected within three (3) days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or action by filing with the Office of the Town Clerk a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least five (5) days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The Appeals Board shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the Public Works Director should not be upheld. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Appeals Board shall make a final and conclusive decision. This decision shall be immediately appealable to a court of competent jurisdiction. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-11-14 Abandonment
In the event that a newsrack remains empty for a period of thirty (30) continuous days, the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may be treated in the manner as provided in Section 10-11-12 for newsracks in violation of the provisions of this Code. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Article 10-12 PARADE AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY

Sections:
10-12-1      Definitions
10-12-2      Permit Required
10-12-4      Application
10-12-5      Fees
10-12-6      Police Protection
10-12-7      Standards for Issuance
10-12-8      Non-Discrimination
10-12-9      Notice of Denial of Application
10-12-10     Alternative Permit
10-12-11     Appeal Procedure
10-12-12     Notice to Town and Other Officials
10-12-13     Contents or Permit
10-12-14     Duties of Permittee
10-12-15     Prohibitions
10-12-16     Public Conduct During Parades or Public Assemblies
10-12-17     Revocation of Permit
10-12-18     For Penalty Provision; See Section 10-1-23

Section 10-12-1 Definitions
A. Chief of Police means the Chief of Police of the Town of Oro Valley.
B. Town means the Town of Oro Valley.
C. Parade means any march, demonstration, procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof upon the streets, parks or other public grounds within the Town with an intent to attract public attention that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets, parks or other public grounds.
D. Parade or public assembly permit means a permit as required by this Code.
E. Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
F. Public assembly means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of more than twenty (20) persons for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or occupies any public area in a place open to the general public.
G. Sidewalk is any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.
H. Street is any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way, or median trip thereof. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-2 Permit Required
This Code shall not apply to the following:
A. Funeral Processions;
B. Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;
C. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and
D. Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within two (2) days of such public assembly, provided that the organizer thereof gives written notice to the Town at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such parade or public assembly. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-4 Application
A. A person seeking a parade or general assembly permit shall file an application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer and the application shall be signed by the applicant under oath.
B. For single, non-recurring parades or public assemblies, an application for a permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police at least ten (10) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The Chief of Police may waive the minimum ten (10) day filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the parade or public assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and the Town services required in connection with the event, the Chief of Police determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety.
C. For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering all such parades or assemblies during that calendar year may be filed with the Chief of Police at least sixty (60) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the date and time at which the first such parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The Chief of Police may waive the minimum sixty (60) day period after due consideration of the factors specified in subsection B above.
D. The application for parade or public assembly permit shall set forth the following information:
    1. The name, addresses and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such a parade or public assembly;
    2. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the headquarters of the organization for which the parade or public assembly is to be conducted, if any, and the authorized and responsible heads of the organization;
    3. The requested date of the parade or public assembly;
    4. The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the termination point;
    5. The appropriate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade or public assembly and the type of animals and description of the vehicles;
    6. The hours when such parade or public assembly will start and terminate;
    7. A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
    8. The location by street of an assembly area for such parade or public assembly;
    9. The time at which unites the parade or public assembly will begin to assemble at any such area;
    10. The intervals of space to be maintained between units of such parade or public assembly;
    11. If the parade or or public assembly is designed to be held by, or on behalf of, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file a letter from that person with the Chief of Police authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;
    12. The type of public assembly, including a description of activities planned during the event;
    13. A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, signs or other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the parade or public assembly;
    14. The approximate number of participants (spectators are by definition not participants);
    15. The approximate number of spectators;
    16. A designation of any public facilities or equipment to be utilized; and
    17. Any additional facts that the Chief of Police finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-5 Fees
A. A non-refundable fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to cover administrative costs of processing the permit shall be paid to the Town of Oro Valley by the applicant when the application is filed.
B. If the application is for the use of any Town property or if any Town services shall be required for the parade or public assembly, the applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, the charges for those services in accordance with a schedule of service costs approved by the Town Council by resolution. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-6 Police Protection
A. The Chief of Police shall determine whether and to what extent additional police protection is reasonably necessary for the parade or public assembly for traffic control and public safety. The Chief of Police shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections blocked, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the street and sidewalks. The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in determining the amount of police protection necessary. If possible, without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of public safety, regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the event. If the Chief of Police deems additional police protection for the public assembly necessary, he shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police protection deemed necessary by the Chief of Police at the sole expense of the applicant.
B. Persons engaging in parades or public assemblies conducted for the sole purpose of public issue speech protected under the First Amendment are not required to pay for any police protection provided by the Town. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-7 Standards for Issuance
A. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided herein when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
    1. The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location;
    2. The conduct of the parade of public assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of Town police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the Town;
    3. The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at public assembly points of the parade or public assembly will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such public assembly area.
    4. The conduct of the parade or public assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property;
    5. The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without reasonable delays en route.
    6. Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas;
    7. There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade or public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected;
    8. The applicant has secured the police protection, if any, required under Section 10-12-6.
    9. Such parade or public assembly is not for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods or event that is primarily for private profit, and the parade itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the parade.
    10. No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time and location is already granted or has been received and will be granted.
    11. No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time but location is already granted or has been received and will be granted, and the police resources required for that prior parade or public assembly are so great that in combination with the subsequent proposed application, the resulting deploying of police services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; and
    12. No event is scheduled elsewhere in the Town where the police resources required for that event are so great that the deployment of police services for the proposed parade or public assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property.
B. No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a Town street, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the structure is obtained from the Town Council. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-8 Non-Discrimination
The Chief of Police shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this Code based upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation or gender related grounds. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-9 Notice of Denial of Application
The Chief of Police shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a parade or public assembly permit but in no event shall grant or deny a permit less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event. If the Chief of Police disapproves the application, he shall notify the applicant either by personal delivery or certified mail at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event of his action and state the reasons for denial. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-10 Alternative Permit
A. The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade or public assembly permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade or public assembly at a date, time, location, or route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police.
B. An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade or public assembly permit issued under this Code. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-11 Appeal Procedure
A. Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or public assembly permit to the Town Council. The denied applicant shall make the appeal within five (5) days after receipt of the denial by filing a written notice with the Chief of Police and a copy of the notice with the Town Clerk. The Town Council shall act upon the appeal at the next scheduled meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal.
B. In the event that the Town Council rejects an applicant’s appeal, the applicant may file an immediate request for review with a court of competent jurisdiction. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-12 Notice to Town and Other Officials
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the following:
A. The Mayor and Town Manager;
B. The Town Attorney;
C. The Fire Marshall;
D. The Director of the Department of Public Works;
E. The Postmaster; and
F. The manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed parade or public assembly. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-13 Contents or Permit
Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information:
A. Starting and approximate ending time;
B. Minimum speed of parade units;
C. Maximum speed of parade units;
D. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between parade units;
E. The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the parade or public assemly;
F. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
G. Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this Code. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-14 Duties of Permittee
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
B. The parade or public assembly chairman or other person heading such activity shall carry the parade or public assembly permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-15 Prohibitions
The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and public assemblies:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any parade or public assembly without first having obtained a permit as herein provided;
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or public assembly for which the person knows a permit has not been granted;
C. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a duly licensed parade or public assembly to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit;
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or public assembly activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights or residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property;
E. It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any parade or public assembly to carry or possess any length of metal, lumber, wood, or similar material for purposes of displaying a sign, poster, plaque or notice, unless such object is one-fourth inches (1/4") or less in thickness and two inches (2") or less in width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-fourths inches (3/4") in its thickest dimension.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque, or notice, whether or not mounted on a length of material as specified in subsection E of this Section, unless such sign, poster, plaque, or notice is constructed or made of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material;
G. It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a parade or public assembly to utilize sound amplification equipment at decibel levels that exceed those limits imposed by Town Code Section 10-1-4;
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be ridden or driven by any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street, unless specifically authorized by the permit. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-16 Public Conduct During Parades or Public Assemblies
A. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or public assembly or with any person, behicle or animal participating or used in a parade or public assembly.
B. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly.
C. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of the route of a parade or public assembly. The Chief of Police shall post signs to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable to parking on a street unposted in violation of this Code. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-17 Revocation of Permit
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public assembly permit instantly upon violation of the conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this Code or when a public emergency arises where the police resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of police services for the parade or public assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. ((O)02-07, Enacted,  03/20/2002)

Section 10-12-18 For Penalty Provision; See Section 10-1-23

Article 10-13 FIREWORKS1

Sections:
10-13-1      Definitions
10-13-2      Use of Fireworks, and Sale of Fireworks Other Than Permissible Consumer Fireworks, Prohibited Within the Town; Exceptions; Penalties for Violation
10-13-3      Sale of Permissible Consumer Fireworks; Permits Required; Inspections; Fees
10-13-4      Posting of Signs by Persons Engaged in the Sale of Permissible Consumer Fireworks; Penalty
10-13-5      Authority to Enforce Violations of This Article Designated as Civil Infractions
10-13-6      Violation of This Article a Civil Infraction, Except Where Specifically Provided Otherwise
10-13-7      Liability for Emergency Responses Required by Use of Fireworks, or by Violations of This Article

Section 10-13-1 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. Permit means a permit issued by the Department of Development and Infrastructure Services.
B. “Consumer fireworks,” “display fireworks,” “fireworks” and “permissible consumer fireworks” shall have the same meaning as in Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 36-3601.
C. Fire Chief means the chief or chiefs of the applicable fire prevention agency or agencies within Oro Valley or that officer’s designee.
D. Police Chief means the Oro Valley Police Chief or that officer’s designee.
E. Supervised public display means a professionally monitored performance of display fireworks open to the public and authorized by permit. ((O)11-18, Enacted,  06/29/2011)

Section 10-13-2 Use of Fireworks, and Sale of Fireworks Other Than Permissible Consumer Fireworks, Prohibited Within the Town; Exceptions; Penalties for Violation
A. Except as specifically permitted under subsection (C) of this section, the use of fireworks, including any display firework, consumer firework, permissible consumer firework, or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, within the Town of Oro Valley is prohibited.
B. The sale of fireworks, other than permissible consumer fireworks, within the Town of Oro Valley is prohibited.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit:
    1. The use of items defined to not be fireworks under A.R.S. Section 36-1601(3)(b); or
    2. The occurrence of a supervised public display of fireworks authorized by a permit issued by the Department of Development and Infrastructure Services.
D. Violation of the provisions of subsections (A) or (B) of this section is a civil infraction, except that any such violation that results in damage to property or injury to any person or animal is a Class 1 misdemeanor and, upon conviction, in addition to any other penalty or fine, restitution shall be ordered. This remedy shall not abridge any civil cause of action by the victim. ((O)11-18, Enacted,  06/29/2011)

Section 10-13-3 Sale of Permissible Consumer Fireworks; Permits Required; Inspections; Fees
A. No person shall sell or allow the sale of permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under sixteen (16) years of age.
B. No person shall sell or allow the sale of permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with Arizona State law.
C. A person who desires to sell permissible consumer fireworks to the public shall first obtain a permit allowing the activities listed under Sections 7.3.2(1)(a) and (b) and (2) of the National Fire Protection Association Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles (NFPA 1124), 2006 Edition.
D. A person who desires to sell permissible consumer fireworks to the public is subject to inspection by the Fire Chief and the Department of Development and Infrastructure Services to assure:
    1. That the person has obtained the permit required under subsection (C) of this section.
    2. That the person is in compliance with NFPA 1124, 2006 Edition, International Building Code 2006, International Fire Code 2006 and any other rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to A.R.S. Section 36-1609 and Title 41, Chapter 6 and relating to the storage or retail sale of consumer fireworks. ((O)11-18, Enacted,  06/29/2011)

Section 10-13-4 Posting of Signs by Persons Engaged in the Sale of Permissible Consumer Fireworks; Penalty
A. Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs that state the following:
    1. The use of fireworks within the Town of Oro Valley is prohibited.
    2. A person must be at least sixteen (16) years of age to buy fireworks.
B. The signs required under subsection (A) of this section shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each area where fireworks are displayed and at each cash register where fireworks are sold; shall be not less than eleven (11) inches by fourteen (14) inches in size; shall be in both Spanish and English; and shall use easily legible print.
C. Failure to comply with subsection (A) or (B) of this section is a civil infraction. ((O)11-18, Enacted,  06/29/2011)

Section 10-13-5 Authority to Enforce Violations of This Article Designated as Civil Infractions
The Fire Chief, Police Chief or the Town Department of Development and Infrastructure Services may enforce violations of this article designated as civil infractions. ((O)11-18, Enacted,  06/29/2011)

Section 10-13-6 Violation of This Article a Civil Infraction, Except Where Specifically Provided Otherwise
Except where specifically provided otherwise in this article, any violation of this section is a civil infraction. ((O)11-18, Enacted,  06/29/2011)

Section 10-13-7 Liability for Emergency Responses Required by Use of Fireworks, or by Violations of This Article
A. A person who uses any fireworks, including display fireworks, consumer fireworks, permissible consumer fireworks, or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required as a result of such use. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation of this section is prima facie evidence of liability under this section.
B. A person who violates any provision of this article is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required as a result of such violation. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation of this article is prima facie evidence of liability under this subsection.
C. The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person liable for those expenses pursuant to this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the public agencies, or other first responders that incurred the expenses. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed. ((O)11-18, Enacted,  06/29/2011)
1Town Clerk Note: Ordinance No. (O)11-18, as amended by Council on 6/29/11, provided that the Town Fire Marshall shall evaluate the restrictions on the use of fireworks on a monthly basis and may lift the use restrictions upon consultation with appropriate Town officials.

Article 10-14 DISTRACTED DRIVING

Sections:
10-14-1      Prohibited use of handheld mobile telephone or portable electronic device – Prohibited conduct
10-14-2      Definitions
10-14-3      Exemptions
10-14-4      Penalty

Section 10-14-1 Prohibited use of handheld mobile telephone or portable electronic device – Prohibited conduct
No person shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, use a mobile telephone or portable electronic device while operating a motor vehicle upon a street or highway, unless that device is specifically designed or configured to allow hands-free listening and talking and used in that manner while operating a motor vehicle. ((O)16-15, Enacted,  12/07/2016)

Section 10-14-2 Definitions
“Handheld mobile telephone” and “portable electronic device” means a wireless communication device that is designed to engage in calls, receive and transmit text, image messages, and data and requires being held in one hand.
“Hands-free use” means the use of a mobile telephone or portable electronic device without the use of either hand by employing an internal feature of, or an attachment to, the device.
“Operating” means being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle on a highway or street and included being temporarily stopped because of traffic, a traffic light or stop sign or otherwise, but excludes operating a motor vehicle when the vehicle has pulled over to the side of the road or off an active roadway and has stopped at a location in which it can safely remain stationary. ((O)16-15, Enacted,  12/07/2016)

Section 10-14-3 Exemptions
This section shall not apply to:
A. The use of a mobile telephone or portable electronic device for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an immediate emergency situation:
    1. An emergency response operator;
    2. An ambulance company;
    3. Fire district and rescue service personnel;
    4. Law enforcement personnel;
    5. A hospital; or
    6. A physician’s office or health clinic.
B. The activation or deactivation of hands-free use, as long as the mobile telephone or portable electronic device is securely configured and attached to the vehicle or integrated into the vehicle.
C. First responder exception:
This section does not apply to an emergency service professional using a mobile telephone or portable electronic device while operating an emergency vehicle in the course and scope of his or her duties. ((O)16-15, Enacted,  12/07/2016)

Section 10-14-4 Penalty
A. A violation of this article is a civil traffic violation.
B. A person who violates this article and is not involved in a motor vehicle collision is subject to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third violation.
C. A person who violates this article and is involved in a motor vehicle collision is subject to a civil penalty of a minimum amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). ((O)16-15, Enacted,  12/07/2016)

CHAPTER 11 TRAFFIC; MOTOR VEHICLES

Articles:
11-1         Applicability of State Law
11-2         Administration
11-3         Traffic Control
11-4         Parking
11-5         Solicitation of Employment, Business or Contributions from Occupants of Vehicles Traveling on Town Streets or Highways
11-6         Commercial Vehicles

Article 11-1 APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW

Sections:
11-1-1       Applicability of State Law

Section 11-1-1 Applicability of State Law
All of the provisions and requirements of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, codified as Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 28, Chapter 6 and in particular Sections 28-601 to 28-1062, all inclusive, thereof, in regard to the regulation of traffic and the use and operation of vehicles and amendments or additions thereto hereinafter enacted, insofar as such provisions can have application within the town, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out herein. Copies of such sections shall be on file in the office of the town clerk and the office of the police court of the town.

Article 11-2 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
11-2-1       Duty of Police Department
11-2-2       Records of Traffic Violations
11-2-3       Police Department to Investigate Accidents
11-2-4       Traffic Accident Studies
11-2-5       Traffic Accident Reports
11-2-6       Authority to Detain Persons to Serve Traffic Complaint

Section 11-2-1 Duty of Police Department
It shall be the duty of the police department, under the direction of the police chief, to provide for the enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the town and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the town, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to assist in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out all duties specially imposed by this chapter.

Section 11-2-2 Records of Traffic Violations
A. The police department, under the direction of the police chief, shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the town or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged violations.
B. All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
C. All records and reports shall be public records.

Section 11-2-3 Police Department to Investigate Accidents
It shall be the duty of the police department, under the direction of the police chief, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.

Section 11-2-4 Traffic Accident Studies
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police chief shall conduct studies of such accidents and determine remedial measures.

Section 11-2-5 Traffic Accident Reports
A. The police department, under the direction of the police chief, shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location in the same manner as other department reports.
B. The police department, under the direction of the police chief, shall receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under state law or under any law of the town. All such accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the town. No such report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request of any person making such report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction, to prove compliance with the laws requiring the making of any such report.

Section 11-2-6 Authority to Detain Persons to Serve Traffic Complaint
Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the town may stop and detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of this code, and to serve a copy of the traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation of said code.

Article 11-3 TRAFFIC CONTROL

Sections:
11-3-1       Directing Traffic
11-3-2       Obedience to Traffic Regulations
11-3-3       Traffic Control Devices
11-3-4       Speed Limits
11-3-5       Vehicle Weight Limitation
11-3-6       Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices Restricted
11-3-7       Limitations on Turning Around
11-3-8       Authority to Designate Crosswalks, Establish Safety Zones, and Mark Traffic Lanes Speed Limits
11-3-9       Turning Markers
11-3-10      Restricted Turn Signs
11-3-11      One-Way Streets and Alleys
11-3-12      Regulation of Traffic at Intersections
11-3-13      Drivers to Obey Signs
11-3-14      Processions
11-3-15      Impounding Vehicles
11-3-16      Use of Bicycle Helmets for Minors
11-3-17      Off-road operation of motorized vehicles
11-3-18      Littering from Motor Vehicle Prohibited
11-3-19      Construction Zone Speed Limits

Section 11-3-1 Directing Traffic
A. The police chief is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal.
B. Officers of the fire fighting agency, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police chief in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.

Section 11-3-2 Obedience to Traffic Regulations
It is a civil traffic violation for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter. It is a civil traffic violation for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the police chief or a police officer.

Section 11-3-3 Traffic Control Devices
A. In accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and/or sound engineering practices, the Town Engineer, with concurrence from the Chief of Police, shall place and maintain traffic control devices, signs and signals as becomes necessary in the future to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the Town and State law to guide or warn traffic; provided, that all traffic control signs, signals and devices now in place are hereby ratified and approved as so placed.
B. The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instruction of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the Town unless otherwise directed by the Police Chief, subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by State law. The penalty for failing to obey a traffic control device shall be a maximum of one hundred twenty-three dollars ($123.00). ((O)12-13, Amended,  09/19/2012; (O)02-06, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 11-3-4 Speed Limits
Pursuant to the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 28, Sections 28-627 and 28-703, the established speed on all roads and streets and other areas accommodating motor vehicular traffic within the confines and boundaries of the Town shall be as noted below. Further, this section shall not apply to the regulation of any speed of traffic upon any State or Federal highway.
A. Hardy Road from Highway 89 to the eastern boundaries of Northern Avenue: 35 miles per hour.
B. Lambert Lane: 45 miles per hour.
C. La Canada Drive from the southern Town boundary to Moore Road: 45 miles per hour.
D. Naranja Drive from La Cholla Boulevard to First Avenue: 45 miles per hour.
E. Calle Concordia from Calle Loma Linda to Calle Buena Vista: 30 miles per hour.
F. Calle Buena Vista from Calle Concordia to Hardy Road: 35 miles per hour.
G. Linda Vista Boulevard from cul-del-sac west of Calle el Milagro to U.S. 89: 30 miles per hour.
H. Rancho Vistoso Boulevard from Oracle Road to 150 yards south of Del Webb Boulevard: 45 miles per hour, thence 35 miles per hour until 150 yards west of Welton Drive, thence 45 miles per hour for the remainder of Rancho Vistoso Boulevard.
I. Woodburne Avenue from Moore Road to Rancho Vistoso Boulevard: 35 miles per hour.
J. First Avenue from S.R. 77 (Oracle Road) to Tangerine Road: 45 miles per hour.
K. Del Webb Boulevard, from Rancho Vistoso Boulevard to Sun City Boulevard: 35 miles per hour.
L. Sun City Boulevard, from Rancho Vistoso Boulevard to Del Webb Boulevard: 35 miles per hour.
M. Tangerine Road from La Canada Drive to First Avenue: 45 miles per hour.
N. All streets within Lambert Lane subdivision: 15 miles per hour.
O. Palisades Drive from First Avenue to 150 yards west of Labyrinth Drive: 45 miles per hour, thence 35 miles per hour for the remainder of Palisades Drive.
P. Monterra Vista Drive from Naranja Drive to Tangerine Road: 30 miles per hour.
Q. Moore Road from Rancho Vistoso Boulevard to the Town’s western boundary: 35 miles per hour.
R. North Camino del Plata from Tangerine Road to the northern Town limits; North Camino Del Fierro from Tangerine Road to Limewood Drive; North Como Drive from Tangerine Road to Limewood Drive; and Limewood Drive from North Camino del Fierro to La Cholla Boulevard: 15 miles per hour.
S. Innovation Park Drive from Rancho Vistoso Boulevard to Tangerine Road: 35 miles per hour.
T. When the light is flashing, the speed limit on La Cholla Boulevard from the flashing light located 371 feet south of the La Cholla/Glover Road intersection to the far end of the designated school crosswalk traveling south shall be 15 miles per hour. When the light is flashing, the speed limit on La Cholla Boulevard from the flashing light located 485 feet north of the La Cholla/Glover Road intersection to the far end of the designated school crosswalk traveling north shall be 15 miles per hour.
U. All streets within the Oro Valley Townhouses Subdivision: 15 miles per hour.
V. Campo Bello Traffic Circle which forms the intersection for North Camino de Anza and North Camino Coronado: 15 miles per hour.
W. Traffic roundabout which forms the intersection of Hardy Road and Northern Avenue: 15 miles per hour.
X. All other streets, roads and areas: 25 miles per hour. ((O)11-28, Amended,  11/02/2011; (O)10-05, Amended,  07/07/2010; (O)10-01, Amended,  02/17/2010; (O)07-28, Amended,  06/06/2007; (R)07-13, Amended, ; (O)06-05, Amended,  04/05/2006; (O)05-24, Amended,  06/15/2005; (O)04-02, Amended,  01/21/2004; (O)02-16, Amended,  06/05/2002; (O)01-28, Amended,  12/19/2001; (O)99-181, Amended,  04/07/1999; (O)99-36A, Amended,  05/05/1999; (O)99-031, Amended,  01/06/1999; (O)99-19, Amended,  04/07/1999; (O)96-29, Amended,  08/15/1996)

Section 11-3-5 Vehicle Weight Limitation
The maximum weight limitations for through traffic on roads within Oro Valley shall be as follows:
A. On La Canada, between Lambert Lane and Naranja, five tons per vehicle.
B. On First Avenue between Tangerine Road and Lambert Lane, five tons per vehicle.
C. On all other streets and roads, as is set forth in the applicable state statutes. ((O)00-22, Amended,  06/21/2000)

Section 11-3-6 Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices Restricted
No person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and, when crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.

Section 11-3-7 Limitations on Turning Around
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.

Section 11-3-8 Authority to Designate Crosswalks, Establish Safety Zones, and Mark Traffic Lanes Speed Limits
In accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and/or sound engineering practices, the town engineer, with concurrence from the chief of police, is hereby authorized:
A. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as become necessary.
B. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as become necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
C. To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places consistent with the traffic laws of the Town. ((O)02-06, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 11-3-9 Turning Markers
A. In accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and/or sound engineering practices, the town engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. ((O)02-06, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 11-3-10 Restricted Turn Signs
A. In accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the manual on uniform traffic control devices (MUTCD) and/or sound engineering practices, the town engineer, with concurrence from the chief of police, is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted.
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. ((O)02-06, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 11-3-11 One-Way Streets and Alleys
A. The council shall by resolution designate any streets or alleys which are to be limited to one-way traffic.
B. When any resolution of the council designates any one-way street or alley, the police chief shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.

Section 11-3-12 Regulation of Traffic at Intersections
In accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the manual on uniform traffic control devices (MUTCD) and/or sound engineering practices, the town engineer shall designate through streets, intersections where stops are required and intersections where vehicles shall yield the right-of-way; and shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at every location where a vehicle must stop or yield the right-of-way. ((O)02-06, Amended,  03/20/2002)

Section 11-3-13 Drivers to Obey Signs
Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall obey such signs unless directed to proceed by the police chief or a traffic control signal. No driver shall drive upon or through any private property such as an oil station, vacant lot or similar property to avoid obedience to any regulation included in this chapter.

Section 11-3-14 Processions
A. No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without first securing a permit from the police chief, and all such requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march, destination and such other regulations as the police chief may set forth therein.
B. A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by the police chief.
C. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or the police chief.
D. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.

Section 11-3-15 Impounding Vehicles
A. When Permitted. Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by the town under the circumstances enumerated in this section:
    1. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, street or highway and constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
    2. When a vehicle upon a highway or street is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
    3. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street for a period in excess of seventy-two hours.
    4. When any person is arrested while in possession of a motor vehicle and taken into custody.
B. Notice. 
    1. If owner known. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in subsection A of this section, and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage.
    2. If owner unknown. Whenever the police department removes a vehicle from a street under subsection A of this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided, in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the Motor Vehicle Division, State Highway Department, whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.
C. Redemption or sale. Application for redemption of a vehicle impounded under the provisions of subsection A of this section shall be made by the owner or his duly authorized agent, who shall be entitled to the possession thereof upon payment to the town of the sum of five dollars, together with all other costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon. In the event the vehicle impounded shall not be redeemed by its owner or agent within thirty days, then such vehicle shall be sold for such penalty, charges and costs, in the manner provided by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 28, Section 28-1405, et seq. This remedy shall be cumulative of any and all other penalties provided by this chapter.

Section 11-3-16 Use of Bicycle Helmets for Minors
A. Requirement for helmet use. No person under 18 years of age shall ride a bicycle or be a passenger on a bicycle, ride in a restraining seat attached to a bicycle, or ride in a device towed by a bicycle unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the current standards of the American National Standards Institute for protective headgear.
B. Bicycle renters and sellers. It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or lease any bicycle to or for the use of a person under the age of 18 years unless:
    1. the person is in possession of a protective helmet meeting the standards set out in Section A at the time of such rental or lease; or
    2. the rental or lease includes a protective bicycle helmet meeting the standards set out in Section A and the person agrees to wear the helmet at all times while operating or riding as a passenger on the bicycle.
C. Written explanation of provisions. A person regularly engaged in the business of selling bicycles shall provide any purchaser of a bicycle with a written explanation, either on the receipt of sale or on a separate form indicating receipt of a written explanation of the provisions set forth in Section A.
D. Civil penalties. Any person in violation of this section shall be found guilty of a civil infraction and be required to pay a minimum fine of $50.00 which cannot be suspended except pursuant to subsection 11-3-16(E).
E. Waiver of fine. The penalty provided in this section for a violation of Section 11-3-16(A) may be waived if an offender presents suitable proof that an approved helmet has been purchased or otherwise obtained since the time of the violation and that the minor uses or intends to use said helmet whenever required to do so by this section. ((O)94-17A, Amended, )

Section 11-3-17 Off-road operation of motorized vehicles
A. Definitions. 
    1. “Operate” is defined as driving or controlling an off-road motorized vehicle, whether moving or not.
    2. “Off-road motorized vehicle” means any motorized vehicle when operated off of highways on any land or natural terrain, i.e., two-wheel, three-wheel or four-wheel vehicles, motorcycles, four-wheel drive vehicles and dune buggies.
    3. “Undeveloped public or private property” means any property without a structure, occupied or not, including but not limited to dry washes and river beds, desert areas and non-paved empty lots.
    4. “Dry wash or river bed” means a watercourse having beds, banks, sides and channels through which water currently flows, through which waters flow periodically or no longer flows.
    5. “Willful and wanton” is negligent misconduct by act or omission with conscious disregard for the safety of other persons or property.
B. Declaration of Nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to operate an off-road motorized vehicle with a willful and wanton disregard for the safety of other persons or property. Operation of off-road motorized vehicles on undeveloped property, as defined herein, including washes and river beds, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it is further declared that such activity interferes with the enjoyment of property, reduces the value of the property, creates noise and dust pollution and poses a danger to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an off-road motorized vehicle on undeveloped private property as defined herein, except as permitted by this section.
C. Exceptions. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION SHALL NOT APPLY:
    1. Off-highway vehicle use areas managed specifically for off-road vehicle use through the development or designation of off-highway trails.
    2. Off-road motorized vehicles operated on private property, off the roadway, where written permission has been granted to the operator of the vehicle by the legal owner of the property. Written permission shall be in operator’s possession and must be shown upon demand of a law enforcement officer. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as permitting the operation of motorized vehicles within dry wash or river bed closer than one-quarter (1/4) mile of any structure.
    3. Operation of a motorized vehicle for farming or ranching purpose.
    4. Operation of a motorized vehicle by a business or enterprise which is licensed by the Town and where the motorized vehicle is being used in the lawful operation of the licensed business or enterprise.
    5. Operation of a motorized vehicle by a governmental employee while on government business.
    6. Operation of a golf cart on a golf course.
    7. Operation of an authorized emergency vehicle, including a towing service.
D. Violation/Penalty. A person who violates Oro Valley Town Code Section 11-3-17 is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. In addition to or in lieu of the fine prescribed by this section, a judge may order the person to perform at least eight but not more than twenty-four hours of community service or complete an approved safety course, or both. (Effective 3/15/95).

Section 11-3-18 Littering from Motor Vehicle Prohibited
A. It is unlawful for any person to scatter, dump, drop, deposit, place, toss, throw, or leave upon or within twenty yards of any town roadway, street, avenue, highway, public way, thoroughfare or bike path any:
    1. Incendiary materials such as matches, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco or other materials which have been lit with potential to ignite dry grass, brush, natural vegetation or other materials; and
    2. Refuse, rubbish, debris, odoriferous objects, substances, or other trash.
B. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. ((O)95-81, Enacted,  10/18/1995)

Section 11-3-19 Construction Zone Speed Limits
A. The Town Engineer is authorized to establish reduced speed limits within construction zones. In accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and/or sound engineering practices, the reduced speed limits shall be implemented when the Town Engineer determines that the permanent speed limit set for that roadway under construction is not reasonable or safe under the existing conditions.
B. Any reduced speed limit established by the Town Engineer shall be effective only for the duration of the roadway construction. Construction shall mean any road work by the Town or any contractor or subcontractor performing such construction, reconstruction, or maintenance at the direction of the Town.
C. The reduced speed limits shall become effective when the regulatory speed limit signs (black text on white background stating the speed limit) have been erected upon or around the construction zone in a clear visible manner, and the permanent speed limit signs are covered or otherwise not visible to motorists.
D. The traffic control devices, indicating that double civil penalties will be imposed for exceeding the speed limit in a construction zone, shall be posted at least one thousand (1,000) feet before entering the temporary construction zone indicating the beginning of the construction zone and shall be posted to indicate the end of the construction zone. In addition, such traffic control devices shall be posted at least every twenty-five hundred (2,500) feet within the construction zone.
E. It shall be unlawful for a person to drive in a construction zone at a speed greater than the speed posted for that zone. Violations of the construction zone speed limit are subject to double fines under Oro Valley Town Code Section 11-3-3 when workers are present. ((O)12-13, Enacted,  09/19/2012)

Article 11-4 PARKING

Sections:
11-4-1       Method of Parking
11-4-2       Authority to Erect Signs Restricting Parking
11-4-3       Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited
11-4-4       Nuisance Parking
11-4-5       Penalty
11-4-6       Presumption

Section 11-4-1 Method of Parking
Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the council, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen (18") inches of the right hand curb.

Section 11-4-2 Authority to Erect Signs Restricting Parking
A. Pursuant to ARS 28-643 and within the reasonable exercise of the Oro Valley Police power, the local authority shall place and maintain the traffic control devices on highways under their jurisdiction as they deem necessary to indicate and to carry out local traffic ordinances or to regulate, warn or guide traffic. All traffic control devices erected shall conform to the manual and specifications prescribed in ARS 28-641.
B. The Police Chief or Town Engineer, upon approval by the Council, may erect signs requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left hand curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited, and restricting parking in any way that may be necessary. No parking restrictions shall become effective until such restricted parking area is specifically designated by resolution of the Council and signs have been erected or written notice given as authorized by this Section; provided, that all signs restricting parking now in place are hereby ratified and approved as so placed. It is a civil traffic violation for any person to stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to such parking restrictions.
C. In lieu of providing signage, the Town may attach a written notice to the owner of record of the vehicle, giving the responsible individual twenty-four (24) hours to remove the vehicle. ((O)01-01, Amended,  01/17/2001)

Section 11-4-3 Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited
A. Handicapped Parking Spots. 
    1. Pursuant to ARS 28-884 and except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, no person may stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within any specially designated and marked parking space provided in accordance with this section for physically disabled persons unless the motor vehicle is transporting a person eligible for the distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, and either a) the motor vehicle displays the distinguishing insignia placard; or b) the motor vehicle displays number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol.
    2. If a law enforcement officer employed by the Town finds a motor vehicle in violation of this section, the officer shall issue a complaint, which shall be attached or placed upon the vehicle, which is unlawfully parked. Upon a finding that an owner or operator is responsible for a violation of this section, the court shall impose a civil sanction of not less than eighty ($80) dollars nor greater than two hundred fifty ($250) dollars for such violation.
    3. Any person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person shall be allowed, without a distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, to park momentarily in any such parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading such physically disabled person. No complaint shall be issued to the driver for such momentary parking.
    4. Parking spaces reserved for handicapped persons shall be designated on privately owned property as provided by the Oro Valley Zoning Code. Each such parking space shall be prominently outlined with paint and posted with a permanent sign located not less than three (3) feet nor more than six (6) feet above the grade and of a color and design approved by the department of transportation bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption “reserved parking.” The designation of such parking spaces as provided herein or as required pursuant to the Oro Valley Zoning Code, shall authorize police officer, and other duly authorized agents, to enforce the provisions of this section and shall constitute a waiver of any objection by the owner or person in possession of such property to the enforcement of this section, and such owner shall be deemed to have consented by such designation or person in possession.
B. Storing Vehicles on Public Property. 
    1. Stored vehicle means any vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer of a type subject to registration pursuant to ARS 28-101 et seq., which has been left within the right-of-way of a highway, road street, or public thoroughfare, or upon public property, without being moved, for an extended period of time. Evidence that a vehicle was left unattended or unmoved for a period of forty-eight (48) hours shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle was being stored.
    2. No person shall store a vehicle upon any street, highway, road, other public thoroughfare, or other public property. The storing of any vehicle in a manner as provided for in this subsection, shall constitute a presumption that the last registered owner of record is responsible for such storage. The last registered owner shall be subject to the provisions of this Article unless an affidavit has been filed reporting the vehicle as being stolen, or a stolen report has been accepted by a local law enforcement agency, and a violation of this subsection constitutes a civil traffic offense. The provisions of ARS 28-872 shall apply in all respects to the removal, towing, storage, and sale of stored vehicles impounded under this subsection.
C. Blocking Traffic. 
    1. It is a civil traffic violation for any person to stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in the Town in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twenty (20') feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may stop temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of passengers or, when necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals.
    2. It is a civil traffic violation for any person to park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a private driveway except for the loading or unloading of materials, and not then unless such loading or unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement of vehicular traffic. ((O)01-01, Amended,  01/17/2001; (O)01-01, Amended,  01/17/2001)

Section 11-4-4 Nuisance Parking
1. Parking for Display or Repairs. It is unlawful to park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of a) washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except for immediate repairs necessitated by an emergency and necessary to be made before the vehicle can be moved; or b) displaying commercial exhibits, except by special permit lawfully issued by the Town.
2. Parking on Property of Another. It is unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park the vehicle in or upon property of another without having in the driver’s possession the written permission of the person legally entitled to possession of the property. However, a citation charging violation of this section shall be dismissed if the aforesaid written permission is subsequently presented to the court.
3. Parking on Town-Owned Property. No person shall park a motor vehicle in or on Town-owned property, other than public streets or alleys, when signs prohibiting or regulating parking have been made thereon by the Town as authorized by this article, unless in compliance with such erected signs.
4. Parking in Parks and Playgrounds. It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle in or upon the parks and playgrounds of the Town except in designated and signed parking areas.
5. Parking for Purposes of Sale on Unpaved Lots. t is unlawful to park a motor vehicle for the purpose of sale upon any lot or area, which is not paved, within the Town. The display of any signs or other markings indicating that a motor vehicle is for sale shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle has been parked for the purpose of sale. This section shall not apply to a maximum of one (1) motor vehicle parked for the purpose of sale where the owner of the lot owns the motor vehicle or area on which the motor vehicle is parked.
6. Parking Over-sized Vehicles. No person shall park or store a commercially registered vehicle with a chassis rated for more than one (1) ton nor any vehicle greater than twenty-two (22') feet in length on streets or alleys in a residential area or zone except while loading, unloading, delivering, or making a service call at a residence.
7. Sidewalks. It is a civil traffic violation for any person to park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not, or for an owner to permit his vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk in the Town. ((O)01-01, Amended,  01/17/2001)

Section 11-4-5 Penalty
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the penalty for violating any provision of this article, which regulates the time, place, or method of parking a vehicle shall be a mandatory fine of eighty ($80.00) dollars, no part of which may be suspended or waived by the court. This fine includes assessments imposed by the state pursuant to ARS 12-116.01 and 12-116.02. ((O)01-01, Amended,  01/17/2001)

Section 11-4-6 Presumption
In any prosecution charging a violation of any of the provisions of this article, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefor. ((O)01-01, Enacted,  01/17/2001)

Article 11-5 SOLICITATION OF EMPLOYMENT, BUSINESS OR CONTRIBUTIONS FROM OCCUPANTS OF VEHICLES TRAVELING ON TOWN STREETS OR HIGHWAYS

Sections:
11-5-1       Purpose
11-5-2       Regulation
11-5-3       Definition of “Traveled Portion”

Section 11-5-1 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prevent dangers to persons and property, to prevent delays and to avoid interference with the traffic flow. Roadways that have center medians often are designed to deal with specific traffic flow problems. Any delay or distraction may interfere with traffic planning. Sometimes persons stand near intersections and near traffic lights to contact drivers or passengers in cars that are passing or that are stopped temporarily due to traffic lights or traffic flow. ((O)96-14, Enacted,  04/03/1996)

Section 11-5-2 Regulation
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business or contributions of any kind, or collect monies for the same, from the occupants of any vehicle traveling upon any town street or highway when such solicitation or collection:
1. Causes the person performing the activity to enter onto the traveled portion of a street or highway.
2. Involves the person performing the activity to be located upon any median area which separates traffic lanes for vehicular travel in opposite directions.
3. The person performing the activity is located such that vehicles cannot move into a legal parking area to safely conduct the transaction. ((O)96-14, Enacted,  04/03/1996)

Section 11-5-3 Definition of “Traveled Portion”
For purposes of this article, the traveled portion of the street or highway shall mean that portion of the road normally used by moving motor vehicle traffic. ((O)96-14, Enacted,  04/03/1996)

Article 11-6 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES

Sections:
11-6-1       Commercial Vehicles
11-6-2       Truck Routes
11-6-3       Penalty

Section 11-6-1 Commercial Vehicles
A. No person shall operate any commercial vehicle exceeding eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross vehicle weight at any time upon any Town streets except those streets or parts of streets described in this section as truck routes; except as provided for in this section.
B. A person operating a commercial vehicle may leave an adopted truck route by the nearest route, and in so doing not crossing another truck route to make a single delivery or pickup after which they must return immediately by the nearest route. ((O)01-01, Enacted,  01/17/2001)

Section 11-6-2 Truck Routes
A. Pursuant to ARS 28-627(A)(11) and within the reasonable exercise of the Oro Valley Police power, the following streets are hereby designated as truck routes: Oracle Road; Tangerine Road; Rancho Vistoso Boulevard; La Canada Drive, except that portion between Lambert Lane and Tangerine Road; First Avenue from Oracle Road to Lambert Lane; and Lambert Lane from First Avenue to La Canada Drive.
B. Pursuant to ARS 28-627(C), provisions of this section are not effective until signs giving notice of the local traffic regulations are posted on or at the entrances to the highway or part of the highway affected as is most appropriate. ((O)01-01, Enacted,  01/17/2001)

Section 11-6-3 Penalty
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the penalty for violating any provision of this article, which regulates by limiting the weight of commercial vehicles upon all but certain streets designated as truck routes, shall be a mandatory fine of eighty ($80.00) dollars, no part of which may be suspended or waived by the court. This fine includes assessments imposed by the state pursuant to ARS 12-116.01 and 12-116.02. ((O)01-01, Enacted,  01/17/2001)

CHAPTER 12 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS

Articles:
12-1         Purpose
12-2         Definitions
12-3         Registration
12-4         Telecommunications License
12-5         Telecommunications Franchise
12-6         Cable Television Franchise
12-7         Application to Existing Franchise Ordinances and Agreements
12-8         Penalties
12-9         Other Remedies
12-10        Severability
12-11        Registration of Telecommunications Carriers and Providers
12-12        Reserved
12-13        Purpose of Registration
12-14        Communications License
12-15        Location of Facilities
12-16        Telecommunications Franchise
12-17        Cable Franchise
12-18        Fees and Compensation
12-19        Change of Control
12-20        Construction Standards
12-21        Responsibility of Owner

Article 12-1 PURPOSE

Sections:
12-1-1       Purpose

Section 12-1-1 Purpose
The Purpose and intent of this Chapter is to:
A. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services.
B. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications providers and services.
C. Promote competition in telecommunications.
D. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services.
E. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the Town.
F. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the Town for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis.
G. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the Town.
H. Assure that the Town’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs.
I. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Town and the residents of the Town for permitting private use of the public ways.
J. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the Town comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town.
K. Assure that the owner can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare.
L. Enable the Town to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies; industry competition and technological development. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-2 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
12-2-1       Definitions

Section 12-2-1 Definitions
For the purpose of this title, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
Affiliate means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned, or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.
Annual gross revenue means all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration received directly or indirectly by the licensee or franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any person in which the licensee or franchisee has a financial interest, arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of long distance competitive access or competitive telecommunications services by the licensee within the Town or in any way derived from the operation of its system, including, but not limited to:
    a. All telecommunications service revenues charged on a flat rate basis
    b. All telecommunications services charged on a usage sensitive or mileage basis;
    c. All revenues from installation service charges;
    d. All revenues from connection or disconnection fees;
    e. All revenues from penalties or charges to customers for checks returned from banks, net of bank costs paid;
    f. All revenues from equipment sold or rented to customer upon customer premises;
    g. All revenues from local and long distance full rate service;
    h. All revenues from authorized rental of conduit space;
    i. All revenues from charges for access to local and long distance networks;
    j. All revenues from any leases or subleases of any portion of licenseefranchisee’s network, including plant, facilities, or capacity leased to others for any purpose;
    k. All recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from the sale or assignment of bad debts.
This sum shall be the basis for computing the fees listed in this chapter.
ACC or the Arizona Corporation Commission means the State administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the State of Arizona.
Applicant means a person, as defined in this chapter, who submits a written proposal or response to the town’s request for proposals to provide competitive telecommunications service to the city.
Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 532,  et seq., as now and hereafter amended, including the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
Competitive telecommunications service means the provision of long distance competitive access and/or any telecommunications service where customers of the service within the town have or likely to have reasonable available alternatives, as determined by the mayor and council after public notice and opportunity to comment, or when so classified by the Arizona Corporation Commission by rule or order duly adopted and published. Competitive telecommunications service does not include cable service, as defined in Section 602(6) of the Federal Cable Act, or the distribution of video programming directly to one or more of a multiplicity of subscribers to a cable system as defined in Section 602(7) of the federal act, 47 USC Sections 522(6) and (7) which is subject to local governmental regulation under the Act.
Corporate Authorities means the Mayor and Council of the Town.
Excess capacity means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhold, or other utility facility within the public way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
Franchise means a grant of authority to a telecommunications company to place facilities in the public streets and other municipally owned right-of-way for the purpose of providing competitive telecommunications services.
Grantee means the person or company receiving a License or Franchise agreement.
License means that ordinance or resolution which contains the right, authority or grant, given by a licensing authority enabling the license holder to provide long distance competitive access or competitive telecommunications services.
Licensee means a person who, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the town’s request for proposals, executes a license agreement with the town for the nonexclusive privilege to provide long distance competitive access service in the Town.
Long distance competitive access service means the instantaneous transmission for hire of voice or data signals by digital high speed fiber optic (or other) transmission capacity to carry interstate voice and data signals only to (a) carry interexchange carrier traffic between interexchange carrier points of presence, or (b) to connect customer locations to interexhange carrier points of presence.
Other ways means the highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of way within the Town, but under the jurisdiction and control of a governmental entity other than the Town. See "public ways" in this section.
Overhead facilities means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
Person means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
Proposal means an applicant’s formal written response to the city’s request for proposals to provide long distance competitive services or telecommunications services to the town, pursuant to this chapter. Upon award by the town of a license or franchise, the proposal shall become a part of the license or franchise agreement.
Public street means any highway, street, alley or any other public right of way which may or may not be for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the Town which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities. A "street" means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, curbs, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, or other public ways in the town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated to or otherwise acquired by the Town.
Public ways means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the Town, but only to the extent of the Town’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities.
State means the State of Arizona.
Surplus space means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Arizona Corporation Commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
Telecommunications carrier means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the Town, uses or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service.
Telecommunications facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited, cables, wires conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
Telecommunications provider means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
Telecommunications service means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
Telecommunications System. See "Telecommunications facilities".
Town means the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona.
Town property means and includes all real property owned by the Town, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the Town, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising.
Underground facilities means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for Overhead Facilities.
Usable space means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Arizona Corporation Commission or any other regulatory agency.
Utility easement means any easement owned by the Town and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
Utility facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the Town and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-3 REGISTRATION

Sections:
12-3-1       Registration

Section 12-3-1 Registration
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications originating or terminating in the Town shall register with the Town pursuant to Article 12-13 of this Title. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-4 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE

Sections:
12-4-1       Telecommunications License

Section 12-4-1 Telecommunications License
Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the Town for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons and areas outside the Town shall first obtain a license granting the use of such public ways from the Town pursuant to Article 12-14 of this Title. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE

Sections:
12-5-1       Telecommunications Franchise

Section 12-5-1 Telecommunications Franchise
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the Town, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or areas in the Town, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the Town pursuant to Article 12-1 of this Title. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-6 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE

Sections:
12-6-1       Cable Television Franchise

Section 12-6-1 Cable Television Franchise
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications facilities in any public way of the Town for the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the Town shall first obtain a cable franchise or license from the Town as provided in this Title. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-7 APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS

Sections:
12-7-1       Application to Existing Franchise Ordinances and Agreements

Section 12-7-1 Application to Existing Franchise Ordinances and Agreements
This Title shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until:
1. The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement, or;
2. An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-8 PENALTIES

Sections:
12-8-1       Penalties

Section 12-8-1 Penalties
Any person found guilty of violating disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Title shall be fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than twenty five hundred dollars ($2500) for each offense. Such an offense will be a class one misdemeanor. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-9 OTHER REMEDIES

Sections:
12-9-1       Other Remedies

Section 12-9-1 Other Remedies
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the Town may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this Title. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-10 SEVERABILITY

Sections:
12-10-1      Severability

Section 12-10-1 Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this Title, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-11 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS

Sections:
12-11-1      Registration of Telecommunications Carriers and Providers

Section 12-11-1 Registration of Telecommunications Carriers and Providers
All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the Town, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities within the Town, shall register with the Town pursuant to this Article on forms to be provided by the Town Clerk, which shall include the following:
1. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
3. A description of registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the Town.
4. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the Town.
5. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public way licensing or franchising under this Title.
6. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation tax imposed by the Town.
7. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for an received any certificate of authority required by the Arizona Corporation Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or another other necessary government or regulatory agency to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the Town.
8. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the Town.
9. Such other information as the Town or Town Clerk may reasonably require. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-12 RESERVED

Sections:
12-12-1      Reserved

Section 12-12-1 Reserved
((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-13 PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION

Sections:
12-13-1      Purpose of Registration

Section 12-13-1 Purpose of Registration
The purpose of registration under this Article is to:
1. Provide the Town with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide telecommunications services within the Town, or that own or operate telecommunication facilities within the Town.
2. Assist the town in enforcement of this Title.
3. Assist the Town in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the Town.
4. Assist the Town in monitoring compliance with local, State and Federal laws. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-14 COMMUNICATIONS LICENSE

Sections:
12-14-1      Telecommunications License

Section 12-14-1 Telecommunications License
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the Town for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas inside or outside the Town. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES

Sections:
12-15-1      Location of Facilities

Section 12-15-1 Location of Facilities
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
1. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility.
2. A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
3. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the Town, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
4. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way of the Town, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall be not later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Town Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
5. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-16 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE

Sections:
12-16-1      Telecommunications Franchise

Section 12-16-1 Telecommunications Franchise
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the Town and to provide telecommunications services to any person or area in the Town. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-17 CABLE FRANCHISE

Sections:
12-17-1      Intent
12-17-2      Definitions
12-17-3      License to Install and Operate
12-17-4      License Required
12-17-5      Term of the License
12-17-6      License Territory
12-17-7      Federal, State and Town Jurisdiction
12-17-8      License Nontransferable
12-17-9      Purchase by Town Upon Expiration or Revocation
12-17-10     Geographical Coverage
12-17-11     Nonexclusive License
12-17-12     Multiple Licenses
12-17-13     Initial License Applications
12-17-14     Consideration of Initial Applications
12-17-15     License Renewal
12-17-16     Consumer Protection and Service Standards
12-17-17     Rate Regulation
12-17-18     License Fee
12-17-19     Design and Construction Requirements
12-17-20     Technical Standards
12-17-21     Trimming of Trees
12-17-22     Use of Grantee Facilities
12-17-23     Hold Harmless
12-17-24     Insurance
12-17-25     Records Required and Grantor’s Right to Inspect
12-17-26     Annual Reports
12-17-27     License Violation
12-17-28     Force Majeure: Grantee’s Inability to Perform
12-17-29     Abandonment or Removal of License Property
12-17-30     Extended Operation and Continuity of Services
12-17-31     Receivership and Foreclosure
12-17-32     Rights Reserved to Grantor
12-17-33     Rights of Individuals
12-17-34     Conflicts
12-17-35     Severability

Section 12-17-1 Intent
A. The Town of Oro Valley, pursuant to applicable Federal and State law, is authorized to grant one (1) or more nonexclusive licenses to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the Town limits.
B. The Town Council finds that the development of cable television systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of Oro Valley. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the Town Council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the Town or such persons as the Town shall designate. It is the intent of this article and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable television service to the public and any licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-2 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. All capitalized terms used in the definition of any other term shall have their meaning as otherwise defined in this section. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
A. “Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
B. “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Sections 521 through 611 (1982 & Supp. V 1987), as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, and as may, from time to time, be amended.
C. “Cable service” means:
    1. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and
    2. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.
D. “Cable television system,” “system” or “cable system” means any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. “Cable television system” does not include:
    1. A facility that serves fewer than fifty (50) subscribers.
    2. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public street, road or alley.
    3. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations.
    4. A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to 47 U.S.C. Sections 201 through 276, except that the facility is considered a cable television system, other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. Section 541(c), to the extent the facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of the use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services.
    5. An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. Section 573.
    6. A facility of an electric utility that is used solely for operating its electric utility system.
E. “Channel” or “cable channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum that is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
F. “Council” means the Town Council of the Town of Oro Valley.
G. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, its designated representative or its lawful successor.
H. “License” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Town, whether such authorization is designated as a license, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
I. “License agreement” means a license granted pursuant to this article, containing the specific provisions of the license granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.
J. “License fee” means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the Town or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term “license fee” does not include:
    1. Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
    2. Capital costs that are required by the license agreement to be incurred by the cable operator for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
    3. Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the license, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
    4. Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code.
K. “Grantee” means any person receiving a license pursuant to this article and its agents, employees, officers, designees, or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
L. “Grantor” or “Town” means the Town of Oro Valley as represented by the Council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
M. “Gross revenues” means all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration, less related bad debt not to exceed one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) annually, that is received directly or indirectly by the cable operator, its affiliates, subsidiaries or parent or any person, firm or corporation in which the cable operator has a financial interest or that has a financial interest in the cable operator and that is derived from the cable operator’s operation of its cable system to provide cable service in the area of jurisdiction. Gross revenues include all revenue from charges for cable service to subscribers and all charges for installation, removal, connection or reinstatement of equipment necessary for a subscriber to receive cable service, and any other receipts from subscribers derived from operating the cable system to provide cable service, including receipts from forfeited deposits, sale or rental of equipment to provide cable service, late charges, interest and sale of program guides. Gross revenues also include all income the cable operator receives from the lease of its facilities located in the public streets, roads and alleys, unless services that the lessee provides over the leased facilities are subject to a transaction privilege tax of the licensing authority. Gross revenues do not include revenues from commercial advertising on the cable system, the use or lease of studio facilities of the cable system, the use or lease of leased access channels or bandwidth, the production of video programming by the cable operator, the sale, exchange, use or cablecast of any programming by the cable operator in the area of jurisdiction, sales to the cable operator’s subscribers by programmers of home shopping services, reimbursements paid by programmers for launch fees or marketing expense, license fees, taxes or other fees or charges that the cable operator collects and pays to any governmental authority, any increase in the value of any stock, security or asset, or any dividends or other distributions made in respect of any stock or securities.
N. “Initial service area” means the area of the Town that will receive cable service initially, as set forth in any license agreement.
O. “Installation” means the connection of the system to subscribers’ terminals, and the provision of cable service.
P. “Normal business hours” means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, “normal business hours” must include some evening hours at least one (1) night per week and/or some weekend hours.
Q. “Normal operating conditions” means those service conditions that are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions that are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions, and significant legislative or regulatory requirements. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the system.
R. “Person” means any natural person or any association, firm, individual, partnership, joint stock company, joint venture, trust, corporation, limited liability company, syndicate, business or other legally recognized entity, private or public, whether for-profit or not-for-profit.
S. “Public, educational or government access facilities” or “PEG access facilities” means:
    1. Channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use; and
    2. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
T. “Section” means any section, subsection, or provision of this article.
U. “Service area” or “license area” means the entire geographic area within the Town as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the license agreement.
V. “Service interruption” means the loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more cable channels affecting at least ten percent (10%) of the Town’s subscribers on the system.
W. “State” means the State of Arizona.
X. “Street” means each of the following that have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the Town limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time.
Y. “Subscriber” means any person who or which lawfully elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system and who pays the charges therefor, except such persons or entities authorized to receive cable service without charge as described in the license agreement. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-3 License to Install and Operate
A license granted by the Town under the provisions of this article shall encompass the following purposes:
A. To engage in the business of providing cable service, and such other services as may be permitted by the license agreement.
B. To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of a cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area.
C. To maintain and operate said license properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals for the delivery of cable services and any other services permitted by the license agreement.
D. To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the license agreement. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-4 License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the Town within any street without a properly granted license awarded pursuant to the provisions of this article. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-5 Term of the License
A. A license granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the license agreement, commencing with the grantor’s adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the license.
B. A license granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable State and Federal law and of this article. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-6 License Territory
Any license shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the Town, and within any area added to the Town during the term of the license, unless otherwise specified in the license agreement. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-7 Federal, State and Town Jurisdiction
A. This article shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws.
B. In the event that the State or Federal government discontinues preemption in any area of cable communications over which it currently exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit municipal regulatory authority, grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules and regulations in these areas to the extent permitted by law.
C. This article shall apply to all licenses granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. It shall further apply to the extent permitted by applicable Federal or State law to all existing licenses granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article.
D. Grantee’s rights are subject to the police powers of the Town to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Grantee shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the Town pursuant to that power.
E. Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article or any license granted pursuant to this article by reason of any failure of the Town to enforce prompt compliance.
F. This article and any license granted pursuant to this article shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the State of Arizona. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-8 License Nontransferable
A. Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, the license and/or cable system or any of the rights or privileges granted by the license, without the prior consent of the Council which consent shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed and shall be denied only upon a good faith finding by the Town that the proposed transferee lacks the legal, technical or financial qualifications to perform its obligations under the license agreement. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the license and/or cable system without the consent of the Council shall be null and void. This provision shall not apply to sales of property or equipment in the normal course of business. No consent from the Town shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness, or for a pro forma transfer to a corporation, partnership or other entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with grantee.
B. The following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other transfer of the license and/or cable system requiring compliance with this section:
    1. The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of grantee’s assets;
    2. The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interests in grantee by one (1) or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in grantee;
    3. The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interest by grantee so as to create a new controlling interest in grantee;
    4. The entry by the grantee into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of the grantee and/or the system; and
    5. The term “controlling interest” as used herein means majority equity ownership of the grantee.
C. Except as provided below, no grantee may sell or otherwise transfer ownership in a license and/or cable system within a thirty-six (36) month period following either the acquisition or initial construction of said system by grantee. In the case of a sale of multiple systems, if the terms of the sale require the buyer to subsequently transfer ownership of one (1) or more such systems to one (1) or more third parties, such transfer shall be considered a part of the initial transaction. The above-described thirty-six (36) month holding period shall not apply to:
    1. Any transfer of ownership interest in any license and/or cable system which is not subject to Federal income tax liability;
    2. Any sale required by operation of any law or any act of any agency, any State or political subdivision or the Town; or
    3. Any sale, assignment, or transfer, to one (1) or more purchasers, assignees, or transferees controlled by, controlling, or under common control with, the seller, assignor, or transferor.
D. In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of any license and/or cable system, the Town shall have one hundred twenty (120) days to act upon any request for approval of such sale or transfer that contains or is accompanied by such information as is required in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations, the requirements of this article and such other reasonable information as the Town, in its sole discretion, may request. If the Town fails to render a final decision on the request within one hundred twenty (120) days from receipt by the Town of all required information, such request shall be deemed granted unless the requesting party and the Town agree to an extension of time.
E. Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the license property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said license property. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control of ownership of the license has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control of ownership shall apply.
F. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist grantor in any such inquiry. In seeking grantor’s consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of ensuring that the transferee completes an application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to grantor, which application shall include the information required under State and Federal law as well as under Section 12-17-13(A) through (H) of this article. An application, acceptable to the Town, shall be submitted to grantor not less than ninety (90) days prior to the date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and maintain the system and comply with all license requirements for the remainder of the term of the license. If, after considering the legal, financial, character and technical qualities of the applicant and determining that they are satisfactory, the grantor finds that such transfer is acceptable, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such license. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied.
G. Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the license shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable television system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within thirty (30) days of assuming such control that will ensure continued service and compliance with all license requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one (1) year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said period of time, it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the license to another grantee. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-9 Purchase by Town Upon Expiration or Revocation
A. If, subject to the provisions of the Cable Act, a renewal of a license is denied, the Town may purchase, to the extent permitted by Federal law and upon payment to the grantee of the cable systems’ fair market value as a going concern, exclusive of any value allocated to the license itself, that portion of grantee’s cable system serving the Town of Oro Valley.
B. Subject to the Cable Act, if a license is revoked for cause, the Town may, to the extent permitted by Federal law, acquire that portion of the cable system serving the Town of Oro Valley upon payment of an equitable price. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-10 Geographical Coverage
A. Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the service area, subject to any line extension requirements of the license agreement.
B. After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any part of the service area, grantee shall provide cable service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty (30) days from the date of request; provided, that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty (30) day period on reasonable terms and conditions. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-11 Nonexclusive License
Any license granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional licenses for a cable television system or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable State and Federal law; provided, however, that no license shall be granted on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than any other license granted hereunder. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-12 Multiple Licenses
A. Grantor may grant one (1) or more licenses for a service area. Grantor may, in its sole discretion, limit the number of licenses granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:
    1. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple coaxial cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage.
    2. The impact on the community of having multiple licenses.
    3. The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way.
    4. The financial capabilities of the applicant and its guaranteed commitment to make necessary investment to erect, maintain and operate the proposed system for the duration of the license term.
B. Each grantee awarded a license to serve the entire Town shall offer service to all residences in the Town, in accordance with construction and service schedules mutually agreed upon between grantor and grantee, and consistent with applicable law.
C. Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two (2) cable systems in accordance with the provisions of Section 12-17-19(D).
D. Grantor may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor’s opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables.
E. Any additional license granted by the Town to provide cable service in a part of the Town in which a license has already been granted and where an existing grantee is providing service shall require the new grantee to provide service throughout its service area within a reasonable time and in a sequence which does not discriminate against lower income residents. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-13 Initial License Applications
Any person desiring an initial license for a cable television system shall file an application with the Town. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee established by the Town shall accompany the application. Such application fee shall not be deemed to be “license fees” within the meaning of Section 622 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. Section 542), and such payments shall not be deemed to be (A) “payments in kind” or any involuntary payments chargeable against the compensation to be paid to the Town by grantee pursuant to Section 12-17-18 hereof and applicable provisions of a license agreement, or (B) part of the compensation to be paid to the Town by grantee pursuant to Section 12-17-18 hereof and applicable provisions of a license agreement.
An application for an initial license for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable:
A. A statement as to the proposed license and service area.
B. Resume of prior history of applicant, including the legal, technical and financial expertise of applicant in the cable television field.
C. List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder, if a corporation.
D. List of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person.
E. The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant.
F. A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town.
G. Proposed construction and service schedule.
H. Any additional information that the Town deems applicable. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-14 Consideration of Initial Applications
A. Upon receipt of any application for an initial license, the Town Manager shall prepare a report and make his recommendations respecting such application to the Town Council.
B. A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial license grant, at a time and date approved by the Council. Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the Council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the license(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The Council may grant one (1) or more initial licenses, or may decline to grant any license. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-15 License Renewal
License renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law including, but not necessarily limited to, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the license. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-16 Consumer Protection and Service Standards
A. Except as otherwise provided in the license agreement, grantee shall maintain a local office or offices to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection standards under normal operating conditions:
    1. Cable System Office Hours and Telephone Availability. 
        a. Grantee will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
            i. Trained grantee representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
            ii. After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained grantee representative on the next business day.
        b. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less then ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
        c. The grantee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
        d. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
        e. Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located.
    2. Installations, Outages and Service Calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four (4) standards will be met not less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
        a. Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. “Standard” installations are those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system.
        b. Excluding conditions beyond the control of grantee, grantee will begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The grantee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem.
        c. At the subscriber’s request, the “appointment window” alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be within a two (2) to four (4) hour time block during normal business hours. (The grantee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
        d. Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
        e. If grantee’s representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the customer.
    3. Communications Between Grantee and Cable Subscribers. 
        a. Notifications to Subscribers. 
            i. The grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
                •Products and services offered;
                •Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services;
                •Installation and service maintenance policies;
                •Instructions on how to use the cable service;
                •Channel positions for programming carried on the system; and
                •Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the Town’s cable office.
            ii. Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, the grantee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by the preceding subsection.
        b. Billing. 
            i. Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.
            ii. In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days.
        c. Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either:
            i. The customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or
            ii. The return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if service is terminated.
        d. Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer’s next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-17 Rate Regulation
A. The Town reserves the right to regulate rates for basic cable service and any other services offered over the cable system, to the fullest extent permitted by Federal and/or State law. The grantee shall be subject to the rate regulation provisions provided for herein, and those of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The Town shall follow the rules relating to cable rate regulation promulgated by the FCC.
B. Except to the extent otherwise expressly permitted by applicable law, grantee shall provide cable service to each resident within the service area at a uniform rate. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-18 License Fee
A. Following the issuance and acceptance of a license, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a license fee in the amount set forth in the license agreement.
B. The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within sixty (60) days of the close of the calendar year, certified by an officer of the grantee or audited by a certified public accountant, reflecting the total amounts of gross annual revenues and all payments, and computations for the previous calendar year. Upon ten (10) days’ prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee’s records in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and if such audit indicates a license fee underpayment of five percent (5%) or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit.
C. Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a license fee under this article or any license agreement or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.
D. In the event that any license fee payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in the license agreement, grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prime lending rate plus one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) during the period for which payment was due.
E. License fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the license agreement. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-19 Design and Construction Requirements
A. Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured, at its own expense, all necessary permits, licenses or other forms of approval or authorization from grantor and other cognizant public agencies.
B. In those areas of the Town where transmission or distribution facilities of all the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground.
C. In those areas of the Town where grantee’s cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee’s cost. Certain of grantee’s equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures.
D. In new residential developments in which all the electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the following procedure shall apply with respect to access to and utilization of underground easements:
    1. The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all licensed cable operators to ascertain which operators desire (or, pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article and any license agreement, may be required) to provide cable service to that development. The developer may establish a reasonable deadline to receive cable operator responses. The final development map shall indicate the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development.
    2. If one (1) or two (2) cable operators wish to provide service, they shall be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory shared basis. If fewer than two (2) operators indicate interest, the developer shall provide conduit to accommodate two (2) sets of cable television cables and dedicate to the Town any initially unoccupied conduit. The developer shall be entitled to recover from grantor the cost of such initially unoccupied conduit in the event that grantor subsequently leases or sells occupancy or use rights to any grantee.
    3. The developer shall provide at least ten (10) working days’ notice of the date that utility trenches will be open to the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are open, cable operators shall have two (2) working days to begin the installation of their cables, and five (5) working days after beginning installation to complete installation.
    4. The final development map shall not be approved until the developer submits evidence that:
        a. It has notified each grantee that underground utility trenches are to open as of an estimated date, and that each grantee will be allowed access to such trenches, including trenches from proposed streets to individual homes or home sites, on specified nondiscriminatory terms and conditions; and
        b. It has received a written notification from each grantee that the grantee intends to install its facilities during the open trench period on the specified terms and conditions, or such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreeable to the developer and grantee, or has received no reply from a grantee within ten (10) days after its notification to such grantee, in which case the grantee will be deemed to have waived its opportunity to install its facilities during the open trench period.
    5. Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance with State regulatory agency and utility standards. If such compliance is not possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable television cables, with the entire cost shared among the participating cable operators. With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and the cable operators, alternative installation procedures, such as the use of deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to applicable law.
    6. Any cable operator wishing to serve an area where the trenches have been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs and shall repair all property to the condition which existed prior to such trenching.
E. Grantee shall remove, replace or modify at its own expense the installation of any of its facilities within any street when required to do so by the Town to allow the Town to change, maintain, repair, improve or eliminate a street. Nothing in this section shall prevent grantee from seeking and obtaining reimbursement from sources other than the Town.
F. At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit and upon sufficient notice, grantee shall temporarily raise or lower its wires as necessary to facilitate such move upon not less than seventy-two (72) hours’ advance notice. The direct expense of such temporary changes, including standby time, shall be paid by the holder of the moving permit and grantee may require payment in advance. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-20 Technical Standards
A. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, Federal Communications Commission technical standards, and any standards set forth in its license agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee’s periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to Federal Communications Commission standards and guidelines.
B. Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material license violation.
C. All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, as well as all other applicable local, State and Federal laws and regulations.
D. All installation of electronic equipment shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical and Safety Code and National Electrical Code, as amended, and as may from time to time be amended.
E. Antennas and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable local, State and Federal laws and regulations.
F. All of grantee’s plant and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, headend and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements that the Town may deem appropriate to make, or to interfere in any manner with the rights or reasonable convenience of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct public use of the streets or pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
G. Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-21 Trimming of Trees
Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and hanging over streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the Town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of grantee. Town representatives shall have authority to supervise and approve all trimming of trees conducted by grantee. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-22 Use of Grantee Facilities
The Town shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge, upon the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of grantee, any wires and fixtures desired by the Town to the extent that such installation and maintenance does not interfere with existing operations and future use of grantee. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-23 Hold Harmless
A. Grantee, under any license operated pursuant to this article, shall agree to indemnify, hold harmless, release and defend the Town, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liability, demands, damages, disability, losses, expenses, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs or liabilities of any nature that may be asserted by any person resulting or in any manner arising from the action or inaction of the grantee in constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing or removing the system, in carrying on grantee’s business or operations in the Town or in exercising or failing to exercise any right or privilege granted by the license. This indemnity shall apply, without limitation, to any action or cause of action for invasion of privacy, defamation, antitrust, errors and omissions, theft, fire, violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or any other right of any person, firm or corporation, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or any license agreement, but shall not include any claim or action arising out of the actions or omissions of Town officers, employees or agents or related to any Town programming or other access programming for which the grantee is not legally responsible.
B. The Town shall promptly notify grantee of any claims subject to indemnification by grantee and shall cooperate with all reasonable requests by grantee for information, documents, testimony or other assistance appropriate to a resolution of such claims. Grantee shall have full responsibility for and control of any action or undertaking directed at the resolution of such claims. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-24 Insurance
Grantee shall provide insurance as specified in the license agreement. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-25 Records Required and Grantor’s Right to Inspect
A. Grantee shall at all times maintain:
    1. A full and complete set of plans, records and “as-built” maps showing the location of the cable television system installed or in use in the Town, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers’ homes.
    2. If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days following its request in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor.
B. Upon forty-eight (48) hours’ written notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor, of all license property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the Town, and all records relating to the license, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under local, State and Federal law, this article and the license agreement. Such records include all books, records, maps, plans, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results, records of request for service, and other like materials of grantee. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination.
C. If any of the records described in the previous subsection are proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by State, Federal or local law, upon proper request by grantee, such information obtained during such an inspection shall be treated as confidential. To the extent that any Federal or State law requires grantor to disclose any such records, the Town shall be entitled to disclose those records.
D. Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by grantee, or on behalf of or relating to grantee, to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matters affecting the cable system authorized pursuant to this article and any license shall be made available to the Town upon request. Copies of responses from the regulatory agencies to grantee shall likewise be furnished to the Town upon request. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-26 Annual Reports
A. Grantee shall submit a written end-of-the-year report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year containing the following information:
    1. A summary of the previous year’s (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year’s) activities in development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year.
    2. A list of grantee’s officers, members of its board of directors, and other principals of grantee.
    3. A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent (5%) or more of the voting interest in grantee.
    4. Information as to the number of subscribers and the number of basic and pay service subscribers.
    5. The town, including its agents and representatives, shall have the authority, during normal business hours, to arrange for and conduct an inspection of annual reports required pursuant to this article or a license agreement. The Town shall give the grantee seventy-two (72) hours’ written notice of the inspection request.
    6. If the requested information is proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by State, Federal or local law, upon proper request by grantee, such information obtained during such an inspection shall be treated as confidential. To the extent that any Federal or State law requires grantor to disclose any such records, the Town shall be entitled to disclose records.
B. All reports and records required under this article shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in this article or the license agreement. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-27 License Violation
If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this article or a license granted hereunder, following notice from the grantor and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance, grantor may act to remedy such violation in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Grantor shall notify grantee of any alleged material violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than ten (10) business days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this article or the grantee’s license and thirty (30) days in all other cases.
B. If grantee fails either to correct the violation within the time prescribed or to commence correction of the violation within the time prescribed and thereafter diligently pursue correction of such violation, the grantor shall then give written notice of not less than twenty (20) business days of a public hearing to be held before the Council. Said notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred.
C. At the public hearing, the Council shall hear and consider relevant evidence and thereafter render findings and its decision. In the event that the Council finds that a material violation exists and that grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from grantor and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, the Council may revoke the license or impose another penalty permitted by the license agreement.
    1. The grantor shall give written notice to the grantee of its intent to revoke the license on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the grantee, including one (1) or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the license. The notice shall set forth with specificity the exact nature of the noncompliance. The grantee shall have sixty (60) days from the receipt of the notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the grantor has not received a satisfactory response from the grantee, it may then seek termination of the license at a public hearing. The grantor shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, a written notice specifying the time and place of the hearing and stating its intent to request termination of the license.
    2. At the hearing, the grantor shall give the grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses, after which it shall determine whether or not the license shall be revoked. The public hearing shall be on the record and a written transcript shall be made available to the grantee within ten (10) business days. The decision of the grantor shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the grantee. The grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the grantor and to modify or reverse such decision as justice may require. Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the determination of the grantor. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-28 Force Majeure: Grantee’s Inability to Perform
In the event grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this article or a license grant hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee’s control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, failure or loss of utilities, explosion, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-29 Abandonment or Removal of License Property
A. In the event that the use of any property of grantee within the license area or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that license property.
B. Grantor, upon such terms as grantor may impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the license. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this article, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore any affected street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this article and any security fund provided in the license shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section.
C. Upon abandonment of any license property in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the license property abandoned.
D. At the expiration of the term for which the license is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above-ground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the Town within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days.
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this article, the grantee may abandon any underground license property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-30 Extended Operation and Continuity of Services
Upon either expiration or revocation of the license, the grantor shall have discretion to permit and/or require grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such expiration or revocation. Grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this article and the license and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-31 Receivership and Foreclosure
A. A license granted hereunder shall, at the option of grantor, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
    1. Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this article and the license granted pursuant hereto, and the receivership or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all the faults under the license or provided a plan for the remedy of such faults which is satisfactory to the grantor; and
    2. Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the license granted.
B. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the license property, or any material part thereof, grantor may serve notice of termination upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the license granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless:
    1. Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the license, as and in the manner that this article provides; and
    2. Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the license. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-32 Rights Reserved to Grantor
A. In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this article, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the license.
B. The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the license, except those required by Federal or State regulation, if the grantor determines (1) that it is in the public interest to do so, and (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one (1) instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the license unless the statement so recites. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-33 Rights of Individuals
A. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, disability, gender or sexual preference. Nor shall grantee fail to extend service to any part of the Town within its licensed service area on the basis of the income of the residents. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations, relating to nondiscrimination.
B. Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of Federal, State and local regulations.
C. Neither grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber’s consent, tap or arrange for the tapping of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified.
D. In the conduct of providing its services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber’s or general citizen’s right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. Grantee shall not, without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority, utilize the system’s interactive two (2) way equipment or capability for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen.
E. No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber’s premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber’s property shall be presumed. Where a property owner or his predecessor has granted an easement including a public utility easement or a servitude to another and the servitude by its terms contemplates a use such as grantee’s intended use, grantee shall not be required to obtain the written permission of the owner for the installation of cable television equipment. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-34 Conflicts
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this article and a license agreement entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this article shall control, except as may be specifically otherwise provided in the license agreement. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Section 12-17-35 Severability
If any provision of this article is held by any court or by any Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal or State law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this article, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee; provided, that grantor shall give grantee thirty (30) days’ written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision. ((O)07-35, Enacted,  09/05/2007)

Article 12-18 FEES AND COMPENSATION

Sections:
12-18-1      Purpose

Section 12-18-1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Town related to the enforcement and administration of this Title. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997; (O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-19 CHANGE OF CONTROL

Sections:
12-19-1      Reserved

Section 12-19-1 Reserved
((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-20 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS

Sections:
12-20-1      General

Section 12-20-1 General
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the Town except as provided in this Article and other Town Codes and ordinances. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

Article 12-21 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER

Sections:
12-21-1      Responsibility of Owner

Section 12-21-1 Responsibility of Owner
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the license or franchise grantee, are responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of this Article. ((O)97-03, Enacted,  02/05/1997)

CHAPTER 13 DEVELOPMENT FEES

Articles:
13-1         Development Fees

Article 13-1 DEVELOPMENT FEES

Sections:
13-1-1       Title
13-1-2       Legislative Intent and Purpose
13-1-3       Definitions
13-1-4       Applicability
13-1-5       Authority and Requirements
13-1-6       Administration
13-1-7       Land Use Assumptions
13-1-8       Infrastructure Improvements Plan
13-1-9       Adoption Procedures
13-1-10      Timing for Updates
13-1-11      Collection of Fees
13-1-12      Credits
13-1-13      Appeals
13-1-14      Refunds
13-1-15      Oversight of Program
13-1-16      Fee Schedule

Section 13-1-1 Title
This chapter shall be known as the “Oro Valley Development Fee Ordinance,” and will be referred to in this chapter as “this chapter.” ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-2 Legislative Intent and Purpose
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of Oro Valley by:
A. Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs incurred by the Town that are associated with providing necessary public services to new development;
B. Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing development fees consistent with the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes (“A.R.S.”) Section 9-463.05, including requirements pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-463.05(K), that on or before August 1, 2014, the Town replace its development fees that were adopted prior to January 1, 2012, with development fees adopted pursuant to the requirements of A.R.S. Section 9-463.05 as amended by the State Legislature in SB 1525, Fiftieth Legislature, First Regular Session;
C. Setting forth procedures for administering the development fee program, including offsets, credits, and refunds of development fees. All development fee assessments, offsets, credits, or refunds must be administered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
This chapter shall not affect the Town’s zoning authority or its authority to adopt or amend its General Plan; provided, that planning and zoning activities by the Town may require amendments to development fees as provided in Section 13-1-7. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-3 Definitions
When used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall have the following meanings unless the context requires otherwise. Singular terms shall include their plural.
Applicant means a person who applies to the Town for a building permit or a credit.
Appurtenance means any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components, associated with a capital facility that is necessary or convenient to the operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility.
Aquatic center means a facility primarily designed to host non-recreational competitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not limited to, water polo games, swimming meets and diving events. Such facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting amenities, including, but not limited to, locker rooms, offices, snack bars, bleacher seating and shade structures.
Building permit means the permit required for construction as determined pursuant to Article 6-1 (Building Code) of the Oro Valley Town Code. For purposes of this chapter only, the term “building permit” shall include the approval of the site plan for a mobile home park, the purchase of a new water meter, or the purchase of a larger water meter to replace an existing water meter.
Capital facility means an asset having a useful life of three (3) or more years that is a component of one (1) or more categories of necessary public service provided by the Town. A capital facility may include any associated purchase of real property, architectural and engineering services leading to the design and construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to existing facilities, improvements to or expansions of existing facilities and associated financing and professional services.
Category of development means a specific type of residential, commercial, irrigation or industrial development against which a development fee is calculated and assessed. The Town assesses development fees against the following types of development within each of the three (3) broader categories of development: (A) for residential development, single-family detached, multifamily and mobile home park; (B) for commercial development, retail/commercial, hotel/motel, office and public/institutional; (C) for irrigation; and (D) for industrial, industrial and warehouse.
Category of necessary public service means a specific type of necessary public services for which the Town is authorized to assess development fees pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-463.05(T)(5).
Credit means a reduction in an assessed development fee resulting from developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications for capital facilities included in an infrastructure improvements plan pursuant to Section 13-1-12 (or as otherwise permitted by this chapter).
Credit agreement means a written agreement between the Town and the developer(s) of a subject development that allocates credits to the subject development pursuant to Section 13-1-12.
Credit allocation is a term used to describe when credits are distributed to a particular development or parcel of land after execution of a credit agreement, but are not yet issued.
Credit issuance is a term used to describe when the amount of an assessed development fee attributable to a particular development or parcel of land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.
Developer means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation, State agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development activity, and their respective successors and assigns.
Direct benefit means a benefit to a development resulting from a capital facility that: (A) addresses the need for a necessary public service created in whole or in part by the development; and that (B) meets either of the following criteria: (1) the capital facility is located in the immediate area of the development and is needed in the immediate area of the development to maintain the level of service; or (2) the capital facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need for a capital facility that would have otherwise have been needed in the immediate area of the development to maintain the Town’s level of service.
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms in a building designed or intended to be used for occupancy by one (1) family, with living, sleeping and food preparation facilities, excluding hotel or motel rooms or suites.
Equipment means machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not including vehicles, that are needed by a capital facility to provide the applicable service.
Excluded park facility means park and recreational improvements for which development fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-463.05(T)(7)(g), including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums, arenas, arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities, bathhouses, boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet in floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian facilities, golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks, water reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.
Financing or debt means any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or expansion of a capital facility or associated appurtenances, vehicles or equipment.
General Plan refers to the overall land use plan for the Town establishing areas of the Town for different purposes, zones and activities adopted by the Town as may be amended from time to time.
Gross development fee means the total development fee to be assessed on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of any credits.
Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of each story of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two (2) buildings or different uses, including attic space with headroom of seven (7) feet or greater and served by a permanent, fixed stair, but not including enclosed off-street parking or loading areas. Gross floor area shall also include areas of buildings within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above, which do not have surrounding exterior walls but exceed three (3) feet in horizontal dimension.
Hotel/motel means establishments offering temporary lodging in rooms or suites for less than one (1) month or thirty (30) days.
Industrial means establishments primarily engaged in the fabrication, assembly or processing of goods.
Infrastructure improvements plan means a document or series of documents that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. Section 9-463.05, including those adopted pursuant to Section 13-1-9 to cover any category or combination of categories of necessary public services.
Interim fee schedule means any development fee schedule established prior to January 1, 2012, in accordance with then-applicable law, and which shall expire not later than August 1, 2014, pursuant to Section 13-1-11.
Irrigation means outdoor use of water with a separate water meter for landscaping of property for, but not limited to, commercial, homeowners associations, parks, schools and/or golf courses.
Land use assumptions means projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least ten (10) years as specified in Section 13-1-7.
Level of service means a quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a necessary public service that is to be provided by the Town to development in a particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between service capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort or convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures. Level of service may be measured differently for different categories of necessary public services, as identified in the applicable infrastructure improvements plan.
Lot. As defined in Chapter 31 of the Oro Valley Town Code.
Multifamily means a building or buildings containing multiple dwelling units.
Necessary public services shall have the meaning prescribed in A.R.S. Section 9-463.05(T)(7).
Nonresidential means all land uses, except single-family detached and multifamily.
Office means a building not located in a shopping center and exclusively containing establishments providing executive, management, administrative or professional services. An office use may include ancillary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand, or child care facilities. Ground floor retail uses may also be included, but that space shall be assessed at the retail/commercial rate. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, property management, investment, employment, travel, advertising, secretarial, data processing, telephone answering, telephone marketing, music, radio and television recording and broadcasting studios; banks excluding drive-through only facilities; professional or consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar professions; interior decorating consulting services; medical and dental offices and clinics, including veterinarian clinics and kennels; and business offices of private companies, utility companies, trade associations, unions and nonprofit organizations.
Offset means an amount that is subtracted from the overall costs of providing necessary public services to account for those capital facilities or associated debt that will be paid for by a development through taxes, fees (except for development fees), and other revenue sources, as determined by the Town pursuant to Section 13-1-8.
Park facilities means a category of necessary public services including but not limited to parks, swimming pools and related facilities and equipment located on real property not larger than thirty (30) acres in area, as well as park facilities larger than thirty (30) acres where such facilities provide a direct benefit. Park facilities do not include excluded park facilities, although park facilities may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded park facility.
Plan-based cost per service unit means the total future capital costs identified in the infrastructure improvements plan for a category of necessary public services as attributable to new development over a specified time period divided by the total new service units projected in a particular service area for that category of necessary public services over the same time period, less the offset per service unit.
Police facilities means a category of necessary public services, including vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders, protect the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain police records, vehicles, equipment and communications systems. Police facilities do not include vehicles and equipment used to provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Police facilities do not include any facility that is used for training officers from more than one (1) station or substation.
Qualified professional means any one (1) of the following: (A) a professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst or planner, or other licensed professional providing services within the scope of that person’s education or experience related to city planning, zoning, or development fees and holding a license issued by an agency or political subdivision of the State of Arizona; (B) a financial analyst, planner, or other non-licensed professional who is providing services within the scope of the person’s education or experience related to city planning, zoning, or development fees; or (C) any other person operating under the supervision of one (1) or more of the above.
Residential land use means a single-family detached, multifamily or mobile home development.
Retail/commercial means an establishment engaged in the selling or rental of goods, services or entertainment to the general public. Such uses include, but are not limited to, shopping centers, discount stores, supermarkets, home improvement stores, pharmacies, restaurants, bars, nightclubs, automobile sales and service, drive-through banks, movie theaters, amusement arcades, bowling alleys, barber shops, laundromats, funeral homes, private vocational or technical schools, dance studios, health clubs and banquet halls.
Service area means any specified area within the boundaries of the Town within which: (A) the Town will provide a category of necessary public services to development at a planned level of service; and (B) within which (1) a substantial nexus exists between the capital facilities to be provided and the development to be served, or (2) in the case of a park facility larger than thirty (30) acres, a direct benefit exists between the park facilities and the development to be served, each as prescribed in the infrastructure improvements plan. Some or all of the capital facilities providing service to a service area may be physically located outside of that service area; provided, that the required substantial nexus or direct benefit is demonstrated to exist. The water service area may include areas within or outside of Town boundaries.
Service unit means a unit of demand within a particular category of necessary public services, defined in terms of a standardized measure of the demand that a unit of development in a category of development generates for necessary public services. For water service the service unit is the five-eighths (5/8) inch water meter size. For larger water meter sizes the total number of service units is based upon the AWWA capacity ratio.
Single-family detached means a lot containing one (1) dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit.
Subject development means a contiguous land area linked by a unified plan of development, in furtherance of which the developer has made a capital improvement or other contribution for which credit is requested.
Substantial nexus means a substantial nexus exists where the demand for necessary public services that will be generated by a development can be reasonably quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of existing capital facilities, the need it will create for new or expanded capital facilities, and/or the benefit to the development from those capital facilities.
Swimming pool means a public facility primarily designed and/or utilized for recreational non-competitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public swimming sessions and recreational league swimming/diving events. The facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting amenities.
Town means the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona.
Transportation facilities means a category of necessary public services consisting of Town-owned arterial and major collector streets; and also includes traffic signals, rights-of-way, and improvements thereon; culverts, irrigation tiling, and storm drains serving such streets.
Useful life means the period of time in which an asset can reasonably be expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will continue to be owned and operated by the Town over the entirety of such period.
Vehicle means any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for transportation in the course of providing a particular category of necessary public services, excluding helicopters and other aircraft.
Warehouse means establishments primarily engaged in the display, storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale; activities involving movement and storage of products or equipment; or an enclosed storage facility containing independent, fully enclosed bays that are leased to persons for storage of their household goods or personal property.
Water facilities means a category of necessary public services including but not limited to those facilities necessary to provide for water services to development, including the acquisition, supply, transportation, treatment, purification and distribution of water, and any appurtenances to those facilities. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-4 Applicability
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the territory within the corporate limits of the Town and its water service area, as follows:
    1. Development fees for transportation, parks and police facilities shall be assessed on all new development within the Town’s corporate limits, as those may be amended from time to time.
    2. Development fees for water facilities shall be assessed for any new connection to the Town’s water system or any upgrade of an existing connection to a larger meter size.
B. The Development Infrastructure Services Director or his/her designee is authorized to make determinations regarding the application, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, except in cases where another Town official has specifically been given such authority pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Water Utility Director or his/her designee is authorized to make determinations regarding the application, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and Article 15-17 pertaining to the water development impact fees. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-5 Authority and Requirements
A. Authority. The Town may assess and collect a development fee for costs of necessary public services, including all professional services required for the preparation or revision of an infrastructure improvements plan, development fee, and required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this chapter.
B. Requirements. Development fees shall be subject to the following requirements:
    1. The Town shall develop and adopt a written report of the land use assumptions and infrastructure improvements plan that analyzes and defines the development fees that may be charged in each service area for each category of necessary public service.
    2. Development fees shall be assessed against all new single-family residential, multifamily residential, commercial, irrigation and industrial developments; provided, that the Town may assess different amounts of development fees against specific categories of development based on the actual burdens and costs that are associated with providing necessary public services to that category of development. No development fee shall exceed the plan-based cost per service unit for any category of development.
    3. No development fees shall be charged, or credits issued, for any capital facility that does not fall within one (1) of the categories of necessary public services for which development fees may be assessed as identified in Section 13-1-8(A)(1).
    4. Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new development shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing development in the same service area. Development fees may not be used to provide a higher level of service to existing development or to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities that are serving existing development.
    5. Development fees may not be used to pay the Town’s administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.
    6. Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be included in development fees to the extent they represent principal and/or interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the infrastructure improvements plan.
    7. Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules, all development fees charged by the Town must be included in a “fee schedule” prepared and adopted pursuant to this chapter.
    8. All development fees shall meet the requirements of A.R.S. Section 9-463.05.
    9. If the Town agrees to waive any development fees assessed on a development, the Town shall reimburse the appropriate development fee account for the amount that was waived.
    10. The actual development fees to be assessed shall be disclosed and adopted in the form of development fee schedules in Section 13-1-16. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-6 Administration
A. Separate Accounts.  Development fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing accounts for each category of necessary public services within each service area.
B. Limitations on Use of Fees. Development fees and any interest thereon collected pursuant to this chapter shall be spent to provide capital facilities associated with the same category of necessary public services in the same service area for which they were collected, including costs of financing or debt used by the Town to finance such capital facilities and other costs authorized by this chapter that are included in the infrastructure improvements plan.
C. Time Limit. Development fees collected after July 31, 2014, shall be used within ten (10) years of the date upon which they were collected for all categories of necessary public services except for water facilities. Development fees for water facilities collected after July 31, 2014, shall be used within fifteen (15) years of the date upon which they were collected. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-7 Land Use Assumptions
The infrastructure improvements plan shall be consistent with the Town’s current land use assumptions for each service area and each category of necessary public services as adopted by the Town pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-463.05.
A. Reviewing the Land Use Assumptions. Prior to the adoption or amendment of an infrastructure improvements plan, the Town shall review and evaluate the land use assumptions on which the infrastructure improvements plan is to be based to ensure that the land use assumptions within each service area conform to the General Plan.
B. Evaluating Necessary Changes. If the land use assumptions upon which an infrastructure improvements plan is based have not been updated within the last five (5) years, the Town shall evaluate the land use assumptions to determine whether changes are necessary. If, after general evaluation, the Town determines that the land use assumptions are still valid, the Town shall issue the notice required in Section 13-1-10.
C. Required Modifications to Land Use Assumptions. If the Town determines that changes to the land use assumptions are necessary in order to adopt or amend an infrastructure improvements plan, it shall make such changes as necessary to the land use assumptions prior to or in conjunction with the review and approval of the infrastructure improvements plan pursuant to Section 13-1-9. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-8 Infrastructure Improvements Plan
A. Infrastructure Improvements Plan Contents. The infrastructure improvements plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be based upon or incorporated within the Town’s capital improvements plan. The infrastructure improvements plan shall:
    1. Specify the categories of necessary public services for which the Town will impose a development fee.
    2. Define and provide a map of one (1) or more service areas within which the Town will provide each category of necessary public services for which development fees will be charged. Each service area must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a substantial nexus between the capital facilities to be provided in the service area and the service units to be served by those capital facilities. For libraries and for parks larger than thirty (30) acres, each service area must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a direct benefit between the capital facilities and the service units to be served by those capital facilities. The Town may cover more than one (1) category of capital facilities in the same service area; provided, that there is an independent substantial nexus or direct benefit, as applicable, between each category of necessary public services and the service units to be served.
    3. Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon which the infrastructure improvements plan is based in each service area.
    4. Analyze and identify the existing level of service provided by the Town to existing service units for each category of necessary public services in each service area.
    5. Identify the level of service to be provided by the Town for each category of necessary public services in each service area based on the relevant land use assumptions and any established Town standards or policies related to required levels of service. If the Town provides the same category of necessary public services in more than one (1) service area, the infrastructure improvements plan shall include a comparison of the levels of service to be provided in each service area.
    6. For each category of necessary public services, analyze and identify the existing capacity of the capital facilities in each service area, the utilization of those capital facilities by existing service units and the available excess capacity of those capital facilities to serve new service units including any existing or planned commitments or agreements for the usage of such capacity.
    7. Estimate the total number of existing and future service units within each service area based on the town’s land use assumptions.
    8. Based on the analysis in subsections (A)(3) through (6) of this section, provide a summary table or tables describing the level of service for each category of necessary public services by relating the required capital facilities to service units in each service area, and identifying the applicable service unit factor associated with each category of development.
    9. For each category of necessary public services, analyze and identify the projected utilization of any available excess capacity in existing capital facilities, and all new or expanded capital facilities that will be required to provide and maintain the planned level of service in each service area as a result of the new projected service units in that service area, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the Town from additionally including in its infrastructure improvements plan projected utilization of, or needs for, capital facilities for a period longer than ten (10) years; provided, that the costs of such capital facilities are excluded from the calculation of the plan-based cost per service unit.
    10. For each category of necessary public services, estimate the total cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or expanded capital facilities that will be required to serve new service units, including costs of land acquisition, improvements, engineering and architectural services, studies leading to design, design, construction, financing, and administrative costs. Such total costs shall not include costs for ongoing operation and maintenance of capital facilities, nor for replacement of capital facilities to the extent that such replacement is necessary to serve existing service units. If the infrastructure improvements plan includes changes or upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or maintain the planned level of service to existing service units, or to meet new regulatory requirements for services provided to existing service units, such costs shall be identified and distinguished in the infrastructure improvements plan.
    11. Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or other sources that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital facilities identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, which shall include estimated State-shared revenue, highway users revenue, Federal revenue, ad valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar excise taxes and the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to development based on the approved land use assumptions.
    12. Calculate required offsets as follows:
        a. Identify those sources of revenue that: (i) are attributable to new development, and (ii) will contribute to paying for the capital costs of necessary public services.
        b. For each source of revenue identified pursuant to subsection (A)(12)(a) of this section, calculate the relative contribution of new development paying for the capital costs of necessary public services in each service area.
        c. Based on the relative contributions identified pursuant to subsection (A)(12)(b) of this section, for each category of necessary public services, calculate the total offset per service unit to be provided in each service area.
        d. Beginning August 1, 2014, for purposes of calculating the required offset, if the Town imposes a construction, contracting, or similar excise tax rate in excess of the percentage amount of the transaction privilege tax rate that is imposed on the majority of other transaction privilege tax classifications in the Town, the entire excess portion of the construction, contracting, or similar excise tax shall be treated as a contribution to the capital costs of necessary public services provided to new development unless the excess portion is already utilized for such purpose pursuant to this section.
    13. Calculate the plan-based cost per service unit by:
        a. Dividing the total projected costs to provide capital facilities to new service units for each category of necessary public services in each service area as determined pursuant to subsections (A)(1) through (11) of this section by the total number of new service units projected for that service area over a period not to exceed ten (10) years for each category of necessary public services.
        b. Subtracting the required offset per service unit calculated pursuant to subsection (A)(13) of this section.
B. Multiple Plans. An infrastructure improvements plan adopted pursuant to this subsection may address one (1) or more of the town’s categories of necessary public services in any or all of the Town’s service areas. Each capital facility shall be subject to no more than one (1) infrastructure improvements plan at any given time.
C. Reserved Capacity. The Town may reserve capacity in an infrastructure improvements plan to serve one (1) or more planned future developments. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the infrastructure improvements plan at the time it is adopted. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-9 Adoption Procedures
A. Adopting or Amending the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. The infrastructure improvements plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the following procedures:
    1. Major Amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section, the adoption or amendment of an infrastructure improvements plan shall occur at one (1) or more public hearings according to the following schedule, and may occur concurrently with the adoption of an update of the Town’s land use assumptions as provided in Section 13-1-7:
        a. Sixty (60) days before the first public hearing regarding a new or updated infrastructure improvements plan, the Town shall provide public notice of the hearing and post the infrastructure improvements plan and the underlying land use assumptions on its website; the Town shall additionally make available to the public the documents used to prepare the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions and the amount of any proposed changes to the plan-based cost per service unit.
        b. The Town shall conduct a public hearing on the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions.
        c. The Town shall approve or disapprove the infrastructure improvements plan within sixty (60) days, but no sooner than thirty (30) days, after the public hearing. If the document was amended as a result of the public hearing, the revised infrastructure improvements plan shall be posted on the Town’s public website at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting.
    2. Minor Amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the Town may update the infrastructure improvements plan and/or its underlying land use assumptions without a public hearing if all of the following apply:
        a. The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not add any new category of necessary public services to any service area.
        b. The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not increase the level of service to be provided in any service area.
        c. Based on a written analysis, the changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions would not, individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken pursuant to this subsection, have caused a development fee in any service area to have been increased by more than five (5) percent above the development fee that is provided in the current development fee schedule.
        d. At least thirty (30) days prior to the date that any amendment pursuant to this section is adopted, the Town shall post the proposed amendments on the Town website.
B. Adopting or Amending the Fees. Any adoption or amendment of a fee schedule shall occur at one (1) or more public hearings according to the following schedule:
    1. The first public hearing on the fee schedule must be held at least thirty (30) days after the adoption or approval of the infrastructure improvements plan as provided in subsection (A) of this section. The Town must give at least thirty (30) days’ notice prior to the hearing; provided, that this notice may be given on the same day as the approval or disapproval of the infrastructure improvements plan.
    2. The Town shall make the fee schedule available to the public on the Town’s website thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing described in subsection (B)(1) of this section.
    3. The fee schedule may be adopted by the Town no sooner than thirty (30) days, and no later than sixty (60) days, after the hearing described in subsection (B)(1) of this section. If the fee schedule was amended as a result of the public hearing, the revised fee schedule shall be posted on the Town’s public website at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting.
    4. The development fee schedule adopted pursuant to this subsection shall become effective no earlier than seventy-five (75) days after adoption of the fee schedule by the Town. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-10 Timing for Updates
A. Updating the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, not later than every five (5) years the Town shall update the applicable infrastructure improvements plan related to each category of necessary public services pursuant to Section 13-1-9. Such five (5) year period shall be calculated from the date of the adoption of the infrastructure improvements plan.
B. Determination of No Changes.  Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, if the Town determines that no changes to an infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, or fee schedules are needed, the Town may elect to continue the existing infrastructure improvements plan without amendment by providing notice as follows:
    1. Notice of the determination shall be published at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the end of the five (5) year period described in subsection (A) of this section.
    2. The notice shall identify the infrastructure improvements plan and fee schedule that shall continue in force without amendment.
    3. The notice shall provide a map and description of the service area(s) covered by such infrastructure improvements plan and fee schedule.
    4. The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of the Town may submit, within sixty (60) days, a written request that the Town update the infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, and/or fee schedule and the reasons and basis for the request.
C. Response to Comments. The Town shall consider and respond within thirty (30) days to any timely requests submitted pursuant to subsection (B)(4) of this section. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-11 Collection of Fees
A. Collection. Development fees, together with any administrative charges assessed to defray the costs of administering this chapter, shall be calculated and collected at issuance of permission to commence development; specifically:
    1. Development fees shall be paid no sooner than the time of issuance of a building permit but prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy according to the current development fee schedule for the applicable service area(s) as adopted pursuant to this chapter, or according to any other applicable development fee schedule as authorized in this chapter. All water development impact fees will be collected after the issuance of a building permit and/or at the time a water meter is purchased.
        a. The Town shall determine the amount of each required development fee through the use of the applicable fee schedule.
        b. The Town shall determine the category of development for each development based on overall, long-term impact of the development. In general, impact fees shall be assessed based on the principal use of a building or lot. For example, a warehouse that contains an administrative office would be assessed at the warehouse rate for all of the square footage. Shopping centers shall be assessed at the retail/commercial rate, regardless of the type of tenants. For a true mixed-use development, such as one that includes both residential and nonresidential development, the fee shall be determined by adding up the fees that would be payable for each use as if it was a free-standing land use type pursuant to the fee schedule. For uses that cannot readily be designated under a particular category of development, the Development and Infrastructure Services Director or designee shall determine the category the particular use will be assigned based on which category has a daily trip generation rate most similar to the proposed use. Determinations of the category of development may be appealed to the Town Manager or his/her designee.
        c. The Town shall determine the water meter size for each lot based on the actual meter size installed on each lot. If the exact meter size is not listed in a table, then the Town shall use the next largest meter size in such table. If a lot consists of two (2) or more separate areas with separate meters in each separate area, then the development fee shall be determined by adding up all the fees that would be applicable for each meter size in each separate area.
        d. In assessing the development fees for nonresidential land use types, square footage shall be measured in terms of gross floor area, and any determination of square footage shall be in whole units, with any fractions thereof being rounded up to the next square foot.
        e. Development fees for development projects involving an addition to or remodeling of an existing facility, change of use, change of housing type, change of meter size or other modification or redevelopment of a previously developed lot or building with a valid certificate of occupancy shall be calculated as follows: only the new portion of development for the current project will be subject to the current development fee schedule.
    2. If a building permit is not required for the development, but water connections are required, any and all development fees due shall be paid at the time the water meter (service connection) is purchased. If no building permit or water connection is required, all development fees shall be paid prior to development approval.
    3. In determining the amount of fees required for land included in a community facilities district established under A.R.S. 48, Chapter 4, Article 6, the Town shall take into account any capital facilities provided by the district that are included in the infrastructure improvements plan and the capital costs paid by the district for such capital facilities, and shall reduce development fees assessed within the community facilities district proportionally.
    4. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued if a development fee is not paid as directed in the previous subsections.
    5. If the building permit is for a change in the type of building use, an increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an additional or upgraded point of demand to the water system, the development fee shall be assessed on the additional service units resulting from the expansion or change, and following the development fee schedule applicable to any new use type.
    6. For issued permits that expire or are voided, development fees and administrative charges shall be as follows:
        a. If the original permittee is seeking to renew an expired or voided permit, and the development fees paid for such development have not been refunded, then the permittee shall pay the difference between any development fees paid at the time the permit was issued and those in the fee schedule at the time the permit is reissued or renewed.
        b. If a new or renewed permit for the same development is being sought by someone other than the original permittee, the new permit applicant shall pay the full development fees specified in the fee schedule in effect at the time that the permits are reissued or renewed. If the original permittee has assigned its rights under the permits to the new permit applicant, the new permit applicant shall pay development fees as if it were the original permittee.
B. Exceptions. Development fees shall not be owed under any of the following conditions:
    1. Development fees have been paid for the development and the permit(s) which triggered the collection of the development fees have not expired or been voided.
    2. The approval(s) that trigger the collection of development fees involve modifications to existing development that do not: (a) add new service units, (b) increase the impact of existing service units on existing or future capital facilities, or (c) change the land-use type of the existing development to a different category of development for which a higher development fee would have been due. To the extent that any modification does not meet the requirements of this subsection, the development fee due shall be the difference between the development fee that was or would have been due on the existing development and the development fee that is due on the development as modified.
    3. Notwithstanding any other law, a city or town shall not assess or collect any fees or costs from a school district or charter school for fees pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-463.05. This prohibition does not include fees assessed or collected for streets and water and sewer utility functions pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-500.18.
    4. Temporary structures for which an administrative use permit is secured for use as a sales office and not for residential or other purposes and intended to be removed within the two (2) year period granted under the use permit shall be exempt from development fees. This exemption shall not apply where the temporary building is erected on a parcel of land upon which a permanent building with permanent facilities is to be constructed.
C. Temporary Exemptions from Development Fee Schedules. New developments in the Town shall be temporarily exempt from increases in development fees that result from the adoption of new or modified development fee schedules as follows:
    1. Single-Family Uses. On or after the day that the first building permit is issued for a single-family development, the Town shall, at the permittee’s request, provide the permittee with an applicable development fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of twenty-four (24) months beginning on the day that the first building permit is issued, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the twenty-fifth (25th) month thereafter. During the effective period of the applicable development fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same single-family development shall not be subject to any new or modified development fee schedule; provided, that if the Town reduces the amount of an applicable development fee during the period that a grandfathered development fee schedule is in force, the Town shall assess the lower development fee.
    2. Nonresidential and Multifamily Uses. On or after the day that the final approval is issued for a nonresidential or multifamily development, the Town shall provide an applicable development fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of twenty-four (24) months beginning on the day that final development approval of a site plan or final subdivision plat is given, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the twenty-fifth (25th) month thereafter. For the purpose of this subsection, final approval shall mean the approval of a site plan or, if no site plan is submitted for the development, the approval of a final subdivision plat. During the effective period of the applicable development fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same development shall not be subject to any new or modified development fee schedule; provided, that if the Town reduces the amount of an applicable development fee during the period that a grandfathered development fee schedule is in force, the Town shall assess the lower development fee.
    3. Other Development. Any development not covered under subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section shall pay development fees according to the fee schedule that is current at the time of collection as specified in subsection (A) of this section.
    4. Changes to Site Plans and Subdivision Plats. Notwithstanding the other requirements of this subsection, if changes are made to a development’s final site plan or subdivision plat that will increase the number of service units after the issuance of a grandfathered development fee schedule, the Town may assess any new or modified development fees against the additional service units. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-12 Credits
A. Eligibility of Capital Facility. All development fee credits must meet the following requirements:
    1. One (1) of the following is true:
        a. The capital facility or the financial contribution toward a capital facility that will be provided by the developer and for which a credit will be issued must be identified in an adopted infrastructure improvements plan as a capital facility for which a development fee was assessed; or
        b. The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject capital facility should have been included in the infrastructure improvements plan in lieu of a different capital facility that was included in the infrastructure improvements plan and for which a development fee was assessed. If the subject capital facility is determined to be eligible for a credit in this manner, the Town shall amend the infrastructure improvements plan to (i) include the subject replacement facility and (ii) delete the facility that will be replaced.
    2. Credits shall not be available for any capital facility provided by a developer if the cost of such capital facility will be repaid to the developer by the Town through another agreement or mechanism. To the extent that the developer will be paid or reimbursed by the Town for any contribution, payment, construction, or dedication from any Town funding source, any credits claimed by the developer shall be: (a) deducted from any amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the Town; or (b) reduced by the amount of such payment or reimbursement.
B. Eligibility of Subject Development. o be eligible for a credit, the subject development must be located within the Service Area of the eligible capital facility.
C. Calculation of Credits. Credits will be based on that portion of the costs for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted infrastructure improvements plan for which a development fee was assessed. If the gross development fee for a particular category of necessary public service is adopted at an amount lower than the plan-based cost per service unit, the amount of any credit shall be reduced in proportion to the difference between the plan-based cost per service unit and the gross development fee adopted. A credit shall not exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in providing the eligible capital facility, nor shall it exceed the amount of the applicable development fee for the subject development.
D. Allocation of Credits. Before any credit can be issued to a subject development (or portion thereof), the credit must be allocated to that development as follows:
    1. The developer and the Town must execute a credit agreement including all of the following:
        a. The total amount of the credits resulting from provision of an eligible capital facility.
        b. The estimated number of service units to be served within the subject development.
        c. The method by which the credit values will be distributed within the subject development.
    2. It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation of development fee credits through an application for a credit agreement.
    3. If a building permit is issued or a water connection is purchased, and a development fee is paid prior to execution of a credit agreement for the subject development, no credits may be allocated retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits may be allocated to any remaining permits for the subject development in accordance with this chapter.
    4. If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility sells or relinquishes a development (or portion thereof) that it owns or controls prior to execution of a credit agreement, credits will only be allocated to the development if the entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to its successor(s) in interest for the subject development.
    5. If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital facility, both entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the Town, and any request for the allocation of credit within the subject development(s) must be made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible capital facility.
E. Credit Agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a credit agreement executed in accordance with subsection (D) of this section. The Development and Infrastructure Services Director or authorized designee is authorized by this chapter to enter into a credit agreement with the controlling entity of a subject development, subject to the following:
    1. The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all information requested by the Town to allow it to determine the value of the credit to be applied.
    2. An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted to the Town by the developer within one (1) year of the date on which ownership or control of the capital facility passes to the Town.
    3. The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the Development and Infrastructure Services Director or authorized designee(s) for review in the form provided to the applicant by the Town. The draft credit agreement shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information and supporting documentation:
        a. A legal description and map depicting the location of the subject development for which credit is being applied. The map shall depict the location of the capital facilities that have been or will be provided.
        b. An estimate of the total service units that will be developed within the subject development depicted on the map and described in the legal description.
        c. A list of the capital facilities, associated physical attributes and the related costs as stated in the infrastructure improvements plan.
        d. Documentation showing the date(s) of acceptance by the Town, if the capital facilities have already been provided.
        e. The total amount of credit to be applied within the subject development and the calculations leading to the total amount of credit.
        f. The credit amount to be applied to each service unit within the subject development for each category of necessary public services.
    4. The applicant shall pay the cost incurred by the Town in making the determination. The Town as a condition of proceeding with the application will require a deposit of the reasonably estimated cost. The Town’s determination of the credit to be allocated is final.
    5. Upon execution of the credit agreement by the Town and the applicant, credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development.
    6. Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be initiated within two (2) years of the Town’s final acceptance of the eligible capital facility for which the amendment is requested.
    7. Development credits must be used within ten (10) years from the date of credit agreement.
F. Issuance of Credits. Credits allocated pursuant to subsection (D) of this section may be issued and applied toward the gross development fees due from a development, subject to the following conditions:
    1. Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only be applied to the development fee due for the applicable category of necessary public services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another category of necessary public services.
    2. Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital facility from which the credits were derived has been accepted by the Town.
    3. Where credits have been issued pursuant to subsection (F)(2) of this section, a development fee due at the time a building permit is issued shall be reduced by the credit amount stated in or calculated from the executed credit agreement. Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross development fee shall be paid in full.
    4. Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or reallocated to another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released for reuse on the same subject development if a building permit for which the credits were issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund under Section 13-1-14(A)(2)(a). ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-13 Appeals
A development fee determination by Town staff may be appealed in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Limited Scope. An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the calculation of the development fees for a specific development and/or permit and calculation of service units for the development.
B. Form of Appeal. An appeal shall be initiated on such written form as the Town may prescribe and submitted to the Development and Infrastructure Services Director or designee. The applicant shall submit a written notice of appeal with a full statement of the grounds and an appeal fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or such other amount as may be fixed from time to time by ordinance adopted by the Town Council.
C. Action by Manager. The Town Manager or authorized designee shall act upon the appeal within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the appeal and the applicant shall be notified of the Town Manager or authorized designee’s decision in writing.
D. Final Decision. The Town Manager or authorized designee’s decision regarding the appeal is final.
E. Fees During Pendency. Building permits may be issued during the pendency of an appeal if the applicant (1) pays the full development fee calculated by the Town at the time the appeal is filed or (2) provides the Town with financial assurances in the form acceptable to the Town Manager or authorized designee equal to the full amount of the development fee. Upon final disposition of an appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered, and a refund paid if warranted. If the appeal is denied by the Town Manager or authorized designee, and the applicant has provided the Town with financial assurances as set forth in subsection (E)(2) of this section, the applicant shall deliver the full amount of the development fee to the Town within ten (10) days of the Town Manager or designee’s final decision on the appeal. If the applicant fails to deliver the full amount of the development fees when required by this subsection, the Town may draw upon such financial assurance instrument(s) as necessary to recover the full amount of the development fees due from the applicant. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-14 Refunds
A. Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any current owner of property within the Town who submits a written request to the Town and demonstrates that:
    1. The permit(s) that triggered the collection of the development fee have expired or been voided prior to the commencement of the development for which the permits were issued and the development fees collected have not been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the repayment of financing or debt; or
    2. The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor in interest paid a development fee for the applicable category of necessary public services on or after August 1, 2014, and one (1) of the following conditions exists:
        a. The capital facility designed to serve the subject real property has been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject real property and any development for which there is reserved capacity and the service which was to be provided by that capital facility has not been provided to the subject real property from that capital facility or from any other capital facility.
        b. After collecting the fee to construct a capital facility, the Town fails to complete construction of the capital facility within the time period identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, as it may be amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the subject real property from that capital facility or any other capital facility.
        c. For a category of necessary public services other than water facilities, any part of a development fee is not spent within ten (10) years of the Town’s receipt of the development fee.
        d. Any part of a development fee for water facilities is not spent within fifteen (15) years of the Town’s receipt of the development fee.
        e. The development fee was calculated and collected for the construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific capital facility serving the subject real property and the actual construction costs for the capital facility are less than the construction costs projected in the infrastructure improvements plan by a factor of ten percent (10%) or more. In such event, the current owner of the subject real property shall, upon request as set forth in this subsection (A), be entitled to a refund for the difference between the amounts of the development fee charged for and attributable to such construction cost and the amount the development fee would have been calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the infrastructure improvements plan. In performing the recalculation, the Town may take into consideration actual construction costs for other improvements serving the subject real property that were included in the infrastructure improvements plan for the same category of necessary public facilities. The refund contemplated by this subsection shall relate only to the costs specific to the construction of the applicable capital facility and shall not include any related design, administrative, or other costs not directly incurred for construction of the capital facility that are included in the development fee as permitted by A.R.S. Section 9-463.05.
B. Earned Interest. A refund of a development fee shall include any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the development fee by the Town from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid.
C. Refund to Government. If a development fee was paid by a governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.
D. Correction of Errors. he Development and Infrastructure Services Director or designee is hereby authorized and directed to correct any error in the assessment and collection of development fees detected within twenty-four (24) months of the date of the payment of the development fees, including assessing additional development fee amounts or issuing a refund from the appropriate development fee fund(s).
E. No Refund for Change of Development. After a development fee has been paid pursuant to this chapter, no refund of any part of such development fee shall be made if the development for which the development fee was paid is later demolished, destroyed, or is altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to reduce the size of the development, the number of units in the development, or the number of service units. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-15 Oversight of Program
A. Annual Report. Within ninety (90) days of the end of each fiscal year, the Town shall file with the Town Clerk an unaudited annual report accounting for the collection and use of the fees for each service area and shall post the report on its website in accordance with A.R.S. Section 9-463.05(N) and (O), as amended.
B. Biennial Audit. In addition to the annual report described in subsection (A) of this section, the Town shall provide for a biennial, certified audit of the Town’s land use assumptions, infrastructure improvements plan and development fees.
    1. An audit pursuant to this subsection shall be conducted by one (1) or more qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of the Town and who did not prepare the infrastructure improvements plan.
    2. The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of development fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments describing the amount of development fees assessed, collected and spent on capital facilities.
    3. The audit shall describe the level of service in each service area and evaluate any inequities in implementing the infrastructure improvements plan or imposing the development fee.
    4. The Town shall post the findings of the audit on the Town’s website and shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within sixty (60) days of the release of the audit to the public.
    5. For purposes of this section a certified audit shall mean any audit authenticated by one (1) or more of the qualified professionals conducting the audit pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 13-1-16 Fee Schedule
A. Transportation, Parks and Police Development Fees. 
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
|     Land Use Type      |   Unit    | Transportation | Parks | Police | Total  |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Single-Family Detached | Dwelling  | $1,990         | $856  | $310   | $3,156 |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Multifamily            | Dwelling  | $1,231         | $599  | $215   | $2,045 |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Mobile Home Park       | Space     | $649           | $651  | $234   | $1,534 |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Hotel/Motel            | Room      | $758           | $0    | $200   | $958   |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Retail/Commercial      | 1,000 sq. | $2,412         | $0    | $447   | $2,859 |
|                        | ft.       |                |       |        |        |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Office                 | 1,000 sq. | $1,822         | $0    | $156   | $1,978 |
|                        | ft.       |                |       |        |        |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Industrial             | 1,000 sq. | $983           | $0    | $65    | $1,048 |
|                        | ft.       |                |       |        |        |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Warehouse              | 1,000 sq. | $915           | $0    | $63    | $978   |
|                        | ft.       |                |       |        |        |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
| Public/Institutional   | 1,000 sq. | $1,379         | $0    | $118   | $1,497 |
|                        | ft.       |                |       |        |        |
+------------------------+-----------+----------------+-------+--------+--------+
B. Water Development Fees. Refer to Article 15-17. ((O)14-04, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

CHAPTER 14 none
Repealed.

CHAPTER 15 WATER CODE

Articles:
15-1         Title, Intent and Purpose, Definitions
15-2         Responsible Entities
15-3         Town Water Utility Director
15-4         Oro Valley Water Utility Commission
15-5         Application for Service Required; Payment of Charges; Prerequisite to Serve; Deposits; Amount; Refund; Bond; Other Service Related Matters
15-6         Bond(S)
15-7         Grounds for Refusal of Service
15-8         Temporary Service
15-9         Service Lines, Valves and Meters
15-10        Easements and Rights of Way
15-11        Agreements for Construction and Financing of Water Facilities Authorized
15-12        Construction of Facilities Other than by Town
15-13        Water System Capacity Requirements, Oversizing, Refunds for Oversized Capacity
15-14        Service Area Inclusion and Fees
15-15        Provision of Water Utility Service
15-16        Service Obligations of the Town, Interruptions
15-17        Water Rates, Fees and Charges
15-18        Water Conservation
15-19        Violations, Fines and Penalties
15-20        Amendments and Public Hearings
15-21        CONFLICT OF INTEREST
(Reserved)
15-22        Severability
15-23        Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Program
15-24        Stormwater

Article 15-1 TITLE, INTENT AND PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS

Sections:
15-1-1       Title
15-1-2       Intent and Purpose
15-1-3       Definitions

Section 15-1-1 Title
This code shall be known as and shall be entitled the Water Code of the Town of Oro Valley. Sections 15-1-2 through 15-23-17 apply to the water utility and are referred to as the Water Utility Code. Article 15-24 applies to stormwater which is under the Public Works Department, and is referred to as the Stormwater Code. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-1-2 Intent and Purpose
It is the intent and purpose of the Oro Valley Town Council, by adopting this Water Utility Code, to promote the health, safety, order, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the Town; and those served by Town utilities outside the Town boundaries, and specifically to:
A. Provide for safe and reliable water utility service to the inhabitants of the Town and those served outside the Town boundaries;
B. Provide for the financial integrity of the Town water utility;
C. Protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and those persons served by a Town utility outside the Town boundaries;
D. Manage the water resources of the Town to protect the existing inhabitants of the Town and those served by a Town utility outside the Town boundaries, inhabitants of the Town and those served by a Town utility outside the Town boundaries, and to facilitate the economic development of the Town;
E. Develop water resources for the benefit of those served by a Town utility;
F. Provide for the expansion and improvement to the Town’s water utility system(s); and
G. Secure economy in municipal expenditures and facilitate adequate provision of water system capacity and improvement. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-1-3 Definitions
In this Water Utility Code, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:
“Applicant” means a person requesting the Town to supply water service.
“Application” means a request to the Town for water service or service area inclusion, as distinguished from an inquiry as to the availability or charge for such service or inclusion.
“Commodity charge” means the unit cost of billed usage, as set forth in the water rates and charges as adopted by Council resolution.
“Contributions in aid of construction” means funds provided to the Town water utility by the applicant under the terms of a main extension agreement and/or service connection agreement the value of which are not refundable.
“Curtailment” means the reduction of all or part of water services due to action by the Town Council or the Water Utility Director in response to a particular situation.
“Customer” means the person or entity in whose name service is rendered, as evidenced by the name on the application or contractor for that service, or by the receipt and/or payment of bills regularly issued in his name regardless of the identity of the actual user of the water service.
“Director of Water Utility” or “Water Utility Director,” for the purposes of this document, refers to the current or acting Water Utility Director, or his/her authorized representative.
“Distribution main” means a water main of the Town water utility from which service connections may be extended to customers.
“Main extension” means the mains and ancillary equipment necessary to extend the existing water distribution system to provide service to additional customers.
“Master meter” means a meter for measuring or recording the flow of water at a single location where said water is transported through piping system to tenants or occupants for their individual consumption.
“Meter” means the instrument for measuring and indicating or recording the volume of water that has passed through it from a point of delivery.
“Meter tampering” means a situation where a meter has been illegally altered. Common examples are meter bypassing, use of magnets to slow the meter recording, broken meter seals, and destruction of equipment by unauthorized removal or attempted removal of a locking device.
“Minimum charge” means the amount the customer must pay on a monthly basis for the availability of water service.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, governmental agency, or other organization operating as a single entity.
“Point of delivery” means the point where facilities owned, leased, or under license by a customer connect to the Town water utility’s pipes or at the outlet side of the meter.
“Service line” means a water line that transports water from a common source (normally a distribution main) of supply to the customer’s point of delivery.
“Premises” means all of the real property and apparatus employed by a single enterprise on an integral parcel of land undivided by public streets, alleys, or other rights-of-way or easements.
“Reclaimed water” means that water which originates from a reclaimed water facility and is distributed through the Town of Oro Valley’s reclaimed water distribution system for the express purpose of nonpotable uses such as irrigation of turf and landscaping. For other definitions relative to reclaimed water, see Section 15-15-9.
“Service line” means a water line that transports water from a common source (normally a distribution main) of supply to the customer’s point of delivery.
“System” means the Town of Oro Valley Water Utility, including all personal and real property. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)03-31, Amended,  10/01/2003; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-2 RESPONSIBLE ENTITIES

Sections:
15-2-1       The Oro Valley Town Council
15-2-2       Appointments
15-2-3       Adoption of a Comprehensive Water System Development Plan
15-2-4       Adoption of Water Utility Construction Standards
15-2-5       Management of Water System by Independent Contractor
15-2-6       Water Utilities to be Enterprise Fund Based
15-2-7       Amendments

Section 15-2-1 The Oro Valley Town Council
((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-2-2 Appointments
The Town Council in conjunction with the Town Manager and Water Utility Director shall appoint all personnel to fulfill the purposes of this Water Utility Code. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-2-3 Adoption of a Comprehensive Water System Development Plan
The Town Council may adopt a comprehensive water system development plan for the Town system or any part thereof. Upon adoption of such a comprehensive water system development plan, the Town Council and/or the Water Utility Director shall assure that no extension, improvement or addition to the Town water utility system or facilities over which the Town of Oro Valley has jurisdiction shall be constructed or authorized until and unless the extension, improvement or addition to the Town water utility system or facilities shall be determined to essentially conform to said comprehensive water system development plan. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-2-4 Adoption of Water Utility Construction Standards
The Town Council shall be empowered to originate, change, adopt and amend engineering design and construction standards for improvements to, extension of, additions to, and modifications to the Town water utility system. The Town applies Tucson Water standards for development of the water utility system. Any modifications to those standards must be approved and granted by the Water Utility Director. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-2-5 Management of Water System by Independent Contractor
The Town Council may, in its sole option and discretion, provide that the management of the Town water utility system, or a portion thereof, be accomplished by the use of an independent contractor. In the event the Town Council determines that it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the Town to have the Town’s water utility managed by an independent contractor, the Town Council shall select bids and proposals from individuals and entities with proven water utility management experience. Management fees are to be paid by the Town from water utility revenues for such management services. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-2-6 Water Utilities to be Enterprise Fund Based
There is established by this code separate Water Utility Funds and all monies paid to the Town pursuant to provisions of the Water Utility Code for, but not limited to, water service charges, fees, construction of facilities, and fines and penalties shall be deposited into the Water Utility Funds, and all expenditures made by the Town in relation to the Town’s ownership, operation, maintenance, repair, expansion, acquisition, management, salaries, professional fees, debt service, bond payments, and other costs and charges shall be paid from the Water Utility Funds. The Town Council is hereby empowered to make loans from the Town General Fund to the Town Water Utility Funds from time-to-time to supplement revenues generated by the Town water utility in order to assure the timely payment of all obligations of the water utility, provided that such loans are timely repaid from the Water Utility Fund(s) to the General Fund. It is hereby declared to be the express policy and intent of the Town of Oro Valley that the Town water utility shall be a self-supporting utility funded solely from revenues generated from utility operations as much as possible. All fees and charges levied by the Town in relation to its water utility may be, to the degree practical, based on the cost of providing the service for which a fee or charge is levied. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-2-7 Amendments
The Town Council may amend this code from time-to-time by simple majority vote of the entire Council membership at a public meeting of the Council, subject to the requirements of Title 10 herein. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-3 TOWN WATER UTILITY DIRECTOR

Sections:
15-3-1       Duties
15-3-2       Term
15-3-3       Compensation

Section 15-3-1 Duties
The Water Utility Director shall report to and take direction from the Town Manager. The Water Utility Director shall be responsible for the day to day management of the Town water system, including but not limited to; the inspection and repair of the water system; sufficiency of water supply: enforcement of this Water Utility Code; review of all engineering plans; review of all contracts with the Town Attorney, preparation of water system development plans, improvement or expansion plans; collection of all funds due to the Town water utility; compliance with all federal, state and local health regulations; compliance with federal, state and local ordinances and requirements in general; preparation of annual budgets; preparation of capital improvements plans. ((O)98-45, Amended,  11/04/1998)

Section 15-3-2 Term
The Water Utility Director shall be appointed by the Town Manager in accordance with Town Policy and other Town Ordinances. ((O)98-45, Amended,  11/04/1998)

Section 15-3-3 Compensation
The Town Council shall provide the terms and provisions of compensation to be provided by the Town to the Water Utility Director in accordance with State Law, Town Ordinances and Town Policy. ((O)98-45, Amended,  11/04/1998)

Article 15-4 ORO VALLEY WATER UTILITY COMMISSION

Sections:
15-4-1       Creation
15-4-2       Functions and Purposes
15-4-3       Membership Composition, Terms and Qualifications
15-4-4       Committee Organization
15-4-5       Committee Reports
15-4-6       Limitation of Powers

Section 15-4-1 Creation
There is hereby established an entity to be called the Oro Valley Water Utility Commission. Members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Mayor and Town Council. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-4-2 Functions and Purposes
The functions, purposes, powers and duties of the Oro Valley Water Utility Commission shall be to:
A. Act as the official advisory body on water capital improvement program planning and rate structure formulation to the Town Council, in conjunction with submitting proposals to the CIP program, etc.;
B. Annually review the proposed water system capital improvement program, and recommend to the Town Council an annual and five (5) year capital budget;
C. Annually review the water revenue requirements of the water utility and recommend to the Town Council rate adjustments as required;
D. Review and report to the Town Council on the comprehensive water system development plan and any long-term (ten (10) to fifty (50) years) water source and capital needs of the water system, utilizing staff of the Town (with the permission of the Town Manager) and other sources for the information necessary for such review;
E. Support and sponsor community programs and projects to provide information and education to the community regarding the Town water utility;
F. Review and make recommendations on proposed State and Federal legislation relating to water;
G. Review and make recommendations on proposed acquisition of private water companies and expansion of the water utility service area;
H. Consult with the Town Council from time to time as may be required by the Town Council relative to water-related issues.
I. Subcommittees. Only technically qualified persons may be appointed from time to time by the Town Manager with input from the Council and Commission for the specific tasks outlined above. These subcommittees shall report to the Water Utility Commission. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-4-3 Membership Composition, Terms and Qualifications
The Oro Valley Water Utility Commission (Commission) shall be composed of not less than five (5) and no more than seven (7) members. Insofar as is possible, at least two (2) members shall be technically qualified residential customers from the area served by the Town of Oro Valley water system within current Town boundaries, at least one (1) member shall be a technically qualified residential customer from the service area of the Town of Oro Valley water system outside of the Town boundaries, and at least one (1) member shall be a technically qualified representative from a commercial and/or turf interest within the Oro Valley water system. Any additional members appointed will serve at-large and shall be residents from the area served by the Oro Valley water system or employed by a commercial or turf customer served by the Oro Valley water system. Insofar as possible, any at-large representative shall be technically qualified and possess sufficient interest in and knowledge of local water issues to allow them to promote the intent and purpose of this code as stated in Section 15-1-2. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Town Council, having completed an application on a form supplied by the Town, a subsequent interview and having been recommended by the interview committee panel consisting of the Water Utility Commission Council liaison, the Water Utility Commission chair and the Water Utility Director. The Commission members shall serve terms of three (3) years, which terms shall be staggered. ((O)17-06, Amended,  10/18/2017; (O)08-01, Amended,  01/16/2008)

Section 15-4-4 Committee Organization
The Oro Valley Water Utility Commission chairperson and a vice-chairperson shall be selected by a majority of the committee members annually and effective as of July 1st. They shall also appoint their own executive committee, task forces, and standing committees if necessary, and shall meet at such time and places as determined by the committee. All meetings shall comply with the open meeting laws of the State. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-4-5 Committee Reports
The Oro Valley Water Utility Commission shall render to the Town Council an annual report on or before April 1st and send additional reports and recommendations as it determines, or as requested by the Town Manager. At a minimum these reports will contain an annual review of the proposed water system capital improvement program, and recommendations to the Town Council of an annual and five (5) year capital budget; and an annual review of the water revenue requirements of the water utilities and recommend to the Town Council rate adjustments as required. ((O)99-58, Amended,  11/17/1999; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-4-6 Limitation of Powers
Neither the Town of Oro Valley Water Utility Commission nor any member of the commission may incur Town expenses without prior authorization of the Town Council or Town Manager, nor may it obligate the Town of Oro Valley in any manner or form. Any member of the Commission may be removed by a majority vote of the Town Council. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-5 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE REQUIRED; PAYMENT OF CHARGES; PREREQUISITE TO SERVE; DEPOSITS; AMOUNT; REFUND; BOND; OTHER SERVICE RELATED MATTERS

Sections:
15-5-1       Application For Service
15-5-2       Requirement of Deposit, Amount
15-5-3       Refund of Deposit
15-5-4       Use of Deposit for Payment of Bill

Section 15-5-1 Application For Service
Water utility service at an existing water service may be provided pursuant to an application to the Town Water Utility to establish an account. The Town, as a condition precedent to approving an application to establish an account for water service to any premises, shall collect all installation and other charges required by this Water Utility Code. Title to pipes, fittings and other water facilities shall be and remain in the Town of Oro Valley. Where service is requested by two (2) or more individuals at the same location the Town shall have the right to collect the full amount owned for water utility service from any one of the applicants at the Town’s discretion. The Town shall have a minimum time frame of forty-eight (48) hours within which to begin service. The following minimum information shall be required from each new applicant for water utility service: (a) Name or names of applicant(s); (b) Service address or location and telephone number and/or daytime telephone number; (c) Billing address/telephone number (if different than service address); (d) Date applicant will be ready for service; (e) Purpose for which service is to be used; (f) Indication of whether applicant is owner or tenant of or agent for the premises. If a rental situation, provide the name and address of the actual owner. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-5-2 Requirement of Deposit, Amount
The Town of Oro Valley will require a deposit from an applicant for service not to exceed twice the average monthly bill for the account or in the case of a new account, twice the estimated monthly bill, as a condition of providing water service. A separate deposit may be required for each meter installed. The Town may review the customer’s water usage after service has been connected and adjust the deposit amount either up or down based on the customer’s actual water usage and/or a review of an account in regards to delinquency. ((O)14-06, Amended,  04/02/2014; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-5-3 Refund of Deposit
Deposits for all single family residential accounts that are in the homeowner’s name will be refunded after one (1) year if the customer has not been delinquent in the payment of bills rendered during such period or the deposit shall be refundable upon closing the account after the final bill is paid, whichever occurs first. For all other accounts, the deposit will not be refunded until the account is closed and the final bill is paid. The individual and/or organization in whose name the deposit is made shall be responsible for the payment of all bills incurred in connection with the service furnished. Deposits may be transferable from an existing account to a new account. This section applies to all deposits collected after April 2, 2014. ((O)14-06, Amended,  04/02/2014; (O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-5-4 Use of Deposit for Payment of Bill
Upon discontinuation of service the deposit may be applied by the Town toward settlement of the account. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-6 BOND(S)

Sections:
15-6-1       Bonds

Section 15-6-1 Bonds
The Water Utility Director may, at his/her option, allow or require a utility service bond in lieu of a cash deposit for commercial and industrial applicants for service. Such utility service bond shall be on a form approved by the Town Attorney, and the Town Water Utility Director shall have the power to execute such bond on behalf of the Town. The provisions of 15-5-1 through 15-5-4 of this chapter shall apply to utility service bonds. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-7 GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL OF SERVICE

Sections:
15-7-1       Grounds for Refusal of Service

Section 15-7-1 Grounds for Refusal of Service
The Town of Oro Valley may refuse to establish water utility service if any of the following conditions exist:
A. The applicant has an outstanding amount due for water service with the Town and the applicant does not bring current its outstanding bills;
B. A condition exists which in the Town’s judgment is unsafe or hazardous to the applicant, a resident of the Town, or the Town’s personnel or facilities;
C. Refusal by the applicant to provide the Town with a water utility deposit;
D. Failure of customer to furnish such funds, service, equipment and/or rights-of-way necessary to serve the customer and which has been specified by the Town as a condition for providing water utility service;
E. Applicant provides incomplete or false information for the purpose of obtaining service;
F. Any other legitimate health, safety and welfare reasons as determined appropriate by the Water Utility Director.
Once established, the Town reserves the right to also shut off water service in accordance with this Code and state law. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-8 TEMPORARY SERVICE

Sections:
15-8-1       Temporary Service

Section 15-8-1 Temporary Service
Applicants for temporary water service will be required to pay the Town, in advance of service establishment, the estimated cost of installing and removing the facilities necessary for furnishing the desired service. The applicant may be required to advance a sum of money equal to the estimated bill for service. Where the duration of service is to exceed one (1) month, the applicant will also be required to pay the deposit for service required by the Town. Any service for a period of more than six (6) months shall be deemed a permanent service, and provisions of this code relating to permanent service shall apply. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-9 SERVICE LINES, VALVES AND METERS

Sections:
15-9-1       Service Lines, Valves and Meters

Section 15-9-1 Service Lines, Valves and Meters
An applicant for water utility service shall be responsible for the cost of installing all customer piping up to the meter. Where water service is being provided for the first time or to a new customer, the customer shall provide and maintain a private cutoff valve within 18 inches of the meter on the customer’s side of the meter. The Town may install its water meter at the property lines, or at the Town’s option, on the customer’s property. Where the meter or service line location on the customer’s premises is changed at the request of the customer or due to alterations on the customer’s premises, the customer shall provide and have installed at his expense all piping necessary for relocating the meter. The Town, upon approval of the Water Utility Director, may allow moving the meter and/or service line. The customer’s lines or piping must be installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connection or backflow, and must be done in accordance with all standards as established by the Town. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-10 EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS OF WAY

Sections:
15-10-1      Easements and Rights-Of-Way

Section 15-10-1 Easements and Rights-Of-Way
Each customer of the Town water utility shall grant adequate easement and/or rights-of-way satisfactory to the Town to ensure that customer’s service connection is accessible by the Town. Failure on the part of customer to grant adequate easement and/or rights-of-way shall be grounds for the Town to refuse water utility service. When the Town discovers that a customer or his agent is performing work or has constructed facilities adjacent to or within an easement or right-of-way and such work, construction or facility poses a hazard or is in violation of federal, state or Town laws, ordinances, statutes, rules or regulations, or may significantly interfere with the Town’s access to its water utility facilities and/or equipment, the Town shall make reasonable efforts to notify the customer or his agent and shall take whatever actions are necessary to eliminate the hazard, obstruction or violation at the customer’s expense. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-11 AGREEMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND FINANCING OF WATER FACILITIES AUTHORIZED

Sections:
15-11-1      Construction of new facilities by the Town Authorized
15-11-2      Approval of Agreements to Construct New Facilities
15-11-3      Construction Agreements

Section 15-11-1 Construction of new facilities by the Town Authorized
((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-11-2 Approval of Agreements to Construct New Facilities
The Town Council and/or the Town of Oro Valley Water Utility Director may permit the construction of water facilities to provide water service in areas where no water service is available, or where existing water facilities are inadequate in the opinion of the Town Water Utility to serve the proposed new customers. Agreements for construction of water facilities shall provide that all costs be at the sole expense of the applicant for service, except as otherwise noted in such agreement. Costs shall include, but are not limited to, engineering and design fees, materials, labor, applicable taxes, permits, and inspection fees. Facilities shall include, but are not limited to wells, pumps, storage tanks and reservoirs, mains valves, meters and other appurtenances to the water system both within an applicant’s proposed development as well as outside the development. It shall be any such configuration of the facilities deemed necessary or desirable by the Town Water Utility to serve the new development. Agreements for the construction of water facilities that contain no provision for refunds shall be subject to the final approval of the Water Utility Director. All agreements for the construction of water facilities that contain provisions for refunds shall be subject to final approval by the Town Council. No agreement for the construction of water facilities shall be submitted for approval by the Town Council or the Water Utility Director unless such agreement has been reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney, and the engineering plans have been approved by the Water Utility Director. ((O)00-06, Amended,  02/02/2000; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-11-3 Construction Agreements
The applicant for a construction agreement shall be required to pay to the Town, a refundable advance in aid of construction and/or system development fee, and before any construction is commended, the estimated cost of all mains, including all valves and fittings, and any water production, storage or pressure system, all as deemed necessary and convenient by the Town to provide water service to applicant’s property. In no event shall the fee be allowed to be paid at the end of construction.
a. Upon request by a potential applicant for a construction agreement, the Town Water Utility Director, or an authorized agent, shall prepare a preliminary sketch and preliminary estimate of the cost of installation to be paid by said applicant. The Town reserves the right to require applicants to pay the costs of the preliminary sketch and rough estimate. Any applicant requesting the Town Water Utility to prepare detailed plans, specifications, or cost estimates shall be required to deposit with the Town an amount equal to the estimated cost of preparation and review. The Town Water Utility shall, upon written request, make available to the applicant within ninety (90) days after receipt of the deposit referred to herein, such plans, specifications, or cost estimates of the proposed main extension. This deposit shall be non-refundable.
b. In the event that the Town’s actual cost of construction is more than the amount advanced by the applicant, the applicant shall pay the balance due to the Town within thirty (30) days after the completion of the construction.
c. Agreements shall have the minimum following written requirements:
    1. Name and address of applicant(s);
    2. Proposed service address;
    3. Description of requested service;
    4. Description (if any) of the requested line extension;
    5. Itemized cost estimate to include materials, labor, and other costs as necessary;
    6. Payment terms;
    7. A clear and concise explanation of any oversizing refund provisions, if applicable;
    8. The transfer of any title.
d. The size, design, type and quality of materials of the system, installed pursuant to agreement with the Town, locations in the ground and manner of installation, shall be specified by the Town, and shall be in accordance with the requirements of other public agencies having authority therein.
e. All pipelines, valves, fittings, wells, tanks, reservoirs, or other facilities installed by agreement with the Town shall be the sole property of the Town of Oro Valley, and parties making advances in aid of construction under this Water Utility Code shall have no right, title or interest in any such facilities. ((O)00-06, Amended,  02/02/2000; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-12 CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES OTHER THAN BY TOWN

Sections:
15-12-1      Approval of Construction of Facilities Other than by Town Water Utility
15-12-2      Approval of Construction Plans and Inspection
15-12-3      Line Extension Agreements
15-12-4      Line Extension Agreements with Protected Facilities
15-12-5      Construction of Protected Facilities by the Water Utility

Section 15-12-1 Approval of Construction of Facilities Other than by Town Water Utility
The Town Council and/or the Town of Oro Valley Water Utility Director, at its discretion and option, may permit the construction of water facilities by a party other than the Town through the use of line extension agreements. The facilities shall be constructed at the sole expense of the party. These facilities may be constructed within roadways, avenues, alleys and within rights-of-way and easements and subject to payment of any permits, or other fees or charges, which are due the Town and its Water Utility. Facilities shall include, but are not limited to, wells, pumps, storage tanks and reservoirs, water mains, valves, hydrants, meters and other appurtenances to the water system both within the party’s proposed development as well as outside the development. It shall be any such configuration of the facilities deemed necessary or desirable by the Town Water Utility to meet design requirements and serve the new development. All titles, rights, or interests in the facilities shall be transferred to the Town of Oro Valley upon acceptance of fully constructed improvements. The party shall provide the Water Utility with the minimum following information: Approved construction plans (water plan); approval to construct issued by the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality; itemized invoices of the actual costs to construct; lien releases; proof of insurance; and, upon completion of construction, as-built plans of the project, recorded easements and applicable testing and inspection documentation. ((O)12-14, Amended,  09/19/2012; (O)00-05, Amended,  02/02/2000; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-12-2 Approval of Construction Plans and Inspection
Plans for construction of water facilities to be constructed by parties other than by the Town Water Utility shall be provided by the party, certified by a registered professional engineer, and approved by the Water Utility Director or the Director’s designee. The party shall be responsible to pre-pay water plan review fees and construction inspection fees as directed by the Town Water Utility. Construction of water facilities shall not start until a grading permit and/or right-of-way permit has been issued. The construction of water facilities, as authorized and approved by the Town Water Utility, shall be regularly inspected by the Water Utility, or its authorized agent, and shall comply with the engineering, construction, material, and installation standards adopted by the Town of Oro Valley. ((O)12-14, Amended,  09/19/2012; (O)00-26, Amended,  08/16/2000; (O)00-05, Amended,  02/02/2000; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-12-3 Line Extension Agreements
A line extension agreement for water facilities constructed in accordance with Articles 15-11 and 15-12 shall be prepared by the Water Utility Director, or the Director’s designee, and shall be executed by the party prior to the start of construction. The Water Utility Director may execute any line extension agreement on behalf of the Town subject to the requirements of Sections 15-12-4 and 15-13-2.
Line extension agreements shall, at a minimum, identify the party; the project; the engineer’s plan number; fees; oversizing refunds (if applicable); engineering requirements; inspection authority; construction procedures; indemnity; dedication of easements and facilities; description of subject property; cost estimate details for on-site and off-site facilities; cost estimate detail for facility oversizing and protected main facilities if applicable; and a certificate of approval to construct the project issued by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality and/or the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality. The Town Attorney shall review and approve all line extension agreements prior to execution. ((O)12-14, Amended,  09/19/2012; (O)00-05, Amended,  02/02/2000; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-12-4 Line Extension Agreements with Protected Facilities
The general policy of the Town regarding extension of the water system through private contracts is that all costs associated with construction of water system facilities needed to serve a new customer or property shall be paid by that party developing the property. However, in some cases facilities are installed in such a manner as to make water service available to a property that did not participate in the original installation of the facility; therefore, the participating party may be eligible for a refund of a portion of the construction costs through the collection of a protected facilities charge levied against any and all non-participating party(ies) who request service from and will connect to the protected facility.
A. Definitions. 
    Agreement (or) protected facility agreement means that portion of the “Agreement for Construction of Water Facilities Under Private Contract” pertaining to the protected facility program.
    Non-participating party means developers, property owners, and/or other applicants for water service from the protected facility that did not participate in the original installation and construction costs of the protected facilities.
    Participating party means developers, property owners, and/or other applicants sharing in the construction costs of water facility installation designated as a protected facility.
    Protected facility means any water facility installed by private contract in such a manner as to provide water service to any property adjacent to the water facility that did not participate in the costs of the facility.
    Protected facility charges means the amount of the fee required to be paid by a participating party for water service from a connection to a protected facility.
    Refunds means reimbursement of construction costs on protected facilities to the participating party from the collection of protected facility charges less the participating party’s share of the protected facilities charges.
B. Policy. Any extension of the Town’s water distribution system, installed by private contract, that may potentially provide water service to properties which have not participated in the installation costs will be designated as a “protected facility,” when requested by the participating party. Whenever a water facility is installed as a protected facility, it will be the policy of the Town to refund a portion of the construction costs to the party that financed the original water facility installation through the collection of a protected facility fee, levied against all non-participating applicants for service from the facility.
C. The Water Utility Director may execute line extension agreements with protected facilities if funds are expected to be available from payments from non-participating party(ies). The Town and/or its Water Utility will not convey or transfer any refunds to the participating party under any line extension agreement that includes protected facilities unless and until the required payments are collected and received from a non-participating party.
D. The protected facilities charges will be set at fifty percent (50%) of the per foot cost, including any appurtenances such as valves and hydrants, at the time of construction for the minimum size facility installation and based on the lineal footage of the non-participating property fronting the protected facility. This charge will be calculated based on the costs at the time of construction as set forth in the line extension agreement. The charge for other protected facilities (not pipelines and appurtenances) will be determined by the Utility Director or the Director’s designee based on the specific facility and the benefit realized by non-participating parties.
E. This agreement will remain in effect until either the full sum, less the participating party’s(ies’) share of the protected facilities charges based on their fronting footage, has been refunded or for a period of fifteen (15) years from the effective date of the agreement. Any balances remaining unpaid after this time shall be considered cancelled, and the Town shall be fully discharged from any further obligations and payment of refunds under the agreement.
F. Procedures. 
    1. Designation of Water Facilities as Protected. 
        a. The Utility Director or the Director’s designee will have the responsibility of determining whether a facility should be designated as protected based on a review of the water plan(s).
        b. The Utility Director or the Director’s designee will then initiate the “Agreement for Construction of Water Facilities Under Private Contract” indicating that portion, if any, of the facility installation designated as a protected facility and relevant to the protected facility section of the agreement.
        c. The Utility Director or the Director’s designee will be responsible for ensuring that all participating properties are noted on the water plan(s) and that the plan(s) clearly indicates all protected facilities.
        d. The Utility Director or the Director’s designee will calculate the total refund due based on the length of pipeline specified as protected facilities on the plans and current construction costs.
    2. Refunds from Non-Participating Connections to Protected Facilities. 
        a. Upon completion and acceptance of the water facilities installed pursuant to a protected facility agreement, the participating party may be eligible for refund of that portion of the cost that is not directly attributable to providing water service solely to participating properties.
        b. When application is received by the Town for a water service or water main connection to a protected facility by a non-participating property benefiting from the facility, the Town will collect the protected facilities charges. These charges shall be refunded to the participating party based upon per foot costs at the time of construction, fronting footage and the “as-built” plans of the protected facility installed.
        c. In no event will the aggregate amount refunded exceed the full, authorized refundable portion of the cost of the water facility installed.
        d. The Water Utility will maintain an accounting record of each protected facility agreement. Within this record, all protected facility payments and refunds will be monitored and logged. Protected facilities fees will continue to be collected until either the total refund amount has been collected or for a period of fifteen (15) years from the effective date of the agreement.
        e. Waiver of protected facility charges can only be granted by the party that originally financed the installation of the protected facility. The Water Utility will require a notarized letter granting the waiver prior to waiving the fee from the participating party(ies).
    3. Collection of Protected Facility Charges from Non-Participating Properties. 
        a. As early in the platting and/or plan review process as is practical, the Water Utility Director or the Director’s designee will inform the non-participating party applying for water service that a protected facility charge is required, whenever their property has frontage on a protected facility and their water plan(s) calls for service and/or water main connections to that protected facility.
        b. At the time of water plan review for a non-participating party, an estimate of the applicable protected facility charges will be calculated based on the front footage. Payment of this charge will be required prior to installation of meters.
G. All property owned by the participating party(ies) that could be served by the protected facilities will be considered participating parties.
H. If an applicant for water service connects to the end of a protected facility and there is no fronting footage for the applicant’s property for the protected facility, no protected facility charges will be assessed to or collected from the applicant. ((O)12-14, Amended,  09/19/2012; (O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)98-28, Enacted,  07/15/1998)

Section 15-12-5 Construction of Protected Facilities by the Water Utility
The Water Utility is authorized and may choose to protect facilities it constructs that are not paid for by water development impact fees. ((O)12-14, Enacted,  09/19/2012)

Article 15-13 WATER SYSTEM CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS, OVERSIZING, REFUNDS FOR OVERSIZED CAPACITY

Sections:
15-13-1      Water System Capacity Requirements
15-13-2      Oversizing Refunds

Section 15-13-1 Water System Capacity Requirements
The Water Utility Director or the Director’s designee may require the participating party to install “on-site” or “off-site” water facilities of a size greater than is required to provide service to the development or property. ((O)12-14, Amended,  09/19/2012; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-13-2 Oversizing Refunds
A. The Utility may require the oversizing of transmission lines that extend the water lines to the subject property. The Utility will refund the oversizing of a transmission line by reimbursing the participating party for the construction cost difference between what was required to deliver water to the subject property and what was requested to enhance the water system for future growth. Should a distribution main be requested to be oversized by the Utility, the Utility would use the same manner of refund as with an oversized transmission line.
B. The Water Utility Director may execute a line extension agreement with oversizing of facilities on behalf of the Town for oversizing refunds. ((O)12-14, Amended,  09/19/2012; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-14 SERVICE AREA INCLUSION AND FEES

Sections:
15-14-1      Service Area Inclusion Fees
15-14-2      Application for service area inclusion
15-14-3      Service Area Inclusion Within and Without Town Limits, Approvals Required
15-14-4      Service Area Inclusion Entitlement and Limitations
15-14-5      Separate Service Agreement Required
15-14-6      Data Requested
15-14-7      Service Area Inclusion does not constitute 100 Year Water Adequacy

Section 15-14-1 Service Area Inclusion Fees
Any property owner wishing to have his property included in the water utility service area of the Town of Oro Valley (C.H.) Water Utility or Town of Oro Valley (R.V.) Water Utility systems, in the event such property was not previously within the service area of a public service corporation water utility purchased or acquired by the Town or within the boundaries of the City of Tucson, Oro Valley Water Improvement District No. 1 or Metropolitan Domestic Water Improvement District municipal water utility service areas, shall pay fees as outlined later in this document as a Service Area Inclusion Fee. Should the situation arise where a person or company in another territory wishes to leave their current territory and be included within a Town utility, such fee will be negotiated at that time. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-14-2 Application for service area inclusion
Any property owner desiring to have his property included in the water utility service area of the Town of Oro Valley shall apply for inclusion on the form provided by the Town. The form shall require the name of the property owner, a legal description of the property proposed to be included, and the authorized signature of the owner of the property requesting approval, said signature acknowledged pursuant to ARS 33-506. No application for inclusion in the water utility service area shall be considered unless the service area inclusion fee has been paid, and the required information and authorized signature of the property owner has been provided. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-14-3 Service Area Inclusion Within and Without Town Limits, Approvals Required
Applications for service area inclusion for property located within or without the incorporated limits of the Town of Oro Valley, but outside the boundaries of a water utility public service corporation, the City of Tucson, the Oro Valley Water Improvement District No. 1 or the Metropolitan Water service area, shall be subject to approval by the Director of the Town Water Utility upon completion of the required application and payment of the service area inclusion fee. Applications for service area inclusion outside of the incorporated limits of the Town of Oro Valley shall also be subject to the approval of the Town Council, which may, at its sole option, decline to approve such inclusion without cause. In the event an application for service area inclusion outside the incorporated limits of the Town is rejected, the applicant’s service area inclusion fee shall be non-refundable. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-14-4 Service Area Inclusion Entitlement and Limitations
Inclusion in the water utility service area of the Town of Oro Valley shall entitle the property owner to make application for water utility service, subject to the provisions of this code including requirements that applicant pay all costs for construction and installation of a water system. The service area inclusion fee shall be in addition to other fees and charges required by the town to obtain water service. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-14-5 Separate Service Agreement Required
Inclusion in the water utility service area of the Town of Oro Valley by agreement does not constitute an actual water utility service agreement. An applicant for inclusion into the water utility service area of the Town of Oro Valley need not simultaneously apply for actual water service nor enter into water facilities agreements. However, an applicant for service area inclusion must provide the Town with any proposed development plans or subdivision plats the applicant may have to enable the Town of Oro Valley to appropriately forecast its future water demands and include the property in its application for an assured water supply designation. The Town reserves the right to require conveyance to the Town of wells, well sites, rights of way and easements as a condition of service to a new applicant on service area inclusion. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-14-6 Data Requested
In the event the service area inclusion applicant has any hydrologic or well data concerning his property, such data shall be required to be provided as part of the service area inclusion application. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-14-7 Service Area Inclusion does not constitute 100 Year Water Adequacy
Payment of the service area inclusion fee shall not be deemed as a guaranty that the Town of Oro Valley has now or will be successful in the future in obtaining an assured water supply designation for the Town’s water utility service area, including the applicant property, pursuant to ARS 45-576. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-15 PROVISION OF WATER UTILITY SERVICE

Sections:
15-15-1      Customer Responsibility
15-15-2      When and where bills are due and payable
15-15-3      Grounds for Termination of Service With Notice
15-15-4      Termination for Non-payment of Delinquent Bill
15-15-5      Unauthorized Reconnection of Service
15-15-6      Challenge of Accuracy of Water Bill
15-15-7      Deposit Requirement After Termination
15-15-8      Termination Without Notice
15-15-9      Reclaimed Water

Section 15-15-1 Customer Responsibility
Each customer of the Town of Oro Valley water utility shall be responsible for the following:
a. Each customer shall be responsible for maintaining all facilities on the customer’s side of the point of delivery in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the rules of the Federal Government, State of Arizona, Pima County Health Department, Town of Oro Valley, and any other jurisdiction with regulatory powers over such connections;
b. Each customer shall be responsible for safeguarding all Town water utility property installed in or on the customer’s premises for the purpose of supplying water to that customer;
c. Each customer/resident shall exercise all reasonable care to prevent loss or damage to Town water utility property, excluding ordinary wear and tear. The customer shall be responsible for loss of or damage to Town water utility property on the customer’s premises arising from neglect, carelessness, or misuse and shall reimburse the Town for the cost of necessary repairs or replacements;
d. Each customer/resident shall be responsible for payment of any equipment damage resulting from unauthorized breaking of seals, tampering or bypassing the Town water utility meter;
e. Each customer/resident shall be responsible for promptly notifying the Town of any failure identified in Town’s water utility equipment;
f. Water furnished by the Town shall be used only on the customer’s premises and shall not be resold to any other person. During critical water conditions, as determined by the Town Council, the customer shall use water only for those purposes specified by the Town Council. Disregard for this provision shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of water utility service by the Town;
g. Each customer shall provide the Town and its employees and agents the right of safe ingress and egress to the customer’s premises for any purpose reasonably connected with the Town’s water utility property used in furnishing service and the exercise of any and all rights secured to it by law or this Water Utility Code;
h. Each customer shall be responsible for paying all water rates, charges and fees when due.
i. Any violation of any of the above provisions may result in civil or criminal prosecution(s), including a Class One Misdemeanor.
j. Each existing customer who irrigates two (2.0) acres or more of turf, shall be required to use reclaimed water if the reclaimed water system is available and within 200 feet of the property to be irrigated. See Section 15-15-9.
k. Each new customer who irrigates two (2.0) acres or more of turf, shall be required to use reclaimed water. ((O)03-31, Amended,  10/01/2003; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-15-2 When and where bills are due and payable
Water rates, charges, and/or fees are due and payable as indicated on the billing or at any future established locations. If a bill, charge, etc., is not paid in ten (10) days it is considered late, between eleven (11) and fifteen (15) days it will be considered past due, and after sixteen (16) days of the date the charges are due and payable it is considered delinquent. A penalty for any late, past due, or delinquent payment may be imposed. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-15-3 Grounds for Termination of Service With Notice
Water service to a customer may be terminated by the Town of Oro Valley, upon ten (10) days advance written notice (notice sent by regular mail and whether received or not) for any of the following reasons:
A. Customer violation of any of the provisions of this Water Rate Code;
B. Failure of the customer to meet or maintain the Town water utility’s credit and deposit requirements;
C. Failure of the customer to provide the Town reasonable access to its water utility equipment and property;
D. Failure of a customer to pay a delinquent bill for utility service. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-15-4 Termination for Non-payment of Delinquent Bill
If any bill for a water rate, charge and/or fee made to the customer pursuant to this Water Utility Code is not paid within the first sixteen (16) days after it is due, the customer shall be given written notice specifying that the bill is past due. The customer shall be given written notice specifying that the bill is delinquent, and outlining the procedure by which the customer may challenge the accuracy of the bill. If a delinquent bill is not paid at the office, and no challenge has been made to the accuracy of the bill within ten (10) days of the notice of delinquency, the water supply will, without further notice, be turned off, and not turned on until all sums due are paid in full, together with a charge for reconnection after delinquency as provided in Article 15-17. It is also decreed that any occupancy permits may not be issued until such time as any delinquent bill is paid in full, along with any charge for reconnection after delinquency. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-15-5 Unauthorized Reconnection of Service
In no case shall any person, company or plumber turn on the water supply to any building, or any supply pipe, where the supply has been turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly water bill or for the violation of any provision of this code. All water that has been turned off by the Town water utility shall only be turned on again by the employees or agents of the Town water utility. Any person found involved in such an action may be charged with a Class One Misdemeanor. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-15-6 Challenge of Accuracy of Water Bill
The procedure by which a customer may challenge the accuracy of a water bill and the determination of the validity of such challenge shall be as follows:
A. The customer shall notify the office of the Town Water Utility, preferably in writing, of his challenge of the accuracy of their water bill, and the reasons therefore. In the event the customer has received a notice of delinquency, such challenge shall be filed within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of delinquency.
B. The customer may request that their meter be re-read, or their meter be tested, provided the customer pay the meter re-read charge or the meter test charge, in the amount as provided for in Article 15-17. A request for meter re-read or meter test, paid for by the customer, shall constitute a challenge to the accuracy of the water bill.
C. In the event the meter reading is found to be in error due to a meter re-read or meter test, the Town shall rebill the customer and refund the testing fee. Customer shall have twenty (20) days to pay the delinquent bill which had been challenged and after a new bill is sent.
D. The Director of the Town Water Utility/Water Utility Director may appoint someone to investigate all challenges of the accuracy of water bills, when such challenge does not include a request for a meter re-read or meter test.
E. The customer’s water service shall not be terminated until and unless an investigation has been completed finding the challenge to be without merit.
F. Any such investigative finding referenced above is final. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-15-7 Deposit Requirement After Termination
The Town may, at their sole option, require as a condition of re-establishing water service in the event of termination due to nonpayment of a delinquent water bill, payment of a water utility deposit to be held until service is cancelled. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-15-8 Termination Without Notice
Water utility service to a customer may be terminated by the Town of Oro Valley, without advanced written notice, under the following conditions:
A. The existence of an obvious hazard to the safety, welfare or health of the customer or the general population;
B. The Town has evidence of water meter tampering or fraud;
C. Unauthorized resale of water or use of water utility services;
D. Failure of a customer to comply with the curtailment procedures imposed by the Town Council during supply shortages. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-15-9 Reclaimed Water
1. Purpose and Intent. It is the Town of Oro Valley’s purpose and intent to establish a reclaimed water system and to extend such system to certain areas of the Town of Oro Valley (Town) where the Town Council determines that the extension of such a system is practical. Once such reclaimed water is made available to a property, use of reclaimed water will be required for landscape and grounds irrigation systems and will be permitted and encouraged by the Town for other authorized uses established by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. The reclaimed water distribution system will be constructed in sections and phases to provide reclaimed water service to designated areas as determined by the Town Council and pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth herein.
2. Reclaimed Water System Part of Town Water System and Other Definitions. The Reclaimed Water System is a part of the Town’s water system. All provisions of Chapter 15, Water Code, shall apply to the reclaimed water system unless otherwise indicated herein. To this end, the terms water system, water pipe, Town water, waterworks, water service, water distribution system, water, water meters, water mains and other references to the water system contained in Chapter 15 shall be deemed to include and mean portions of the reclaimed water system, unless in conflict with the provisions contained in this Section, or otherwise excluded. For the purpose of this code, the definitions contained in this section shall apply unless otherwise specifically stated.
    1. Available. 
        a. Existing Customer: an existing customer irrigating two (2) or more acres of turf on a property or adjoining properties and the reclaimed water system is within 200 feet of the property or properties, provided legal access is available. The existing customer will be required to extend the reclaimed water system to their point of delivery and use reclaimed water for their irrigation.
        b. Existing Customer adding new turf: an existing customer adding new turf to their property or adjoining properties that will create an aggregate turf area of two (2) or more acres will be required to extend the reclaimed water system to their point of delivery and use reclaimed water for their irrigation of the new aggregate area once a working reclaimed water system is available within the Town.
        c. New/Existing Customer: a proposed separate development with two (2) or more acres of turf requiring irrigation, regardless of whether the same individual or entity is already receiving reclaimed water at another location, will be required to extend the reclaimed water system to their proposed point of delivery and use reclaimed water for their irrigation once a working reclaimed water system is available within the Town.
    2. Cross-Connection means any physical connection or arrangement which would allow the movement of fluids between the potable water system and any other piping system, such as the reclaimed water system.
    3. Director means the Director of the Water Utility of the Town or his or her designee.
    4. Distribution Mains mean those conduits used to supply reclaimed water to service lines from transmission mains.
    5. Department means the Town’s Water Utility Department.
    6. End User means the Town’s reclaimed water customer and the actual user of the reclaimed water.
    7. Irrigation System means a device or combination of devices having a hose, pipe, or other conduit installed in the landscape which transmits Town water to customer’s lawns, landscapes or green space.
    8. Notice of Availability means the Water Utility has formally notified a property owner that reclaimed water is available and their property requires the use of irrigation with reclaimed water for irrigation.
    9. Potable Water means water that meets Safe Drinking Water Standards produced by the Town’s water system.
    10.  Reclaimed Water means water which is distributed through the Town’s reclaimed water distribution system for the express purpose of non-potable uses such as irrigation of turf and landscaping.
    11.  Reclaimed Water Agent means a person holding a permit issued by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality to distribute reclaimed water to more than one end user.
    12. Reclaimed Water System means all equipment, piping, valves, reservoirs, booster stations and associated hardware and other appurtenances, including meters, from the Customer’s reclaimed water meter back to, and including the reclaimed water production and pumping facility.
    13. Reclaimed Water User Agreement means a contract between the customer/end user and the Town’s Water Utility. The agreement describes the responsibilities of the customer and the consequences for failure to comply with the terms of the agreement.
    14. Service Line means that conduit for reclaimed water from the distribution main to the property line.
    15. Transmission Mains mean those conduits used to supply reclaimed water from the pumping station or treatment plant to the distribution mains.
    16. Turf means area covered with grasses that require irrigation.
3. General. Once reclaimed water is available to a property, the property owners shall connect to the reclaimed water system upon submission of a fully executed application as required by the Director, and upon compliance with all other Town requirements. Reclaimed water may be used for irrigation purposes and for other non-potable water purposes in accordance with federal, state and local ordinances, rules, and regulations. If reclaimed water is to be used for any purpose other than land irrigation, the customer shall obtain prior approval of such use from the Director.
4. Mandatory Use of Reclaimed Water for Irrigation Systems Irrigating Two (2.0) or More Acres of Turf. It is unlawful to use potable water for irrigation systems irrigating two (2.0) or more acres of turf 90 days after a property owner or water customer has been notified by the Director that reclaimed water is available to a particular property or site (“Notification of Availability”). If a customer has not been granted a time extension, as provided for in Section 15-15-9.7, and is found to be in violation of this Code requirement, the Director will terminate all irrigation water service to the property in question until connection to the reclaimed water system has been made by the customer.
5. Connection to Reclaimed Water System. 
    a. Customers with existing irrigation systems irrigating two (2.0) or more acres of turf: the Director shall provide written notice to the water customer located on that property of the Availability of Reclaimed Water. Customers with existing irrigation systems using potable water who desire to continue to maintain such systems using Town water, must apply for reclaimed water in accordance with the application procedures specified in this Code and must disconnect irrigation systems from the Town’s potable water system and connect to the reclaimed water system within 90 days of written Notification of Availability.
    b. Customers or prospective customers with new irrigation systems: All new irrigation systems designed to irrigate two (2.0) or more acres of turf constructed after the effective date of this ordinance must connect to the Town’s reclaimed water system at construction. Connection must be made prior to, or concurrent with connection of other improvements on the property to the Town’s potable water system. In the event the new customer is required to extend the reclaimed water system to the development site to connect its irrigation system, it will be done at the sole expense of the new customer. The new customer will be required to sign a Line Extension Agreement (LEA) per Section 15-12-1 of the Town Code.
6. Reclaimed Water Service Application and User Agreement. Applications for reclaimed water service shall be made and will be accepted in the same manner as applications for water service, subject to the provisions of Chapter 15, WATER CODE. In addition to the application for reclaimed water service, the customer will required to sign a “Reclaimed Water User Agreement.”
7. Request for Time Extension. An existing customer whose property irrigation requirements qualify for reclaimed water may request a one time extension of 60 days, for a total of 150 days from the time of Notification of Availability if a financial hardship or physical condition precludes them from being able to meet the 90 day period, as described in Section 15-15-9.5. The existing customer/property owner must submit a letter to the Water Director requesting the extension and providing documentation that supports and verifies the justification for the extension. If an extension beyond 150 days is required, the existing customer may submit a request to the Mayor and Council for review and consideration, requesting additional time and providing documentation that supports and verifies the reason why 150 days is not adequate time to comply with the requirements of this code.
8. Installation of Lines and Easement Dedications. The Town will be responsible for reclaimed water service lines to the applicant’s property line, provided easements or other access is available to the Town. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs and expenses of installation and maintenance of the reclaimed water line and all appurtenances from their property line on their property. In the event the Town is required to locate the reclaimed water meter or any other part of the Town reclaimed water system on applicant’s property, the applicant shall dedicate land or perpetual easements on, over and through applicant’s land for the reclaimed water transmission and distribution facilities as necessary to provide reclaimed water service to applicant’s property. No reclaimed water lines or other facilities will be installed or accepted by the Town for maintenance unless the lines or facilities are in a dedicated public right-of-way or dedicated public easement. Any new easement shall be adequately sized to accommodate construction and maintenance of the reclaimed water line or system component. No obstruction of any kind shall be planted, built, or otherwise created within the limits of the easement of right-of-way without written permission of the Director. Delays by applicant in granting easements or dedications will result in the loss of potable water for irrigation, if more than ninety (90) days have passed from Notification of Availability and if no good cause is shown for the failure to grant the necessary easements.
9. Meter Requirements. Metering of reclaimed water is mandatory. There will be no exceptions to this requirement. Metering requirements are outlined in Chapter 15, WATER CODE, and in the Water Utility Standard Specifications.
10. Permits. All applicants for reclaimed water, at the applicant’s own cost and expense, shall apply for, obtain and meet all requirements of all necessary permits, licenses, conditions, and approvals for the initial construction and the operation of the on-site reclaimed water facilities and the use of reclaimed water.
11. Authority to Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Town Council may by Ordinance establish reasonable rules and regulations concerning the reclaimed water system and the use of reclaimed water. Additional standard policies and procedures may be adopted concerning the reclaimed water system. Insofar as there is not conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, Town policies and procedures pertaining to potable water service shall apply.
12. Authority to Adopt Rates, Fees and Charges. The Town Council may by Ordinance, duly adopted after a public hearing, establish rates, fees and charges for the reclaimed water system and provide terms and conditions for the payment and collection of same. After the initial establishment of a reclaimed water rate, and fee or charge for connection to the reclaimed water system, these rates, fees and charges will normally be reviewed and adjusted annually as part of the annual budgeting cycle, as provided in Chapter 15, WATER CODE.
13. Priorities for Extending Reclaimed Water Service. The Town Council will establish priorities for extension of the reclaimed water system, as it does for water system extensions. The Town Council may establish priorities for extension of service outside the utility service boundaries. Provision of reclaimed water service outside the Town limits will be considered on a case-by-case basis and may be time limited to benefit the Town.
14. Conditions of Reclaimed Water Service Use. 
    a. General. The Town may terminate, discontinue, or suspend reclaimed water service in accordance with Chapter 15 and Town policies and procedures in the event of (i) a violation of this Ordinance or Town regulations, policies or procedures, (ii) failure to pay bills by the due date, (iii) tampering with any utility service, (iv) the existence of plumbing cross-connections with another water source, or (v) any customer condition or action that may be detrimental to the Town’s potable water system or its reclaimed water system. The Town may, at its option, suspend service until the condition is corrected and all costs due the Town are paid. These costs may include delinquent billings, connection charges, and payment for any damages caused to the potable or reclaimed water systems. The details of the Town’s procedures for discontinuing service are found in Chapter 15, WATER CODE of the Town’s Code of Ordinances and in appropriate Town policies and procedures.
    b. Cross Connection Control. There shall be no cross connections between the reclaimed water system on a customer’s property and the Town potable water system. In all premises where reclaimed water service is provided, the public or private potable water supply shall be protected by an approved cross connection control plan. The plan for cross connection control must be submitted with the application for reclaimed water service and must receive the prior approval of the Director. In the event a cross connection is found, the cross connection shall be immediately disconnected, and the reclaimed water service will be suspended. Before reconnection of the reclaimed water service, the public potable water system shall be protected against the possibility of future cross connections to the Director’s satisfaction. Additional protection against cross connection may be required as specified by the Director at the customer’s expense before reclaimed water service is resumed.
    c. Right of Entry. The Director or representative may enter any premises to determine the presence of any cross connections or other potential hazards to the Town potable water system. Each customer of reclaimed water service shall, by completing the reclaimed water application, give written consent to such entry upon the customer’s premises.
15. Service Interruption. The Town reserves the right to temporarily discontinue service to any portion or all of the reclaimed water system as deemed necessary by the Director. In addition, the Director shall have the authority to establish schedules which restrict the use of reclaimed water at certain times in order to reduce maximum pressure demands on the system and to regulate usage during periods of limited reclaimed water availability.
16. Maintenance by Customer. The property owner and/or customer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all reclaimed water lines and appurtenances within the customer’s property, unless the meter was, of necessity, located beyond the customer’s property line, in which case the customer shall be responsible for all reclaimed water lines and appurtenances beyond the meter. The Town reserves the right to disconnect the service to any property when the reclaimed water system and appurtenances are not properly maintained. In addition, should the customer require reclaimed water at different pressures, or different quality, or in any way different from that normally supplied by the Town, the customer shall be responsible for the necessary devices to make adjustments and for obtaining approval by the Director.
17. Conservation of Water Resources. It is the policy of the Town to wisely use natural resources. In addition to all other conservation measures contained in this Chapter the Town may terminate, suspend or discontinue reclaimed water service if customer usage of reclaimed water varies substantially from the overall loading rates outlined in the customer’s application for service.
18. Right to Refuse Service. The Town makes no guarantees that reclaimed water service will be provided, or, once provided, continued. The Town may and from time to time, refuse to extend or suspend or terminate service on the basis of a use detrimental to the system, an inadequate supply of reclaimed water, the failure to pay required fees, or for any other reason which, in the judgment of the Director, will cause the provision of service to not be of benefit to the Town.
19. Ownership by Town. In accordance with Chapter 15, WATER CODE, all reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances within dedicated public easements when constructed or accepted by the Town, shall become and remain the property of the Town. No person shall by payment of any charges provided herein, or by causing any construction of facilities accepted by the Town, acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities or any portion thereof, other than the privilege of having their property connected thereto for reclaimed water service in accordance with this Ordinance and any amendments thereof.
20. Priority. As to the provision of reclaimed water service, in the event of a conflict with the provisions of any other Town Ordinance, the provisions of this Code shall take priority.
21. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Code is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. ((O)03-31, Enacted,  10/01/2003)

Article 15-16 SERVICE OBLIGATIONS OF THE TOWN, INTERRUPTIONS

Sections:
15-16-1      Level of Service
15-16-2      Non-liability
15-16-3      Service Interruptions
15-16-4      Minimum Delivery Pressures
15-16-5      Construction Standards
15-16-6      Meter Reading, Measurement of Service
15-16-7      Customer Requested Meter Re-reads
15-16-8      Customer Requested Meter Tests
15-16-9      Billing and Collection
15-16-10     Estimated Bills
15-16-11     Combining Meters
15-16-12     Minimum Bill Information
15-16-13     Billing Date

Section 15-16-1 Level of Service
The Town of Oro Valley shall make reasonable efforts to supply a satisfactory and continuous level of service to its customers. The Town will make plans and make reasonable efforts to comply with or bring into compliance the system for fire protection services where indicated. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-2 Non-liability
The Town of Oro Valley shall not be responsible for any damage or claim of damage attributable to any interruption or discontinuation of service resulting from:
a. Any cause against which the Town could not have reasonably foreseen, such as but not limited to force majeure;
b. Any service interruptions to make repairs or perform routine maintenance;
c. Hydraulic phenomena resulting in temporary water quality changes that are not attributable to faulty water service;
d. Curtailment;
e. Any damage to property of the utility due to an outside agency’s actions. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-3 Service Interruptions
The Town shall make reasonable efforts to re-establish service within the shortest possible time when service interruptions occur. In the event of national emergency or local disaster resulting in disruption of normal service, the Town may, in the public interest, interrupt service to other customers to provide necessary service to civil defense, fire protection, or other emergency service agencies on a temporary basis until normal service to these agencies can be restored. When the Town plans to interrupt service for more than four (4) hours to perform necessary repairs or maintenance, the Town shall attempt to inform affected customers at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the scheduled day and the estimated duration of the service interruption. Such notice may be by regular mail, but is not required. Such repairs shall be completed in the shortest possible time to minimize inconvenience to customers of the Town water utility. Notice to customers shall not be required in the event of an emergency or an outage due to unanticipated events or causes. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-4 Minimum Delivery Pressures
The Town of Oro Valley shall maintain a minimum standard delivery pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch gauge (PSIG) at the customer’s meter or point of delivery. The Town intends to work toward maintaining a thirty (30) to forty (40) PSIG level at all connections. The maximum pressure shall not exceed eighty (80) PSIG. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-5 Construction Standards
All facilities will be constructed in accordance with the guidelines established by the Arizona Department of Health Services, the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, and the Town of Oro Valley; or shall follow as closely as possible the above agencies’ and the City of Tucson’s standards as pre-approved by the Water Utility Director until the Town of Oro Valley adopts its own standards, and shall follow any other jurisdiction’s standards with authority over the construction standards for public water supplies. ((O)07-41, Amended,  11/07/2007; (O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-6 Meter Reading, Measurement of Service
Each customer’s meter shall be read monthly on as close to the same day as practical. All water delivered by the Town water utility shall be billed on the basis of metered volume sales, except that the Town may, at its option, provide a fixed charge schedule for the following:
A. Special services from a Town pre-designated location where water use can be readily estimated;
B. Public and private fire protection service;
C. Water used for Town of Oro Valley purposes. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-7 Customer Requested Meter Re-reads
At the request of a customer, the Town shall re-read the customer’s meter within five (5) working days after such request by the customer. Any re-reads shall be charged to the customer at the rate provided for in Article 15-17 et. seq., provided that the original reading was not in error. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-8 Customer Requested Meter Tests
At the request of a customer, the Town shall test the customer’s meter. Meter tests shall be charged to the customer at the rate provided for in Article 15-17 et. seq.; provided, that the meter was not found to be in error by more than three percent (3%). ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-9 Billing and Collection
The Town shall bill its customers monthly for water services rendered. Meter readings shall be scheduled for periods of not less than twenty-five (25) days nor more than thirty-five (35) days. If the Town is unable to read the meter on the scheduled meter read date, the Town will estimate the consumption for the billing period giving consideration to the following factors where applicable:
A. The customer’s usage during the same month of the previous year;
B. The amount of usage during the preceding month; failure on the part of the customer to comply with a reasonable request by the Town for access to its meter may lead to discontinuance of service. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-10 Estimated Bills
Estimated bills will only be issued under the following conditions:
A. Conditions which prevent the Town from reading the meter; or
B. Circumstances that make it dangerous or impossible to read the meter, i.e., locked gates, blocked meters, vicious or dangerous animals, threatening conduct of the customer, etc. Each bill based on estimated usage will indicate that it is an estimated bill. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-11 Combining Meters
Each meter at a customer’s premises will be considered separately for billing purposes, and the readings of two or more meters will not be combined unless the Town, in its sole judgement, determines good cause exists to combine meter readings. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-12 Minimum Bill Information
Each bill for water utility service will contain the following minimum information:
a. Date and meter reading at the start of a billing period;
b. Previous month’s meter reading;
c. Bill usage;
d. Town water utility telephone number;
e. Customer’s name;
f. Service account number;
g. Amount due and due date;
h. Past due amount plus interest (where appropriate);
i. Other charges and taxes (where applicable);
j. Service address and billing date. Note: Failure to receive bills or notices which have been properly placed in the United States Mail shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the customer of his/her obligations. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Section 15-16-13 Billing Date
The date a bill is rendered may be evidenced by any of the following: the postmark date, the mailing date, certified mail, certificate of mailing. ((O)96-13, Enacted,  03/25/1996)

Article 15-17 WATER RATES, FEES AND CHARGES

Sections:
15-17-1      Establishment of Water Rates, Fees and Service Charges
15-17-2      Alternative Water Resources Development Impact Fees
15-17-3      Potable Water System Development Impact Fees

Section 15-17-1 Establishment of Water Rates, Fees and Service Charges
Water rates, fees and service charges for the Town of Oro Valley Water Utility shall be established by resolution of the Town Council. The alternative water resources development impact fees and the potable water system development impact fees shall be established by ordinance in accordance with Chapter 13. ((O)14-05, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 15-17-2 Alternative Water Resources Development Impact Fees
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Customer Class | AWRDIF Effective 7/1/2014 |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Single-Family Residential (per meter size) |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 5/8-inch       | $4,045                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3/4-inch       | $6,067                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-inch         | $10,111                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-1/2-inch     | $20,223                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 2-inch         | $32,356                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Multifamily Residential (per unit)         |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Per Unit*      | $1,941                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Commercial and Industrial (per meter size) |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 5/8-inch       | $5,258                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3/4-inch       | $7,887                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-inch         | $13,145                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-1/2-inch     | $26,289                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 2-inch         | $42,063                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3-inch         | $84,126                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 4-inch         | $131,447                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 6-inch         | $262,894                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 8-inch         | $420,631                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Irrigation (per meter size)                |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 5/8-inch       | $7,280                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3/4-inch       | $10,920                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-inch         | $18,200                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-1/2-inch     | $36,401                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 2-inch         | $58,241                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3-inch         | $116,482                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 4-inch         | $182,004                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 6-inch         | $364,007                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 8-inch         | $582,412                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
Individually metered residential units shall pay the single-family residential fee for each meter.
*The meter component of the fee for master-metered multifamily residential uses is the higher of the total based upon one thousand nine hundred forty-one dollars ($1,941) per unit or the commercial fee(s) for the size of the master meter(s).
A variance may be requested if a meter is required to be increased from a five-eighths (5/8) inch meter to a three-quarter (3/4) inch meter solely due to the installation of fire sprinkler systems. If the variance is granted, the AWRDIF that will be assessed will be the cost of a five-eighths (5/8) inch meter. The variance will have no impact on all other rates, fees and/or charges associated with a three-quarter (3/4) inch water meter.
Metered connections to the Town’s reclaimed water system are not subject to the alternative water resources development impact fees. ((O)14-05, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Section 15-17-3 Potable Water System Development Impact Fees
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Customer Class | PWSDIF Effective 7/1/2014 |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Single-Family Residential (per meter size) |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 5/8-inch       | $2,015                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3/4-inch       | $3,022                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-inch         | $5,037                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-1/2-inch     | $10,074                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 2-inch         | $16,118                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Multifamily Residential (per unit)         |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Per Unit*      | $967                      |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Commercial and Industrial (per meter size) |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 5/8-inch       | $2,619                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3/4-inch       | $3,929                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-inch         | $6,548                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-1/2-inch     | $13,096                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 2-inch         | $20,953                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3-inch         | $41,906                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 4-inch         | $65,478                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 6-inch         | $130,956                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 8-inch         | $209,530                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| Irrigation (per meter size)                |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 5/8-inch       | $3,626                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3/4-inch       | $5,440                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-inch         | $9,066                    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 1-1/2-inch     | $18,132                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 2-inch         | $29,012                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 3-inch         | $58,024                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 4-inch         | $90,662                   |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 6-inch         | $181,324                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| 8-inch         | $290,118                  |
+----------------+---------------------------+
Individually metered residential units shall pay the single-family residential fee for each meter.
*The meter component of the fee for master-metered multifamily residential uses is the higher of the total based upon nine hundred sixty-seven dollars ($967.00) per unit or the commercial fee(s) for the size of the master meter(s).
A variance may be requested if a meter is required to be increased from a five-eighths (5/8) inch meter to a three-quarter (3/4) inch meter solely due to the installation of fire sprinkler systems. If the variance is granted, the PWSDIF that will be assessed will be the cost of a five-eighths (5/8) inch meter. The variance will have no impact on all other rates, fees and/or charges associated with a three-quarter (3/4) inch water meter.
Metered connections to the Town’s reclaimed water system are not subject to the potable water system development impact fees. ((O)14-05, Substituted,  04/02/2014)

Article 15-18 WATER CONSERVATION

Sections:
15-18-1      Purpose
15-18-2      Declaration of Policy
15-18-3      Water Conservation Compliance
15-18-4      Restricts During Potable Water Shortages
15-18-5      Termination of Water Service for Violation
15-18-6      Variance
15-18-7      Penalties
15-18-8      Public Notification
15-18-9      Disclaimer
15-18-10     Residential Rainwater Harvesting
15-18-11     Rainwater Harvesting for Commercial and Master Subdivision Development Projects
15-18-12     Graywater Use

Section 15-18-1 Purpose
The Town of Oro Valley has enacted an ordinance requiring water conservation at a local level. It is recognized that water conservation is also a regional issue that should be addressed in cooperation with other jurisdictions and water providers. The Town will cooperate with all water providers serving Oro Valley to develop a region-wide conservation plan with the focus on encouraging customers to minimize water usage and to utilize water more efficiently. Furthermore, because of the arid conditions present in the area, it is the policy of the Town of Oro Valley to encourage its water users to always conserve water voluntarily to the maximum extent practicable. The Town of Oro Valley deems it necessary to establish policies, rules, regulations, penalties and plans for water conservation within the Town to be implemented by Oro Valley Water Utility customers during water shortages as defined herein. ((O)03-07, Amended,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-2 Declaration of Policy
It is hereby declared that, because of the water shortage conditions experienced in the Town of Oro Valley, the general welfare requires that all the water resources available to the Town be put to the maximum beneficial use to the extent to which they are capable, and that waste, excessive use, or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and that conservation of water be exercised in the interests of the Town of Oro Valley and for the public welfare. ((O)03-07, Enacted,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-3 Water Conservation Compliance
It shall be unlawful for any customer of the Town of Oro Valley Water Utility to knowingly make, cause, use or permit the use of water provided by the Town for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, irrigation or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provisions of this Code, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted under any Resource Status Level declared in accordance with this Code. ((O)03-07, Enacted,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-4 Restricts During Potable Water Shortages
To determine the need to impose restrictions, the following procedures shall be implemented during potential potable water shortage conditions involving drought or other conditions:
A. The Water Utility Director, or a designated representative, shall project the supply and demand for water on a daily basis and shall advise the Town Manager on the extent of the use reduction required through the implementation and/or termination of particular use reduction stages in order for the Water Utility to prudently plan for and supply water.
B. The Town Manager, upon the recommendation of the Water Utility Director, or a designated representative, is hereby authorized to declare Water Conservation Levels in conformity with and based upon the Resource Status Levels set forth herein.
C. Safe production capability is defined as ninety percent (90%) of the total available water system capacity (calculated over a 24 hour period), based upon distribution components, storage reserves, and weather conditions.
D. Such declaration may designate the entire area served by the Oro Valley Water Utility, or a portion or portions of the service area as affected, in the event the shortage is not system-wide.
E. Priority for potable water demand shall be designated as follows:
    Highest Priority - Residential indoor domestic use and fire protection.
    Second Highest Priority - Commercial/Institutional/Industrial uses.
    Third Highest Priority - Public and private landscape irrigation sites, including golf courses, athletic fields and parks.
    Lowest Priority - Other uses such as main flushing, street cleaning, pool filling, decorative facilities.
    Note: Per Arizona Administrative Code Title 18; Chapter 5; Note 1. Only a certified operator can make a decision about process control or system integrity regarding water quality or water quantity that affects public health; however, an administrator who is not a certified operator can make a planning decision regarding water quality or water quantity as long as the decision is not a direct operational process control or system integrity decision that affects public health. A certified operator will report supply conditions to the Water Utility Director, or a designated representative.
F. The following Resource Status Levels are hereby prescribed:
    1. Resource Status Level I: Periods when water demand is equal to safe production capability.
    2. Resource Status Level II: Periods when water demand is greater than safe production capability for three (3) consecutive days.
    3. Resource Status Level III: Periods when water demand is greater than safe production capability for two (2) consecutive weeks.
    4. Resource Status Level IV: Periods when water demand exceeds total production capability.
G. The following Water Conservation Levels shall govern the use of water by customers of the Oro Valley Water Utility, as prescribed below:
    1. Water Conservation Level I: Voluntary Water Reductions. Water Conservation Level I shall be imposed when water demand is classified as Resource Status Level I. Water users shall be requested to voluntarily reduce water used for irrigation, vehicle and pavement washing, construction and other water consuming activities. Irrigation is defined as the application of water to residential lawns, landscaping, commercial and industrial turf areas (including golf courses), parks, and medians.
    2. Water Conservation Level II: Water Restrictions. Water Conservation Level II shall be imposed when water demand is classified as Resource Status Level II. The following water uses shall be restricted or prohibited. No person shall:
        a. Wash vehicles unless a bucket and hose with a positive cutoff nozzle is used. No restrictions shall apply to commercial car washes.
        b. Wash paved areas as drives, sidewalks, or tennis courts; except reasons of health or safety.
        c. Continue normal irrigation practices. Potable water supply for irrigation of golf courses and large turf areas shall be reduced by 10%. Further reductions in irrigation use along with time restrictions may be imposed. Operations personnel shall recommend appropriate actions to balance the system to the Water Utility Director. No restrictions shall apply if treated effluent/reclaimed water is used.
        d. Use ornamental or public fountains and outdoor misting systems.
        e. Use water from a fire hydrant from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. for construction water unless provided written approval of the Water Utility Director and Town Fire Marshall; and except for such use associated with firefighting activities.
    3. Water Conservation Level III: Water Emergency. Water Conservation Level III shall be imposed when water demand is classified as Resource Status Level III. In addition to the restrictions set forth in Section 15-18-4(F)(2) above, the following water uses are further restricted or prohibited. No person shall:
        a. Fill or refill swimming pools, spas or wading pools unless for public health, safety or welfare.
        b. Potable water supply for irrigation golf courses and large turf areas shall be reduced by up to 60%. Further reductions in irrigation use along with time restrictions may be imposed. No restrictions shall apply if treated effluent/reclaimed water is used.
        c. Wash vehicles, paved areas, or use fire hydrants on a non-emergency basis without written approval of the Water Utility Director and the Town Fire Marshall. No restrictions shall apply to vehicles that must be washed for public health, safety or welfare, or to commercial car washes.
        d. Irrigate outdoors other than between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on Monday and Thursday for even-numbered street addresses and for odd-numbered street addresses and all others at these same times on Tuesday and Friday. No restrictions shall apply if treated effluent/reclaimed water is used.
    4. Water Conservation Level IV: Water Crisis. Water Conservation Level IV shall be imposed when water demand is classified as Resource Status Level IV. The following water users shall be restricted or prohibited. No person shall:
        a. Do any of the acts prescribed in Section 15-18-4(F)(2) and (3) above.
        b. Use any potable water for irrigation.
        c. Use fire hydrants, wash pavements, fill or refill pools, spas, outdoor misting systems or fountains unless for public health, safety or welfare.
        d. Use potable water for dust control on public or private streets or capital improvement projects. Includes all construction water.
        e. Use potable water in violation of any other restriction deemed necessary by the Mayor and Town Council for the purpose of protecting the health & welfare of the citizens of the Town of Oro Valley.
        f. No restrictions shall apply if treated effluent/reclaimed water is used. ((O)03-07, Enacted,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-5 Termination of Water Service for Violation
If and when the Water Utility Director, or a designated representative, becomes aware of any violation of any use reduction regulation pertaining to water use or misuse, the Water Utility Director, or a designated representative, shall have authority to take actions, including mandatory measures up to and including disconnection of service, and other such enforcement actions as are required or deemed necessary to assure compliance with the use reduction plan. In notification of such a violation, a written notice shall be placed on the property where the violation occurred; and a duplicate shall be mailed to the billing account address for the service where the violation occurs, and to any other person known to the Water Utility who is responsible for the violation or its correction. Said notice shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected, caused or abated immediately or within such specified time as the Water Utility determines is reasonable under the circumstances. If said order is not complied with, the Water Utility may forthwith disconnect the service where the violation occurs. If a service is disconnected, assessment of a reconnection fee to be determined by the Water Utility will be assessed and collected before service is restored. Said fee shall be in addition to other fees or charges imposed for disconnection or reconnection of service.
Upon a second violation at the same property or by the responsible party, disconnection may be ordered immediately, and the service shall not be reconnected unless a device supplied by the Water Utility that will restrict the flow of water to said service is installed. Furthermore, a fee for reconnection may be imposed in addition to other fees or charges imposed by the disconnection and reconnection of service.
In addition to any other legal or equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this Code, the Town of Oro Valley may terminate or suspend water service to property owned or controlled by any party in violation of any provision in this Code. The Water Utility Director, or a designated representative, may cause a notice of water termination to be served upon the violating party stating that service will be discontinued in a predetermined number of days unless a hearing is requested. A hearing may be requested by delivery of a request in writing to the Town Manager, which shall be received by the Town Manager on or before the expiration of said specified number of days. If a hearing is requested, the Town Manager shall convene a hearing within three (3) business days of the written request. The requesting party may appear before the Town Manager and may present such evidence and reasons such party may have for not effectuating a termination or suspension of water service and may bring to the hearing such other persons or evidence as such party may desire. After hearing, and upon finding that such a violation has occurred, the Town Manager may order that water service be terminated or suspended pending compliance with the provisions of this Code. Termination of water service and reconnection of service is subject to all applicable charges, fees and penalties. ((O)03-07, Enacted,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-6 Variance
The Water Utility Director, or a designated representative, may in writing, grant variances to persons who apply for usages of water not in compliance with the water use reduction programs described in 15-18-4. These variances may be granted if it is found that such water use is necessary to prevent an emergency condition relating to health, safety and general welfare or essential governmental services such as police, fire, and similar emergency services; or for customers who have made every reasonable effort to reduce water use yet are still prevented from compliance for reasons beyond their control. Efforts made to conserve water at the onset of drought conditions or periods of water shortage may be considered in granting said variance. ((O)03-07, Enacted,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-7 Penalties
Any violation of any provision in this Code shall be a civil violation and shall be subject to a civil sanction not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) for each day that the violation continues. The imposition of a civil sanction shall not be suspended. ((O)03-07, Enacted,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-8 Public Notification
Town of Oro Valley Water Utility customers shall be notified of changes in Water Conservation Levels in conformity with and based upon the Resource Status Levels set by the Town Manager by the use of public notices, local newspapers, Public Service Announcements from radio and television, door hangers, water utility bills and any other method necessary to provide adequate notice to customers. ((O)03-07, Enacted,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-9 Disclaimer
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. ((O)03-07, Enacted,  03/05/2003)

Section 15-18-10 Residential Rainwater Harvesting
Active and passive rainwater harvesting systems are allowed for use by residents of Oro Valley; provided, that active systems meet the requirements of applicable parts of Oro Valley Town Code Chapter 6 (Building) as to construction methods and that any system that ties into or uses potable water must have backflow protection installed and meet requirements of Article 15-23 of the Town of Oro Valley Water Code: Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Program. All collection vessels must be covered and mosquito proof. In passive systems, all standing water must infiltrate into the soil within twelve (12) hours. No ponding allowed. ((O)07-19, Enacted,  03/21/2007)

Section 15-18-11 Rainwater Harvesting for Commercial and Master Subdivision Development Projects
Active and passive rainwater harvesting systems are allowed for use by these projects. All systems must first be approved under the Drainage Review Criteria Manual and the Town Engineer prior to installation and meet current Oro Valley Town Code Chapter 6 (Building) as to construction methods. Any system that ties into or uses potable water must have backflow protection installed and meet requirements of Article 15-23 of the Town of Oro Valley Water Code: Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Program. All collection vessels must be covered and mosquito proof. For passive systems, all standing water must infiltrate into the soil within twelve (12) hours. No ponding allowed. ((O)07-19, Enacted,  03/21/2007)

Section 15-18-12 Graywater Use
Graywater use is allowed for use by Oro Valley Water Utility customers; provided, that all guidelines imposed by ADEQ are met and that design, construction and operation of the system meet requirements of the Oro Valley Town Code Chapter 6 (Building). All graywater systems must have backflow protection installed and must meet requirements of Article 15-23 of the Town of Oro Valley Water Code: Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Program. ((O)07-18, Enacted,  03/21/2007)

Article 15-19 VIOLATIONS, FINES AND PENALTIES

Sections:
15-19-1      Installation, Repair by Individuals Prohibited
15-19-2      Turning On Water Without Authority
15-19-3      Escaping Water; Violation Declared a Civil Infraction
15-19-4      Interfering With; Tampering with Water Facilities; Removing Water
15-19-5      Damaging, Defacing Water Facilities
15-19-6      Penalties

Section 15-19-1 Installation, Repair by Individuals Prohibited
All water services to be installed by the Town of Oro Valley Water Utility shall only be installed by the Town or its authorized employees or agents as provided for in this Water Utility Code. It shall be unlawful for any person to install any such service or any part of such service, or to repair any service now existing or any part thereof, from the water mains to and including the meter, or disturb any right of way easement, street or alley in any manner for the purpose of locating problems with the water system or for any other reason whatsoever.

Section 15-19-2 Turning On Water Without Authority
If any person shall, by false key or otherwise, after the water has been shut off from any premises, cause such premises to be supplied with water, such person, his aiders and abettors, shall be guilty of a Class One Misdemeanor.

Section 15-19-3 Escaping Water; Violation Declared a Civil Infraction
No person shall intentionally allow water to escape from his premises upon public property, such as alleys, roads or streets, nor upon any other person’s property.

Section 15-19-4 Interfering With; Tampering with Water Facilities; Removing Water
No person shall open or close any fire hydrant or stopcock connected with the water system of the Town of Oro Valley, or lift or remove the covers of any gate valves or shutoffs, or tap into Town water mains or otherwise remove water from the Town water utility system without a permit from the Director of the Town Water Utility, or in violation of conditions of a permit, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of the officers of the fire suppression service provider. Any violation shall be a Class One Misdemeanor unless specifically stated otherwise.

Section 15-19-5 Damaging, Defacing Water Facilities
If a person shall destroy, deface, impair, injure or wantonly force open any gate or door, or in any way whatsoever destroy, injure or deface any reservoir, building, storage tank, or appurtenances, fences, trees, or fixtures or property appertaining to the water utility of the Town, such person shall be guilty of a Class One Misdemeanor.

Section 15-19-6 Penalties
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any of the provisions of Title 9 of the Oro Valley Water Utility Code shall be guilty of a Class One Misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence or fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this Code.

Article 15-20 AMENDMENTS AND PUBLIC HEARINGS

Sections:
15-20-1      Amendment Procedure
15-20-2      Public Hearing Requirement

Section 15-20-1 Amendment Procedure

Section 15-20-2 Public Hearing Requirement
Shall be in accordance with Arizona State Laws.

Article 15-21 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
(RESERVED)

Article 15-22 SEVERABILITY

Sections:
15-22-1      Severability

Section 15-22-1 Severability
This Water Utility Code and the various parts, sections, and clauses, are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby declared that the remainder of this Code shall not be affected thereby. The Town Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code and each part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more portions thereof may be declared invalid.

Article 15-23 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM

Sections:
15-23-1      Purpose
15-23-2      Definitions
15-23-3      Backflow Prevention Required
15-23-4      Hazard Potential
15-23-5      Backflow Prevention Methods; List
15-23-6      Backflow Prevention Methods Required
15-23-7      Backflow Prevention Methods Required for Reclaimed Water and Graywater Systems
15-23-8      Backflow Prevention Assembly Installation Requirements
15-23-9      Installation of Backflow Prevention Assemblies for Fire Systems
15-23-10     Inspections
15-23-11     Permit
15-23-12     Discontinuance of Water Service
15-23-13     Test, Notification, Maintenance, Records
15-23-14     Plan Review
15-23-15     Fees
15-23-16     Penalties
15-23-17     Appeals

Section 15-23-1 Purpose
The purposes of this backflow prevention and cross-connection control program are as follows:
A. To protect the public potable water supply for the Town of Oro Valley from the possibility of contamination or pollution by preventing the backflow of contaminants and pollutants.
B. To promote the elimination or control of cross-connections, actual or potential, between a customer’s internal water systems, plumbing fixtures, industrial piping systems, and the public water supply.
C. To provide for a continuing “service protection” program of cross-connection control that will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply system.
D. Unless a cross-connection problem is specifically identified, or as otherwise provided in this section, the requirements of this Section shall not apply to single-family residences used solely for residential purposes. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998)

Section 15-23-2 Definitions
ADEQ: Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
Auxiliary Water Supply: Any water supply on or available to any premises other than the public potable water supply. These auxiliary water supplies may include, but are not limited to, water from another utility’s potable water system or from any source such as a well, spring, river, pond, lake, reservoir, stream or any other body of water.
AWWA: American Water Works Association.
Backflow: A flow of water within a potable water system that is the reverse of that intended, thus allowing nonpotable water to flow into a potable water pipe.
Backflow Prevention Assembly: An assemblance of one (1) or more body components including shutoff valves that has been approved by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research at the University of Southern California.
Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester: A person who is currently certified by an authority recognized in the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality regulations and is approved and registered with the Utility to test, repair, and maintain backflow prevention assemblies.
Compliance Date: The date by which the annual backflow prevention assembly compliance test report must be received by the Utility’s Backflow Prevention Section stating that the backflow assembly meets the requirements of this code or for violations of this code, the specified date by which a violation must be remedied.
Compliance Fee: The fee that is charged to recover the administrative costs that are incurred when a customer’s water service is discontinued.
Consecutive Systems: Another public or private water system where the Utility is the sole source of water for the other supplier’s water system.
Contamination: An impairment of the quality of potable water by sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds, or any other materials, solids, gases, or liquids to a degree which in the judgment of the Utility degrades the water quality and creates a health hazard.
Cross-Connection: Any unprotected actual or potential physical connection or structural arrangement of piping or fixtures between a consumer’s water system and the public potable water system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the public potable water system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, liquid, solid or any other substance. Examples of such cross-connections include, without limitation, bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or any other temporary or permanent connecting arrangement through which backflow may occur.
Cross-Connection Protection: The degree of protection against cross-connections existing between the public water supplies and private plumbing systems.
Customer: The person/entity accepting financial responsibility for water service from the Utility.
Graywater: Untreated wastewater from bathtubs, showers, wash basins, washing machines, and laundry tubs. Graywater does not include wastewater from toilets, urinals, kitchen sinks or dishwashers.
Hazard: A cross-connection or potential cross-connection between the public water supply and a private plumbing system involving any substance that could, if introduced into the public water supplies, cause contamination or pollution, or have a high probability of causing such effects.
Inspection: A visual examination of premises or any backflow protection equipment, materials, workmanship and operational performance.
Maintenance: Work performed or repairs made to keep backflow prevention assemblies operable and in compliance.
PSIG: Pounds per square inch gauge.
Pollution: Any substance that creates an actual or potential threat to the physical facilities of the public water supply systems or to the public water supplies which, although not dangerous to health, would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances.
Reclaimed Water: Water that, as a result of treatment of wastewater, is suitable for a direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur and is not safe for human consumption.
Service Connection: The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system where the Utility loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer’s water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the down-stream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer’s water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system.
Service Protection: The acceptable backflow prevention method installed between the Utility’s meter and a customer’s private plumbing system.
Utility: Town of Oro Valley Water Utility. ((O)07-21, Enacted,  03/21/2007)

Section 15-23-3 Backflow Prevention Required
A. When Oro Valley Water Utility determines that the water supplied by the public water system may be subject to contamination or pollution, a backflow prevention method shall be required at every service connection to a customer’s water system. The customer shall install the required backflow protection within the time specified by the Utility. In determining the time in which backflow protection shall be installed, the Utility shall consider the degree of hazard potential to the public water supplies.
B. The backflow prevention method required shall be determined by the Utility. The method required by the Utility shall be sufficient to protect against the hazard potential, as determined by the Utility, to the public potable water supply.
C. Residential service connections will be exempt from backflow prevention unless it is determined by the Utility that the potable water supplied by the public potable water system may be subject to contamination, pollution or other deterioration of quality by conditions or potential conditions within the customer’s water system. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-2)

Section 15-23-4 Hazard Potential
The potential degree of hazard to the public potable water supply system from a customer’s water supply system shall be determined using the following hazard factors:
A. Health: Any actual or potential condition, device or practice which, in the judgment of the Utility, may create a threat of contamination to a potable water supply or may create a danger to the health and well-being of the potable water consumers.
B. Plumbing: An actual or potential plumbing cross-connection in a customer’s water supply system that has not been protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. A plumbing hazard may be either a pollution or contamination hazard.
C. Non-health: Any actual or potential condition, device or practice which, in the judgment of the Utility, may create a threat of pollution to a potable water supply system.
D. System: Any actual or potential condition, device or practice which, in the judgment of the Utility, may create a threat of severe damage to the physical properties of a potable water supply system or that would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-3)

Section 15-23-5 Backflow Prevention Methods; List
All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the parameters of the manufacturer and the Utility. The following are the approved types of backflow prevention assemblies which the department may require. (See Appendix A, on file in the office of the Town Clerk, for schematics and additional information.)
A. Air Gap (AG): The unobstructed vertical distance through free atmosphere between the lowest point of a water supply outlet, pipe or faucet supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the tank, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved air gap shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less than one (1) inch.
B. Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly (RPA): A backflow prevention assembly containing two (2) independently acting, approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly.
C. Reduced Pressure Principle Detector Assembly (RPDA): An assembly composed of a line size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle assembly.
D. Double Check Valve Assembly (DC): A backflow prevention assembly composed of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks.
E. Double Check Detector Assembly (DCDA or DDCVA): An assembly composed of a line size approved double check valve assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly.
F. Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly (PVB): A backflow prevention assembly containing an independently operating, loaded check valve and an independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly.
G. Spill-Resistant Pressure Vacuum Breaker (SVB): An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with a properly located test cock, properly located bleed/vent valve and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly.
Any backflow prevention assembly equipped with test cocks shall have been issued a certificate of approval by the USC Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. Any backflow prevention assembly not equipped with test cocks shall be certified by a third party entity unrelated to the product’s manufacturer or vendor and approved by the ADEQ. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-4)

Section 15-23-6 Backflow Prevention Methods Required
A. A backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line on private property or immediately inside the building being served; but in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:
    1. In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an AG or RPA.
    2. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substances are handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the Utility system that have been subject to deterioration in quality. AG, RPA, or DC.
    3. In the case of premises having (a) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an AG or RPA.
    4. In the case of any premises where there is the potential for pollution, the public water system shall be protected by an approved DC, PVB, or SVB.
    5. Temporary potable water connection for any use, including construction sites and jumpers, shall require an RPA provided and maintained by the Utility.
B. When two (2) or more of the aforementioned conditions exist on the same premises and are served by the same service connection, the most restrictive backflow protection required for any of the conditions shall be required to be installed at the service connection. The order of most restrictive to least restrictive backflow protection shall be as follows:
    1. Air gap (AG).
    2. Reduced pressure principle assembly (RPA).
    3. Reduced pressure principle detector assembly (RPDA).
    4. Double check valve assembly (DC).
    5. Double check detector assembly (DCDA).
    6. Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB).
    7. Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SVB). ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Amended,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-5)

Section 15-23-7 Backflow Prevention Methods Required for Reclaimed Water and Graywater Systems
A. There shall be no cross-connections between reclaimed water or graywater systems and potable water systems. Prior to service, all connections to the reclaimed water system shall be reviewed, inspected, and approved by the Utility’s Backflow Prevention Section.
B. Where both reclaimed water and potable water are supplied to a reclaimed water use area, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RPA or RPDA) or an approved air gap (AG) separation shall be installed at the potable water service connection to the use area.
C. Where potable water is used to supplement a reclaimed water system, there shall be an air gap (AG) separation, approved and regularly inspected by the Utility, between the potable water and reclaimed water.
D. Premises using graywater systems shall install an RPA at the potable water service connection to the property.
E. Parts, tools, gauges, and/or other equipment required for the maintenance and testing of backflow prevention devices on the reclaimed water system shall not be used on the potable water system. All backflow prevention maintenance and testing equipment for the reclaimed system shall be color-coded purple. ((O)07-21, Enacted,  03/21/2007)

Section 15-23-8 Backflow Prevention Assembly Installation Requirements
A. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and maintained by the customer, at the customer’s expense and in compliance with the standards and specifications adopted by the Utility, at each service connection. The customer is responsible for notifying the Utility of any installation, repair, relocation or replacement.
B. The backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on private property in an accessible location above ground, as close as possible to the service connection with proper clearances in accordance with the current set of standard details approved by the Utility for backflow prevention assemblies (see Appendix A, on file in the office of the Town Clerk). The backflow prevention assembly shall be installed immediately following the meter and in all cases before the first branch line. The assembly shall have a diameter equal to or greater than the diameter of the service connection. Each service connection will require its own backflow prevention assembly.
C. When a customer requires a continuous water supply, two (2) or more backflow prevention assemblies of the same type shall be installed parallel to one another at the service connection to allow a continuous water supply during testing of each individual backflow prevention assembly. When backflow prevention assemblies are installed parallel to one another, the sum of the cross-sectional area of the assemblies shall be equal to or greater than the cross-sectional area of the service connection or service line piping at the point of installation.
D. For an air gap (AG) installation, all piping installed between the customer’s connection and the receiving tank shall be entirely visible unless otherwise approved in writing by the Utility.
E. A PVB or SVB assembly may be installed for use on a landscape water irrigation service if all of the following criteria are met. In all other circumstances, an RP assembly is required:
    1. The water use beyond the assembly is for irrigation purposes only;
    2. The PVB/SVB is installed in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications;
    3. The irrigation system is designed and constructed to be incapable of inducing backpressure;
    4. Chemigation, the injection of chemical pesticides and fertilizers, is not used or provided for in the irrigation system; and
    5. No other source of water is available on the premises.
F. No person shall alter, modify, bypass or remove a backflow prevention method without the approval of the Utility.
G. Installation of the backflow prevention assembly must be completed within the time specified by the Utility. A time extension may be granted by the Utility.
H. If a customer fails to install a backflow prevention assembly pursuant to this article, the Utility shall discontinue water service and assess a compliance fee pursuant to this article.
I. If the Utility determines, after inspection of the customer’s system, that a backflow prevention method less restrictive than that required in Section 15-23-6(A) will provide adequate protection of the public water supply, the Utility may, at its sole discretion, modify or waive the requirements of Section 15-23-6(A) accordingly. In determining, waiving, or modifying backflow requirements, the Utility shall consider the hazard potential to the public water system based on the design of the customer’s water system. Written notification of the decision will be provided to the property owner. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-6)

Section 15-23-9 Installation of Backflow Prevention Assemblies for Fire Systems
A. Fire protection systems may consist of sprinklers, hose connections, and hydrants. Sprinkler systems may be dry or wet, open or closed. Systems consisting of fixed-spray nozzles may be used indoors or outdoors for protection of flammable liquid and other hazardous processes. It is standard practice, especially in cities, to equip automatic sprinkler systems with fire department pumper connections.
B. For cross-connection control, fire protection systems shall be classified on the basis of water source and arrangement of supplies as follows:
    1. Class 1: Direct connections from public water mains only; no pumps, tanks or reservoirs; no physical connection from other water supplies; no antifreeze or other additives of any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to atmosphere, dry wells or other safe outlets.
    2. Class 2: Same as class 1, except that booster pumps may be installed in the connections from the street mains. It is necessary to avoid drafting so much water that pressure in the water main is reduced below twenty (20) PSI.
    3. Class 3: Direct connection from public water supply main plus one (1) or more of the following: elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking suction from above-ground covered reservoirs or tanks; and pressure tanks (all storage facilities are filled or connected to public water only, the water in the tanks to be maintained in a potable condition).
    Otherwise, class 3 systems are the same as class 1. Class 1, 2, and 3 systems will generally require minimum protection (approved DC or DCDA) to prevent stagnant waters from backflowing into the public potable water system.
    4. Class 4: Directly supplied from public mains similar to classes 1 and 2, and with an auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises; or an auxiliary supply may be located within seventeen hundred feet (1,700') of the pumper connection. Class 4 systems will normally require backflow protection at the service connection. The type (AG, RPA or RPDA) will generally depend on the quality of the auxiliary supply.
    5. Class 5: Directly supplied from public mains, and interconnected with auxiliary supplies, such as: pumps taking suction from reservoirs exposed to contamination, or rivers and ponds; driven wells, mills or other industrial water systems; or where antifreeze or other additives are used. Class 5 systems normally would need maximum protection (AG, RPA or RPDA) to protect the public water system.
    6. Class 6: Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction tanks. Class 6 system protection would depend on the requirements of both industry and fire protection, and shall be determined by the Utility through a survey of the premises.
C. Installation of Assembly. When a backflow prevention assembly is required for a water service connection supplying water only to a fire system, the assembly shall be installed on the service line in compliance with standard specifications adopted by the Town.
    1. Pressure losses across backflow prevention assemblies must be accommodated in the hydraulic design or redesign of the automatic fire sprinkler system.
    2. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed above ground and as close to the service connection as possible on private property. When an assembly is installed in a mechanical room, sufficient drainage and space must be provided for the testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assembly.
    3. Installations shall meet current plumbing and fire codes as applicable in addition to the Utility’s standard details.
    4. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a horizontal or vertical position in accordance with their listing.
    5. A forty-five (45) day installation permit is required for all backflow prevention assemblies. In addition, the installation must be inspected by the Utility and the assembly must be tested by a state certified backflow prevention tester before approval. The fire line contractor should make arrangements with a private backflow prevention assembly tester that is registered with the Utility. A certified backflow prevention tester will only have responsibility for the test and repair of the backflow prevention assembly and not any other component of the automatic fire sprinkler system unless that person is certified to perform testing on fire sprinkler systems.
    6. Backflow prevention assemblies will be UL 1469 listed. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-7)

Section 15-23-10 Inspections
A. At any time deemed necessary by the Utility, an inspection shall be conducted to determine whether any cross-connections or other hazard potentials exist and to determine compliance with this code. The customer’s water system shall be available at all times during normal business hours for inspection and backflow prevention assembly testing by the Utility.
B. The Utility shall inspect all new sites, assembly installations and assembly relocations.
C. A waived premises is property for which the Utility has determined there is currently no hazard potentials and therefore does not require the use of a backflow prevention system. All waived premises shall be inspected periodically or when there has been a change in owner/tenant or a change in use.
D. If a customer refuses to allow the Utility entry for inspection purposes during business hours, the Utility may discontinue water service, require backflow prevention or take any steps allowed by law to gain entry to the property. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-8)

Section 15-23-11 Permit
A. Installation permits for all backflow prevention assemblies shall be obtained from the Utility prior to installation. A separate permit shall be obtained for each required backflow prevention assembly to be installed, including replacement or relocation.
B. It shall be the duty of the person performing the work authorized by the permit to notify the Utility, orally or in writing, that the work is ready for inspection. No inspection shall occur sooner than twenty-four (24) hours from notification of the Utility. Any person requesting an inspection must have a good faith basis to believe that the work done will meet current Town codes and regulations.
C. Any work performed contrary to the provisions of the International Plumbing Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, or this code may be subject to a work stop order by the Utility or its authorized representative. Any persons engaged in or causing improper installation shall be informed in writing that work must cease until the Utility authorizes the continuation of the installation.
D. Whenever a permit is issued in error, on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance, regulation or any provision of the International Plumbing Code or this code, the permit may be revoked or suspended by the Utility upon written notice. ((O)07-21, Enacted,  03/21/2007)

Section 15-23-12 Discontinuance of Water Service
A. Notwithstanding subsection (B) of this section, the Utility may discontinue, without notice, water service to any customer when the Utility discovers any imminent risk for contamination of the public water systems by the customer’s private plumbing systems.
B. Upon notice as provided in subsection (C) of this section, water service is subject to discontinuation if any of the following circumstances exists:
    1. A customer has not installed a required backflow prevention method;
    2. A backflow prevention method has been improperly tested, maintained, bypassed or removed;
    3. An unprotected cross-connection exists in the customer’s water system; or
    4. Any other violation of this code except as provided in Section 15-23-13(J).
C. Prior to disconnecting any service connection, the Utility shall send a notice to the customer describing the condition precipitating disconnection and notifying the customer that the condition must be remedied by the compliance date. The compliance date shall not be less than fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice. If compliance has not been achieved by the compliance date, water service shall be discontinued without further notice.
D. Service connection to a fire sprinkler system shall not be subject to discontinuation under this section. If a condition which would otherwise result in discontinuation of water service, as described in subsection (B) of this section, is not remedied within the time provided in the notice sent to the customer, discontinuation of the domestic water service, excluding the connection to the fire sprinkler system, may result.
E. In the event water service is disconnected, the existing rate for reconnection will be charged to the customer. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-9)

Section 15-23-13 Test, Notification, Maintenance, Records
A. The test compliance date shall be established by the Utility.
B. The Utility shall notify the customer at least forty-five (45) days before the compliance date for each backflow prevention assembly.
C. The customer shall test each backflow prevention assembly at least once a year. Test intervals for any backflow prevention assembly may not exceed the compliance date established by the Utility. If an inactive water service is reactivated, the backflow prevention assembly associated with that service shall be tested if more than twelve (12) months has passed since the last test.
D. Compliance testing shall occur no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the test compliance date.
E. The customer may request in writing a change of the test compliance date for any assembly. No compliance date may be changed to be more than twelve (12) months after the most recent test.
F. If any testing reveals the assembly to be defective or that it is in improper operating condition, the customer shall perform any necessary repairs, including replacement of the assembly, which will return the assembly to proper operating condition. If an assembly is replaced, relocated or repaired, a new test shall be performed on such assembly and submitted to the Utility.
G. Each assembly shall also be tested after installation, relocation, repair, and at least annually thereafter. An assembly shall not be placed in service unless it has been tested and is functioning as designed.
H. At least fifteen (15) days before the compliance date, if the Utility has not received the required annual test information or the backflow method/device does not meet applicable codes, the Utility shall provide a second notice in writing by certified mail. The Utility must receive the required annual test report by the compliance date. It will be the customer’s responsibility to contact the Utility if the repair or replacement of an assembly cannot be completed by the compliance date. For commercial services with a backflow prevention assembly under repair or replacement, the Utility must receive a failed test form by the compliance date, describing the failure and corrective action.
I. All irrigation services with a noncompliant backflow prevention assembly shall be disconnected by five p.m. (5:00) on the day following the compliance date.
J. For commercial services with a noncompliant backflow prevention assembly, the water service may not be disconnected, but the Utility will perform the required test(s) at the customer’s expense. A hand-delivered notice will be given to the customer to alert the customer that the Utility will be on site within four (4) days to complete the test(s), and that it will be necessary to turn off the water service during the test(s). Customers who are in noncompliance will be subject to a fine as described in Section 15-23-16 – Penalties, in addition to all testing costs. The billing calculations and fees are listed in Section 15-23-15 – Fees.
K. The annual testing shall be performed by an individual certified to conduct such testing. The certification shall be approved by ADEQ. A list of certified testers registered with the Utility shall be maintained by the Utility and shall be available upon request.
L. Test procedures shall be performed as required by the ADEQ as set forth in Chapter Nine of the Manual for Cross-Connection Control, Ninth Edition, or later editions. The tester shall provide a copy of the test report to the customer and to the Utility, and shall maintain a copy for their records.
M. For all reduced pressure backflow prevention assemblies (RPA or RPDA), the Utility requires a minimum differential of 3.0 PSI between the number one check valve and the relief valve opening point.
N. The customer shall maintain records, on forms approved by the Utility, of the results of all tests and all servicing, repairs, or replacements of the backflow prevention assembly. A copy of the records shall be provided to the Utility within five (5) days after completion of the activity for which the record is made.
O. Fire systems shall not be out of service for more than eight (8) consecutive hours due to testing, maintenance or repairs. The Fire Department shall be notified immediately of any changes in fire service status.
P. The Utility may test any backflow prevention assembly at any time.
Q. The Utility will notify the tester and/or the customer for corrections of incomplete and/or erroneous test forms. Information on submitted test forms can only be changed or modified by the tester who has signed the form and is responsible for that test.
R. Test equipment shall be maintained and calibrated annually by an agency approved by the Utility as required by the Cross-Connection Control Manual. A copy of the annual equipment calibration certificates shall be submitted to the Utility to maintain equipment registration. Test equipment for backflow prevention assemblies in the Utility’s service area shall be registered with and approved by the Utility. Test equipment used on anything other than potable water backflow prevention assemblies shall not be used to test such assemblies and shall be identified as nonpotable test equipment.
S. Testers shall register with the Utility if they are conducting backflow assembly testing in the Utility’s service area. Testers shall submit a current copy of their certification or recertification upon registration. Testers, upon renewal of tester certification, shall be certified on all backflow prevention assemblies that may be used for service protection. The Utility registration issued to a backflow prevention assembly tester for testing backflow prevention assemblies in the Utility’s service area may be revoked or suspended upon certification expiration or for improper testing, maintenance, reporting or other improper or unethical practices. ((O)07-21, Enacted,  03/21/2007)

Section 15-23-14 Plan Review
A. Backflow prevention assemblies which will be installed shall be shown and specified on all water improvement plans. The Water Utility shall review and approve the intended installation prior to establishment of water service.
B. Backflow prevention assemblies must be installed as to meet the current set of standard details and specifications of the Utility (as shown in Appendix A, on file in the office of the Town Clerk) and be tested by a certified tester and shown to be operating correctly before the water service is activated. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-11)

Section 15-23-15 Fees
A. A schedule of fees shall be kept by the Utility and available upon request.
B. Any costs for time and materials incurred by the Utility as a result of noncompliance with Section 15-23-13(J) shall be charged as part of the customer’s water bill.
C. The fee for issuing a permit to install a backflow prevention assembly and inspecting the installation shall be the current rate in effect at the time the permit is issued.
D. A reconnect fee may be assessed when the customer fails to meet the requirements imposed by this article and the Utility discontinues water service. The reconnect fee shall be the current rate in effect at the time the Utility disconnects the water service.
E. A fee may be established by Town Council resolution to recover the cost of the cross-connection control program. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-12)

Section 15-23-16 Penalties
A. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, enterprise or association, whether as principal, owner, agent, tenant, or otherwise, who violates, disobeys, omits, refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this code shall be subject to a civil penalty. Upon a finding of a civil violation, the court shall impose a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day a violation of any provision of this section continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Customers who are noncompliant with the testing and maintenance provisions of this code (Section 15-23-13) shall be fined as follows: for the first offense there will be a one-hundred-dollar ($100.00) fine in addition to the testing costs. Customers who are in noncompliance for two (2) consecutive compliance periods shall be subject to a two-hundred-fifty-dollar ($250.00) fine in addition to the testing costs.
C. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a second or subsequent violation of any of the provisions of this section within a two (2) year period shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, the defendant shall be sentenced pursuant to the provisions of the Oro Valley Town Code. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-13)

Section 15-23-17 Appeals
An administrative appeal may be requested whenever a violation or dispute of any of the requirements of this code is determined, whether during construction or at the plan review stage, and the applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the staff because of code interpretation, unreasonable hardship or other acceptable reasons. The appeal may be made to the Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Hearing Committee as follows:
A. The applicant shall file a written appeal with the Town Clerk on the forms provided by Oro Valley Water Utility within seven (7) business days of the violation or dispute.
B. The appeal will be heard by the Hearing Committee within ten (10) business days, at a regular specified time.
C. The Hearing Committee shall consist of the Oro Valley Water Utility Director, a member of the Oro Valley Water Utility Commission, and the Cross-Connection Control Specialist. Other technical persons may be added for a particular appeal, at the discretion of the Water Utility Director or designee.
D. Adequate information shall be provided by the applicant in order to fully describe the conditions in question.
E. The decision(s) reached by the Hearing Committee shall be considered final. ((O)07-21, Amended,  03/21/2007; (O)98-03, Enacted,  01/07/1998. Formerly 15-23-14)

Article 15-24 STORMWATER

Sections:
15-24-1      Authority
15-24-2      Need and Purpose
15-24-3      Area of Jurisdiction
15-24-4      “Town-Owned Stormwater Utility (“Enterprise”)”
15-24-5      (Reserved)
15-24-6      Stormwater Utility Commission
15-24-7      Director of Administration
15-24-8      Adoption of Stormwater Management Plan
15-24-9      Facilities
15-24-10     Reserve Funds
15-24-11     Disclaimer
15-24-12     Rules of Interpretation
15-24-13     Stormwater Utility Fee System
15-24-14     Stormwater Management and Discharge Control

Section 15-24-1 Authority
This article may be referred to as the Town of Oro Valley Stormwater Utility Ordinance. This article is adopted pursuant to ARS 9-521, which defines stormwater as a utility undertaking, and ARS 9-522, which authorizes the Town to issue bonds and prescribe service charges so that a utility undertaking for which bonds are issued will always remain self-supporting with revenue sufficient to repay bonds and provide for the expenses of operation, maintenance, expansion and replacement of facilities. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-2 Need and Purpose
A. The occurrence of storms and other events that may cause periodic flooding of land. Such periodic flooding, in sound engineering practice, requires the planning, design, construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities that safely drain and control the quantity and quality of runoff from such storms and other events.
B. The purpose of this article is to provide for the creation of the Town of Oro Valley Stormwater Utility and to adopt appropriate funding mechanisms and service charges to provide the needed stormwater facilities. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-3 Area of Jurisdiction
The Stormwater Utility applies to all areas within the incorporated limits of the Town. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-4 “Town-Owned Stormwater Utility (“Enterprise”)”
A. The Stormwater Utility shall constitute an enterprise of the Town. The Town, may issue its own revenue bonds or other obligations (including refunding securities) on behalf of the Town. The revenue bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely from the net revenues derived from the operation of the Stormwater Utility. Such revenue bonds or other obligations may be additionally secured by mortgages on or security interest in any real or personal property of the Town used in the operation of the Stormwater Utility. The ordinance issuing any such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be adopted in the same manner and shall be subject to referendum to the same extent as any ordinance of the Town in accordance with Arizona law.
B. Any pledge of net revenues derived from the operation of the Stormwater Utility shall be subject to limitations on future pledges thereof contained in any ordinance authorizing the issuance of outstanding bonds or other obligations of the Town payable from the same source or sources. All bonds or other obligations issued by ordinance payable from the net revenues derived from the operation of the Stormwater Utility and all revenue bonds or other obligations of the Stormwater Utility payable solely from the net revenues derived from the operation of the Stormwater Utility, shall be treated as having the same obligor and as being payable in whole or in part from the same source or sources.
C. The Stormwater Utility shall also be authorized to have and exercise the following powers in furtherance of its purpose: 1) to hold meetings concurrently with regular and special meetings of the Town Council; 2) to have and use a seal; 3) to issue its revenue bonds for stormwater purposes in the manner in which Town revenue bonds may be issued; 4) to pledge any revenues of the Town’s stormwater system to the payment of such revenue bonds and to pay such revenue bonds therefrom; 5) to enter into contracts relating to the stormwater system in the manner in which Town contracts may be entered into; 6) to make representations, warranties, and covenants relating to the stormwater system on behalf of the Town; 7) to exercise rights and privileges of the Town relating to the stormwater system; and 8) to bind the Town to perform any obligation relating to the stormwater system other than the multiple-fiscal year direct or indirect debt or other financial obligation(s) of the Town without adequate present cash reserves pledged irrevocably and held for payments in all future years.
D. All revenues and expenditures of the Town, or of the Stormwater Utility relating to the stormwater system, shall be considered revenues and expenditures of the Stormwater Utility. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-5 (Reserved)
(Reserved). ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-6 Stormwater Utility Commission
There is hereby established an entity to be called the Town of Oro Valley Stormwater Utility Commission. The Commission shall be comprised of five (5) Oro Valley residents, and the Mayor and Council shall appoint the members. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-7 Director of Administration
The Public Works Director, or designee, shall serve as the Administrator of the Stormwater Utility. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-8 Adoption of Stormwater Management Plan
The Stormwater Utility shall adopt a comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan in conformance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II guidelines (40 C.F.R. 9.122-125). The Stormwater Management Plan shall outline the goals and objectives of the stormwater system and identify the various elements of the system necessary to achieve the goals and the associated costs in accordance with generally accepted hydrology practices. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-9 Facilities
All stormwater conveyance facilities owned by or dedicated to the Town within the area of jurisdiction shall be considered the facilities of the Stormwater Utility. Stormwater conveyance facilities constructed as a part of private development shall not be dedicated to the public unless a request is made of the Town to accept dedication of such facilities and the Administrator determines that the facilities are constructed to current Town standards and that it is in the public interest to accept such dedication. Such facilities and/or interests in real property shall not be conveyed to the Town prior to the issuance of a formal acceptance by the Town. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-10 Reserve Funds
The Stormwater Utility shall maintain reserve funds for unexpected and/or emergency needs. The need for use of said funds shall be determined by the Board with recommendations from the Commission, or in the case of an emergency where the Commission can not be convened in a timely manner, with recommendation from the Director. This reserve shall be fifteen percent (15%) of the collected annual stormwater fees. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-11 Disclaimer
Floods from stormwater runoff may occasionally exceed the capacity of stormwater facilities constructed and maintained pursuant to this article. This article does not denote that property liable for the fees and charges established by this article would always be free from stormwater flooding or flood damage. This article does not purport to reduce the need or the necessity for the property owners to obtain flood insurance. This article does not create any liability on the part of the Town or any officer or employee thereof for any damages that may result from reliance on this article or actions of the Stormwater Utility. This article, other than as provided for in this section, does not relieve any person from liability for actions taken, or not taken, for damage to persons or the property of others. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-12 Rules of Interpretation
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or repeal other powers granted to the Town. Should provisions of this article conflict or overlap with other regulations, ordinances, or statutes, the regulation, ordinance, or statute that imposes the more stringent requirement or restriction shall prevail. ((O)01-15, Enacted,  06/20/2001)

Section 15-24-13 Stormwater Utility Fee System
A. Findings. 
    1. The Town maintains a system of storm and surface water management facilities including, but not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities, and other components as well as natural waterways.
    2. The stormwater system in the Town needs regular maintenance, repair and improvements.
    3. Stormwater quality is degraded due to erosion and the discharge of nutrients, metals, organic compounds including oil and grease, and other substances into and through the stormwater system.
    4. Stormwater quantity is affected by erosion, design of drainage, maintenance of stormwater channels, channel vegetation, floodway and flood plain characteristics and changes, and deposition of material in the channels.
    5. The public’s health, safety, and welfare are adversely affected by poor stormwater quality and flooding that result from inadequate management of both the quality and quantity of stormwater.
    6. All real property in the Town either uses or benefits from the maintenance of the stormwater system.
    7. The extent of use of the stormwater system by each property is dependant on factors that influence runoff, including land use and the amount of impervious surface on the property.
    8. The costs of improving, maintaining, repairing, operating, and monitoring the stormwater system shall be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners based on the impact of runoff from the impervious areas of their property on the stormwater control and conveyance system.
    9. Management of the stormwater system to protect the public health, safety, and welfare as well as meet the Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Phase II permit and FEMA requirements requires adequate revenues. It is in the interest of the public to finance stormwater management with a fee system that is reasonable and equitable. Single-family residences will be charged a flat rate for one (1) ERU. Non-single-family and religious/educational property owners will be charged a multiple rate equal to the amount of impervious area on their property divided by the amount of one (1) ERU (four thousand (4,000) square feet). This formula will charge property owners on the basis of their properties’ impact to the stormwater system.
B. Authority. Authority for the adoption of a system of charges to fund the implementation of stormwater management programs is conferred on the Town by ARS 9-530, as amended.
C. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
    1. “Administrator of the Stormwater Utility” or “Administrator” means the Town Engineer, or designee, shall serve as the Administrator of the Stormwater Utility.
    2. “Arizona Pollutant Elimination Discharge System (AZPDES)” means a program required under Section 402(b) of the Clean Water Act (CWA), in accordance with 40 CFR 123.22. The program specifies how the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (Department) will administer the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program. The program is found in Article (3.1) of the Arizona Revised Statutes in Chapter 2, under Title 49 authorizing a state NPDES program. The administrative rules for an Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (AZPDES) program are consistent with, but no more stringent than, the NPDES program and the requirements of Sections 402(b) (state permit programs) and 402(p) (municipal and industrial stormwater discharges) of the CWA.
    3. “Equivalent residential unit (ERU)” means approximate average amount of impervious area associated with single-family residential property in the Town.
    4. “Base rate (BR)” means the Stormwater Utility flat fee to an ERU of four thousand (4,000) square feet of impervious surface.
    5. “Commission” means the Stormwater Utility Commission for the Town of Oro Valley established under this article.
    6. “Developed property” means real property which has been altered from its structures, or other impervious area.
    7. “Undeveloped property” means real property in its untouched natural state.
    8. “Fee” or “Stormwater Utility fee” means the charge established under this section and levied on owners of parcels or pieces of real property to fund the costs of stormwater management, implementation of the Stormwater Management Plan together with constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing, and improving the stormwater system in the Town.
    9. “FEMA” means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
    10. “Fiscal year” means July 1st of a calendar year to June 30th of the next calendar year, both inclusive.
    11. “Impervious surface area” means the number of square feet of horizontal surface covered by buildings and other impervious surface, which is compacted or covered with material that is resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, and any other oiled, graveled, graded, compacted, or other surface that impedes the natural infiltration of surface water.
    12. “Multifamily dwelling” means a building with more than three (3) dwelling units (to include apartments and condominiums).
    13. “Nonresidential property” means developed property other than single-family residential property. Such property shall include, but not be limited to, multifamily dwellings, commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, hospitals, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, and offices.
    14. “Educational facilities, religious institutions and nonprofits” means any developed public, private, or parochial school or any building recognized as a religious facility or nonprofit use.
    15. “Property owner” means the property owner of record as listed in the Pima County Assessor’s roll. A property owner includes any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver, or personal representative.
    16. “Single-family residential property (SFR)” means a developed property that serves the primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit. Single-family residential property shall also include duplexes and triplexes. A single-family detached dwelling containing an accessory apartment or second dwelling unit is included in this definition.
    17. “Stormwater utility fund” or “fund” means the fund created by this chapter to operate, maintain, repair, and improve the Town’s stormwater system and implement the Town’s Stormwater Management Plan.
    18. “Stormwater Management Plan” means the planning, design, construction, regulation, improvement, repair, maintenance, operation of facilities and programs necessary for the Town to meet the compliance requirements of the Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (AZPDES) Phase II Municipal General Permit and FEMA Regulations as relating to water, flood plains, flood control, grading erosion, and sediment control along those activities.
    19. “Stormwater system” means the system or network of storm and surface water facilities including but not limited to inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities and other components as well as all natural waterways (including washes). It shall also mean the activities associated with implementing the Stormwater Management Plan.
    20. “Water” means any stormwater, surface water, snow melt or ground water.
D. Establishment of Stormwater Utility Fund. 
    1. The Stormwater Management Plan is established to provide for the Town’s compliance with the AZPDES Phase II Municipal General Permit requirements and to provide the stormwater system necessary to convey stormwater, control flooding, and to protect the natural environment. The costs of complying with the AZPDES Phase II program and FEMA Regulations along with designing, developing, improving, operating, maintaining, and monitoring the stormwater system required in the Town should, therefore, be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners based on their impact on the stormwater system. In order to provide revenue to fund those costs and to fairly allocate those costs, a Stormwater Utility Fund (the “fund”) is established.
    2. All revenues collected from the Stormwater Utility fee, from grants, permit fees, penalties and other charges collected under this article, shall be deposited to the fund. The Town Council may make additional appropriations to the fund. All disbursements from the fund shall be for the purposes of the fund as set forth in subsection E of this section, and the fund shall be used for those purposes only.
E. Purposes of the Fund. The fund shall be used for the following purposes:
    1. All costs of implementation and administration of the Stormwater Management Plan, including the establishment of reasonable operating and capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency stormwater management requirements. There shall be a reserve fund of fifteen percent (15%) of the collected annual stormwater fees as specified under Section 15-24-10 of this code.
    2. Inspection and enforcement activities.
    3. Billing and administrative costs.
    4. Other activities that are reasonably required to accomplish the mission of the Stormwater Management Plan.
F. Stormwater Utility Fee. A monthly service charge is imposed upon all real property in the Town, as of the first day of each month, beginning January 1, 2008, to fund the Stormwater Management Plan and stormwater system with invoicing as defined in subsection J of this section. This service charge shall be known as the Stormwater Utility fee (“fee”). As any real property is developed or developed real property is annexed into the Town it will be subject to the fee. The fee is based on the cost of implementing a stormwater management program.
G. Classification of Property for Purposes of Determination of the Stormwater Utility Fee. 
    1. For purposes of determining the Stormwater Utility fee, all properties in the Town are classified into one of the following classes:
        a. Single-family residential property; or
        b. Nonresidential property; or
        c. Educational facilities, religious institutions and nonprofits.
    2. Single-Family Residential (SFR) Fee. All developed single-family residential properties in the Town shall be charged a flat Stormwater Utility fee, equal to the base rate, regardless of the size of the parcel or the improvements.
    3. Non-Single-Family Residential Property (NSFR) Monthly Fee. A developed non-single-family residential (NSFR) property will be charged a fee for the number of ERUs of impervious area. The impervious area for developed NSFR property may be determined through site examination, mapping information, aerial photographs and other available information. NSFR without first flush capabilities or other approved stormwater pollution prevention devices shall pay the base rate times the number of ERUs on the site. The monthly fee shall be determined by dividing the total impervious surface (in square feet) by four thousand (4,000) and rounding that value up or down to the nearest whole ERU amount and then multiplying the result by the base rate to obtain the monthly fee. NSFR properties that incorporate first flush capabilities or other approved stormwater pollution prevention devices are eligible for a twenty-five percent (25%) reduction in the fee, providing they apply to and are approved by the Stormwater Utility Commission and meet the annual inspection and maintenance requirements.
    4. Educational Facilities, Religious Institutions and Nonprofits Monthly Fee. A developed religious institution, school or other nonprofit property shall be eligible for a twenty-five percent (25%) fee reduction provided they apply to and are approved by the Stormwater Utility Commission. In order to qualify for the fee reduction, the educational facility, religious institution or nonprofit organization must conduct educational programs or other tasks on the topic of stormwater management as approved by the Stormwater Utility Commission. No developed educational facility, religious institution or nonprofit property shall pay less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the base rate. The monthly fee shall be determined by dividing the total impervious surface (in square feet) by four thousand (4,000) and rounding that value up or down to the nearest whole ERU amount and then multiplying the result by the base rate to obtain the monthly fee.
H. Base Rate. 
    1. The Town Council shall, by resolution, establish the annual (fiscal year) monthly base rate for the Stormwater Utility fee. The base rate shall be calculated to ensure adequate revenues to fund the costs of stormwater management and to provide for the operation, maintenance, and capital improvements of the stormwater system in the Town.
    2. A schedule of fees shall be maintained by the Stormwater Utility, three (3) copies of which shall be available at the Town Clerk’s office.
    3. The Stormwater Utility Commission shall annually review the Stormwater Utility revenue requirements and recommend to the Town Council rate adjustments as necessary.
I. Exemptions. 
    1. Property which is owned by the Town and other governmental agencies shall be exempt from the fee.
    2. Undeveloped property shall be exempt from the fee.
J. Billing. 
    1. Each property served by the Oro Valley Water Utility shall be billed monthly for the Stormwater Utility fee. Properties not served by the Oro Valley Water Utility shall be billed quarterly. The bill may be part of the Oro Valley Water Utility bill, a separate billing, or some other reasonable mechanism.
    2. Service charges shall begin January 1, 2008, with invoicing at the end of the month or quarter, as appropriate.
K. Delinquent Stormwater Utility Fee Process/Penalties. For Oro Valley residents being served water by the Oro Valley Water Utility and charged their stormwater utility fees as part of their Water Utility bill, the Oro Valley Water Utility regulations shall apply to all delinquent fees.
For all other Oro Valley Stormwater Utility customers, the following shall be followed to obtain payment of delinquent fees and penalties:
    1. Process. Stormwater Utility fees are overdue twenty-one (21) days after the Stormwater Utility bill is issued and a penalty for any overdue payments may be imposed.
        a. The Stormwater Utility Manager shall send a delinquency notice to property owners responsible for Stormwater Utility fees demanding payment of their delinquent fee within ten (10) days of the date of the notice.
        b. If there is no reply to the Stormwater Utility Manager’s letter, the Town Attorney’s office shall send a letter demanding payment of the Stormwater Utility fee from property owners who have not replied to the first notice. In the event that there is no response to the Town Attorney’s letter, the Town will initiate legal proceedings in the Oro Valley Magistrate Court after ten (10) days.
        c. Failure to pay the fee, including any late charges, by the due date shall be considered a civil violation and a summons and complaint will be served on the property owner. The summons and complaint will be served on the property owner by a process server.
        d. In the event the defendant(s) fail(s) to appear in court, the Oro Valley Magistrate is authorized to issue a default judgment against the defendant(s) in accordance with subsection (K)(2) of this section.
    2. Penalties. 
        a. Civil Sanctions. A person found responsible for a violation of this article shall be sanctioned by the Magistrate or Hearing Officer as follows:
            i. First violation within a twenty-four (24) month period: a sanction of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
            ii. Second violation within a twenty-four (24) month period: a sanction of not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
            iii. Third or subsequent violation within a twenty-four (24) month period: a sanction of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
            iv. The court may, at its discretion, reduce or suspend the sanction.
        Sanctions are in addition to the delinquent Storm Water Utility fee, late fees and charges.
        b. Default Judgment. 
            i. If, after being legally served with a summons and complaint, the party fails to appear at the hearing time designated in the summons and complaint and/or time designated for a hearing by the Court, that individual shall be deemed to have admitted the allegation in the complaint and the Court shall enter judgment and impose a civil sanction in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
            ii. Upon entry of the default judgment, the Court, in addition to the sanctions, may impose all applicable surcharges, security fees, a default judgment fee and other court fees as authorized by State law or Town ordinance.
            iii. If any penalty ordered to be paid by the Magistrate or forfeited pursuant to default is not paid within thirty (30) days of the Magistrate’s order, a lien on the real property to which the delinquent stormwater fees apply may be filed in the amount of the judgment by the Town Attorney. The Magistrate may also institute judicial proceedings as provided by law to collect any such penalty. All penalties collected pursuant to this article shall be paid to and become the property of the Town.
L. Requests for Correction of the Stormwater Utility Fee. 
    1. A property owner may request correction of the fee by submitting the request in writing to the Stormwater Utility Administrator. Grounds for correction of the fee include:
        a. Incorrect classification of the property for purposes of determining the fee;
        b. Errors in the square footage of the impervious surface area of the property;
        c. Mathematical errors in calculating the fee to be applied to the property; and
        d. Errors in the identification of the property owner of a property subject to the fee.
    2. The Stormwater Utility Administrator shall make a determination within thirty (30) days after the receipt of (as indicated by the receipt date stamp) the property owner’s completed written request for correction of the fee. The applicant may appeal the Administrator’s determination to the Stormwater Utility Commission.
    3. A property owner must comply with all rules and procedures adopted by the Town when submitting a request for correction of the fee and must provide all information necessary for the Stormwater Utility Administrator to make a determination on a request for correction of the fee. If a property owner alleges an error under subsection (L)(1)(b) of this section, the request for correction must include a certification by a registered civil engineer or professional land surveyor of the impervious surface area of the property. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall be grounds for denial of the request. ((O)16-07, Amended,  05/04/2016; (O)10-14, Amended,  11/17/2010; (O)10-04, Amended,  04/07/2010; (O)07-40, Enacted,  11/07/2007)

Section 15-24-14 Stormwater Management and Discharge Control
A. Title. This section shall be known as the “Storm Water Quality Management and Discharge Control Ordinance” of the Town of Oro Valley and may be so cited.
B. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Regulations (40 CFR Part 122), and State regulations for stormwater discharge (ARS Title 49, Chapter 2, Article 3.1) by establishing minimum stormwater management requirements for the management of pollutants that are or may be discharged to the municipal storm sewer system.
C. Definitions. The terms used in this section shall have the following meanings:
    1. ADEQ means the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, Arizona’s regulatory entity responsible for administering Federal and State environmental laws and programs including most water-quality, air-quality, and waste programs.
    2. Authorized Representative means the Town Engineer, or his/her designee, who has the delegated duties and powers pursuant to this section.
    3. AZPDES means the Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
    4. AZPDES Permit means any permit issued by the ADEQ pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, a group, or on a general area-wide basis.
    5. Best Management Practices (BMPs) means activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain and ephemeral wash systems and waters of the United States. BMPs include but are not limited to: treatment facilities, including first-flush technology, to remove pollutants from stormwater; public education and involvement; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of nonstormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the Town determines appropriate for the control of pollutants.
    6. Certified Industrial Hygienist means a professional industrial hygienist who is certified by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene.
    7. Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500; 86 Stat. 816; 33 U.S.C. 1251 through 1376), as amended.
    8. Construction Activity means activities subject to the ADEQ construction general permit (AZG2008-001) and the Town of Oro Valley’s grading permit requirements.
    9. Connection means the location/juncture at which discharge can enter a municipal separate storm sewer or ephemeral wash system.
    10. Corrective Action Plan means a plan that is required under this section and approved by an authorized representative that consists of structural and/or nonstructural BMPs to minimize to the maximum extent practicable stormwater pollution or to remediate anthropogenic impacts to the storm-drain/wash system.
    11. De Minimus Discharge means a discharge that is a low flow volume and/or low frequency, seldom occurring, event of relatively pollutant-free water which is discharged with appropriate BMPs to reduce any pollutant concentrations to below the applicable surface standard (A.A.C. Title 18, Chapter 11, Article 1).
    12. Discharge means any addition of any pollutant to waters of the United States or to an MS4 from any point source.
    13. Discharger means any person who causes or allows a discharge or who owns property from which a discharge originates.
    14. Engineer means a professional civil engineer who is registered with the State of Arizona.
    15. Environment means navigable waters, any other surface waters, ground water, drinking water supply, land surface, subsurface strata, ambient air, biotic community, or wildlife habitat within or bordering on the Town.
    16. EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency charged with primary enforcement of the Clean Water Act.
    17. First-Flush means a collection system approved by the Town that is employed to capture and isolate the first one-half (1/2) inch runoff from the commercial development site.
    18. Illicit/Illegal Discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the Town’s storm drain or wash systems, or placement of anthropogenic materials in the preceding systems, except as exempted in subsection (H)(1) of this section or discharges pursuant to and in compliance with an applicable NPDES or AZPDES permit or other written authorization from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ).
    19. Industrial Facility means the site of any industrial activity regulated under NPDES or AZPDES industrial stormwater permits as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14).
    20. Land Disturbance Activity means any activity that is regulated under NPDES or AZPDES stormwater permit requirements for construction sites.
    21. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) means all separate storm sewers defined as “large,” “medium,” or “small” municipal separate storm sewer systems or any municipal separate storm sewers on a system-wide or jurisdiction-wide basis as determined by the Director under A.A.C. R28-9-C902(A)(1)(g)(i) through (iv). [A.A.C. R18-9-A901(23)]. This also includes similar systems owned or operated by separate storm sewer municipal jurisdictions not required to obtain stormwater discharge authorization.
    22. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permits means general, group, and individual stormwater discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in Federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act.
    23. Notice of Intent (NOI) means a document which describes the intent to operate in accordance with an NPDES/AZPDES Construction General Permit.
    24. Notice of Termination (NOT) means the document to terminate coverage under the NPDES/AZPDES Construction General Permit.
    25. Nonstormwater Discharge means any discharge to the storm drain and wash system that does not originate from precipitation.
    26. Owner or operator means any owner or operator of any “facility or activity” subject to regulation under the NPDES/AZPDES program.
    27. Person means an individual, property owner, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the Federal Government, the State of Arizona, or any political subdivision or agency of this State.
    28. Point Source means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
    29. Pollutant means sediment, fluids, contaminants, toxic wastes, toxic pollutants, dredged spoil, solid waste, substances and chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, petroleum products, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt (e.g., overburden material), and mining, industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes or any other liquid, solid, gaseous or hazardous substances. [A.R.S. Section 49-201(29)]
    30. Pollution means the human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses.
    31. Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
    32. Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
    33. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) means a document required under NPDES/AZPDES regulations or imposed pursuant to this section that describes the stormwater quality controls in place at a site and how these controls will be inspected and maintained.
    34. Town means the Town of Oro Valley.
    35. Watercourse means any drainage channel, wash, road or path through which water can flow.
    36. Waters of the United States (U.S.) is defined in 40 CFR 122.2.
D. Applicability. This section shall apply to all activities which may potentially affect the municipal separate storm sewer system, any private storm sewer system, or any wash system on any land within the Town. Additionally, this includes discharge from permanent or temporary stormwater management controls and facilities, constructed as part of any activities listed in this section, which are located within the Town. Stormwater management standards shall apply to industrial, commercial, institutional, and multi-family residential development, as well as subdivision, roadway, and drainage projects that result in land area disturbance equal to or greater than areas established by the current construction general permit.
E. Responsibility for Administration. The Town Engineer shall adopt, administer, implement, and enforce such rules, regulations, standards, processes, and forms as he/she deems necessary for the efficient administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Town Engineer/Public Works Director may be delegated to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the Town.
F. Regulatory Consistency. This section shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations including those set forth in the Arizona State permit, and any amendments to, revisions of, or re-issuance thereof. No permit or approval issued pursuant to this section shall relieve a person of the responsibility to secure permits and approvals required for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. Additionally, the Town does not certify or take any position whether the applicant has met all requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act.
G. Ultimate Responsibility of Discharger. The requirements set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section are intended to meet minimum standards as required by Federal and State regulations but can, as determined by the Town Engineer, exceed the minimum standards. This section does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused by said person. This section shall not create liability on the part of the Town or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that may result from any discharger’s reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
H. Discharge Prohibitions and Controls to Reduce Pollutants Entering Drainage Systems. 
    1. General Requirements. 
        a. Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering a storm sewer system shall undertake appropriate measures to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to, proper use and disposal of household chemicals, such as pesticides and fertilizers, cleaning solutions, and cleaning solution waste water; and ownership and use of facilities which may be a source of pollutants including but not limited to parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, construction sites, and retail establishments.
        b. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, or left unmaintained any refuse, rubbish, garbage, vegetation trimmings, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, parking area, or upon any public or private plot of land so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except where such pollutant is being temporarily stored in properly contained waste receptacles or is part of a well-defined compost system.
    2. Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. 
        a. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or Town watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater or pumped or rising unpolluted ground water. Additionally, depositing, dumping, or storing any material in a manner that may contribute pollutants to or obstruct the flow of stormwater is prohibited. The following activities are also subject to and enforceable under this section as they can contribute to contaminants which are regulated by Federal and State regulations to which this section applies:
            i. Failing to comply with any applicable AZPDES/NPDES permit including any permit requirements to develop, implement, maintain or comply with a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP);
            ii. Failing to provide required information to the Town including:
                (A) Copies of the SWPPP, notice of intent, notice of termination, or any other documents relating to the permit;
                (B) Upon request, copies of the SWPPP, water quality monitoring laboratory analytical results, and/or final hydrologic reports/development plans certifying compliance with any discharge detention or first-flush treatment requirements;
            iii. Failing to develop, implement, or comply with a SWPPP or a corrective action plan utilizing BMPs that is either required under an AZPDES/NPDES permit or imposed by the Town pursuant to this section, including requirements to implement good housekeeping practices, spill control and response procedures, employee training, record keeping, proper material storage and waste management practices for control of nonstormwater flows, and structural stormwater controls; and
            iv. Misrepresentation in any document pertaining to an approved plan, permit, or certification relating to a discharge activity.
        b. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the Town’s MS4 is prohibited except as follows:
            i. Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the Town’s MS4 including any waters of the U.S. when properly managed to ensure that potential pollutants are minimized to the maximum extent practicable, and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Clean Water Act, ADEQ AZPDES General Permit No. AZG-2001-0001, “General Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges to Waters of the U.S. Which Pose a Limited or an Insignificant (De Minimus) Threat to Water Quality” (including amended or reissued permits):
                (A) Potable water line flushing;
                (B) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater and other discharges from potable water sources;
                (C) Diverted stream flows;
                (D) Air conditioning condensation;
                (E) Uncontaminated non-industrial roof drains;
                (F) Individual residential and occasional noncommercial car washing;
                (G) Flows from riparian habitats;
                (H) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges with the exception of filter back wash water;
                (I) Street wash waters;
                (J) Flows from fire fighting;
                (K) Irrigation water;
                (L) Foundation and footing drains;
                (M) Water from sump pumps; and
                (N) Dust control water.
            ii. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES/AZPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the State of Arizona under the authority of the U.S. EPA; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted by the Town for any discharge to the storm sewer system.
            iii. With written concurrence of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, the Town may exempt in writing other nonstormwater discharges which are not a source of pollutants to the storm sewer system or waters of the U.S. Such authorization from ADEQ or the U.S. EPA shall be submitted to the Town prior to the time of discharge, and must be retained for at least three (3) years after the last authorized discharge.
    3. Discharges in Violation of Industrial or Construction Activity NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit. Any person subject to any type of NPDES or AZPDES water or stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Such compliance includes but is not limited to implementing BMPs to minimize the chance of pollutant entry into the storm sewer system, to reduce the potential for accidental discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system, and to comply with the cleanup and notification requirements of this section as well as other pertinent Federal/State regulations. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Town Engineer/Public Works Director prior to or as a condition of a grading permit, subdivision plat, development plan, building permit, or grading or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause.
I. Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants from Construction Sites. 
    1. Basic Requirements. All persons engaged in construction activities that are required by Federal or State law to submit to the EPA and/or the ADEQ a notice of intent (NOI) to comply with NPDES or AZPDES stormwater permit regulations shall provide the Town with a copy of the NOI, the site-specific SWPPP, and the AZPDES stormwater permit issued by the ADEQ. Any person performing construction who has submitted an NOI to the Town shall not cause or contribute to a violation of the AZPDES stormwater permit issued to the Town.
    2. Authorization to Adopt and Impose Best Management Practices. The Town Engineer/Public Works Director has the final authority to require and accept BMPs as required for pre- and post-construction activities and must be presented in a SWPPP that is included as a section in the plans and permits submitted for Town review and acceptance as well as BMPs that are submitted as a part of corrective action plans. Town acceptance of a SWPPP is required prior to issuance of a grading permit.
    3. Every owner, operator, or contractor undertaking any construction activity or operation of any industrial facility having the potential to discharge pollutants to a water of the U.S. or the Town’s MS4, or as otherwise required by the Town, the State of Arizona, or Federal agency, shall submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Town. The SWPPP shall include BMP plans including those required by the Town such as the installation of first-flush technology at commercial sites and shall be prepared by a qualified person. Additionally, SWPPPs shall be prepared and reviewed in accordance with the Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System construction general permit issued by the ADEQ. The Town shall not certify or take any position on whether the applicant has met the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act.
    4. New Development and Redevelopment. Owners of new development and redevelopment projects shall implement BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load, including sediment, of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants including sediment in accordance with the requirements of the AZPDES construction general permit. The Town shall incorporate such requirements in the conditions of relevant development and/or plat approvals as well as grading or other construction/building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. Additionally, proof of all applicable Town, State, and Federal permits such as the SWPPP, NOIs, inspection and maintenance logs, CWA 404s, etc., shall be maintained on site for inspection by authorized representatives. To maintain compliance with construction general permit requirements for inspections, construction site BMPs as delineated in the SWPPP must be inspected by the site operator in accordance with the SWPPP.
    5. Responsibility to Implement Best Management Practices. Any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the Town’s MS4, or waters of the U.S. shall implement best management practices including first-flush control technology on commercial development to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or operator’s expense. Furthermore, notices to employees containing information about whom to contact and what procedures to follow in the event of a spill or accidental discharge must be posted at the site. Site owners or operators shall have a trained employee or staff member who will be responsible for any necessary cleanup or remediation.
    6. In the event of a spill or release in reportable quantities as defined in 4 40 CFR 302, 40 CFR 110 and 40 CFR 117, the owner, operator, or the person who has control of the source or location from which a discharge which is not in compliance with this section shall immediately take all reasonable safety precautions including, if appropriate, calling 911 and completing the following steps:
        a. Proceed with containment and cleanup in accordance with:
            i. The orders of an involved health and safety agency, or if no such orders have been issued;
            ii. The orders of an authorized representative, or if no such orders have been issued;
            iii. The stormwater pollution prevention plan or approved corrective action plan utilizing best management practices for the involved facility;
        b. Report any violations of the Town fire code or other such applicable safety or health codes in the manner required by such code;
        c. Notify the Oro Valley Town Engineer/Public Works Director and the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality of the release by telephone before 5:00 p.m. of the next working day;
        d. Provide written notification, within five (5) working days, to the Oro Valley Town Engineer/Public Works Director of the type, volume, cause of the discharge, corrective actions taken, and measures to be taken to prevent future occurrences.
    7. Compliance with these requirements shall not relieve the discharger of any fines, penalties, or liability incurred, or that may be imposed by this section or other applicable laws as a result of the discharge. In addition, compliance with these requirements shall not relieve the discharger from the reporting requirements of 40 CFR 110, 40 CFR 117 and 40 CFR 302.
J. Requirement to Eliminate Illegal Discharges. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (Q) of this section, the Town Engineer/Public Works Director shall require by written notice that a person responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. Compliance with these requirements shall not relieve the owner/operator of property from which the illegal discharge occurred of any fines, penalties, or liability associated with the action that may be imposed by this section or other applicable laws.
K. Requirement to Eliminate or Secure Approval for Illicit Connections. 
    1. The Town Engineer/Public Works Director shall require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this section to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.
    2. If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this section, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person may request Town approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person’s expense. At the discretion of the Town Engineer/Public Works Director, periodic, random monitoring may be required to ensure compliance with subsection (N) of this section.
L. Watercourse Protection. As required by AZPDES Phase II regulations and Chapter 17 of the Oro Valley Town Code, every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. Failure on the part of the property owner to comply may result in liabilities incurred and penalties and fines imposed upon the property owner as defined in this section.
M. Requirement to Remediate. Whenever the Town Engineer/Public Works Director finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the Town’s MS4, or waters of the U.S., the Town Engineer/Public Works Director may convey by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person the requirement for remediation of the pollution and the restoration of affected property within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of subsections (S), (T), (U), and (V) of this section. Failure to take prompt remedial action may result in fines, penalties, and liabilities incurred under this section or other applicable laws.
N. Requirement to Monitor and Analyze. The Town may in the future be required to adhere to a total maximum daily load (TMDL) or other restriction(s) to a specific pollutant or pollutants established by the State of Arizona or the Federal Government. Should this occur, the Town Engineer/Public Works Director may, by written notice, require that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute these specific pollutants in stormwater to undertake at said person’s expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the Town of Oro Valley as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this section. Additionally, regardless of the restrictions discussed above, the Town Engineer/Public Works Director may, by written notice, require that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain/wash system or waters of the U.S., undertake at said person’s expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the Town of Oro Valley as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this section.
O. Notification of Spills. 
    1. In the event of a spill or release in reportable quantities as defined in 40 CFR 302, 40 CFR 110 and 40 CFR 117, the person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Town’s Public Works Department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also document the type, volume, cause of discharge, corrective actions taken, and remedial actions taken to prevent future occurrences. This information shall be provided to the Town Engineer/Public Works Director in writing within five (5) working days and shall also be retained by the owner/operator for at least three (3) years.
    2. Compliance with subsection (O)(1) requirements of this section shall not relieve the discharger from the reporting requirements of 40 CFR 110,  117 and 302.
P. Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities. 
    1. Stormwater facilities shall be maintained per the approved drainage plans or manufacturer’s specifications by the owner or other responsible party and shall be repaired and/or replaced by such person when such facilities are no longer functioning as designed.
    2. Disposal of waste from maintenance of facilities shall be conducted in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations.
    3. Records of installation and maintenance and repair of facilities referenced in subsection (P)(1) of this section shall be retained by the owner or other responsible party for a period of three (3) years and shall be made available to the Public Works Department upon request.
    4. Any failure to maintain facilities or correct problems with facilities after receiving due notice from the Town may result in criminal or civil penalties and the Town may perform corrective or maintenance work which shall be at the owner’s expense.
Q. Authority to Inspect. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this section, or whenever the Town Engineer/Public Works Director has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this section, the Town Engineer may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. When inspections by Town staff reveal deficiencies in the implementation of the SWPPP, a written inspection report will be provided to the owner and operator within fifteen (15) working days of the inspection. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the Town is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
R. Authority to Sample, Establish Sampling Devices, and Test. During any inspection as provided herein, the Town Engineer/Public Works Director may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary at the expense of the owner/operator of the facility to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities.
S. Charges and Penalties. Charges and penalties levied pursuant to this section shall be collected by the Department of Public Works, Stormwater Utility and utilized for activities in compliance with the Town’s MS4 permit. The Town Engineer shall make and enforce efficient management decisions in the maintenance and protection of the Town’s storm drainage system.
T. Operator and/or Owner of Record. The operator performing on-site activities and/or owner of record of the property upon which a violation of this section occurs shall be presumed to be the person having lawful control over the activity or premises unless it is demonstrated and documented that another person has knowingly and in good faith accepted responsibility for the activity at issue. If more than one (1) person is identified as owner, such persons shall be presumed to be jointly and severally in lawful possession and control of the premises or activity.
U. Notice to Correct. The Town may issue a written notice to correct to any person who has violated or is in violation of this section. Failure to comply with actions described in and required by the notice to correct may result in a notice of violation and/or stop work order as described in subsection (V) of this section.
V. Notice of Violation. 
    1. Whenever the Town Engineer/Public Works Director finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement in accordance with a notice to correct (subsection (U) of this section), the Town Engineer may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. The written notice shall state the nature of the violation, the corrective action required, the time frame for the corrective action, and penalties for continued noncompliance. The notice shall be served by either personal service or certified mail to the owner, owner’s agent, the operator, the occupant, or the lessee. Such notice may require the violator, without limitation, to:
        a. Submit a corrective action plan utilizing best management practices to the authorized representative indicating the cause of the violation, corrective actions to prevent recurrence, and a proposed compliance schedule;
        b. Perform monitoring, sampling, laboratory analysis, and reporting of results to the authorized representative and pay costs associated with these activities;
        c. Eliminate illicit connections or discharges;
        d. Abate and remediate stormwater pollution or contamination hazards, restore affected property, ensure that cleanup has been completed, and make operational changes to prevent future violations;
        e. Implement a corrective action plan utilizing source control treatment BMPs to prevent stormwater pollution. Based on site conditions and nature of the contaminant, the authorized representative will determine if the corrective action plan must be prepared, certified and implemented by a qualified person, such as a professional engineer, landscape architect, industrial hygienist registered with the State of Arizona or certified by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene;
        f. Stop work on clearing, grading, dredging, excavating, storing, transporting, and/or filling of land, new construction, improvements, alterations, or additions;
        g. Maintain, repair, and/or replace existing BMPs;
        h. Stop any activity that is in violation of this section;
        i. Abate/correct, within time frame specified in notice, any condition that is in violation of this section;
        j. Abate immediately any condition in violation of this section that the authorized representative determines to present an immediate threat to public health, safety, or the environment.
    2. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the Town or a contractor designated by the Town Engineer/Public Works Director and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to subsection (AA) of this section.
    3. Failure to comply with any action required by the notice of violation shall be a separate violation for each day beyond the thirtieth calendar day following the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Town to take any action, including emergency actions or other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
W. Civil Penalties. In addition to any other enforcement authority contained in this section, the Town may issue a civil citation to any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this section or any related laws or regulations. A person who is found to have violated any requirement of this section shall be civilly liable to the Town for a sum not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) per day for each violation.
X. Criminal Penalties. A person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class one misdemeanor and may be sentenced to a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) per day for each violation, imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months and/or probation not to exceed three (3) years.
Y. Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the Town at the violator’s expense, and/or the Town may bring a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance.
Z. Appeal. 
    1. Appeals of any determination made by the Town Engineer/Public Works Director relating to a notice of violation issued pursuant to subsection (V) of this section may be made to the Stormwater Utility Commission.
    2. Appeals under this section must be filed with the Town Clerk within ten (10) business days from issuance of the notice of violation.
    3. Decisions of the Stormwater Utility Commission shall be final unless, within ten (10) days from the date of the Commission’s decision, the applicant appeals the decision to the Town Council. An appeal to the Town Council shall be filed in writing with the Town Clerk and scheduled for the next available regular Council meeting.
AA. Charging Cost of Abatement/Liens. Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the nuisance by the Town, the Town Engineer/Public Works Director shall notify the property owner of the cost of abatement plus twenty percent (20%) to cover administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within sixty (60) days of the notification to pay, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Assessor so that the Assessor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the Assessor shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of land.
BB. Urgency Abatement. The Town Engineer/Public Works Director is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this section that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the Town Engineer/Public Works Director, the Town is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the Town shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the Town from seeking other and further relief authorized under this section.
CC. Penalties and Corrective Actions. 
    1. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. The remedies provided in this subsection are cumulative and the Town may seek one (1) or more such remedies as described in subsections (V), (W), (X), and (Y) of this section.
    2. Any person violating this section shall be liable to the Town for all damages, costs, fines, and penalties incurred by the Town.
    3. Upon finding that any person has violated this section, the Court may issue an order or, in the case of a criminal conviction, terms of probation, requiring the violator to perform any of the remediation activities listed in subsection (V) of this section.
    4. If more than one person is identified as the owner of record, all persons will be presumed to be jointly and severally in lawful possession and control of the property and/or activity. The transfer of ownership, possession, or control of real property to another person does not relieve the transferor of the responsibility for violations of this title that occurred before the transfer. ((O)08-20, Amended,  10/01/2008; (O)08-15, Enacted,  09/03/2008)

CHAPTER 16 PARKS AND RECREATION

Articles:
16-1         Regulations for Town Park Facilities

Article 16-1 REGULATIONS FOR TOWN PARK FACILITIES

Sections:
16-1-1       Definitions
16-1-2       Park Operations
16-1-3       Domestic Animals and Pets in Park
16-1-4       Intoxicants and Disturbing the Peace in Town Parks
16-1-5       Use and Occupancy Regulations of Park
16-1-6       Reserved Uses of Town Parks
16-1-7       Fees
16-1-8       Equipment
16-1-9       Violations
16-1-10      Parks and Recreation Advisory Board

Section 16-1-1 Definitions
A. "Town" refers to the Town of Oro Valley.
B. "Administrator" means the person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities, and to whom all park employees of such area are responsible.
C. "Park shall mean a park, reservation, playground, recreation center, of any other area in the Town owned or used by the Town devoted to active or passive recreation. ((O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-2 Park Operations
A. The Director or his or her designee may make such reasonable rules and regulations as are necessary to manage, use, preserve and govern park property and activities, and may designate hours of operation and opening and closing times of the municipal parks. No person shall trespass upon or be on the grounds of any municipal park during hours when any municipal park is closed to the public, unless such person has received written permission from the Town.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Director, and/or the Police Department, at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Director may find in the public health, safety or welfare, or for proper operation of the park. The Director may also modify seasonal park hours to allow for the appropriate use of Town resources and citizen use.
C. Oro Valley Aquatics Center Hours of Operation. The Oro Valley Aquatics Center shall be open to the public from the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday. The Oro Valley Parks and Recreation Director shall have discretion to modify these normal hours for all programs and/or special events held at the Oro Valley Aquatics Center. ((O)14-16, Amended,  12/03/2014; (O)13-01, Amended,  01/16/2013; (O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-3 Domestic Animals and Pets in Park
A. No domestic animals or other pets are permitted to be at large in Town park facilities. Domestic animals and pets must be restricted by a cage or a leash of not more than six (6) feet in length, and of sufficient strength to control the animal. Dogs over four (4) months of age must wear a valid license on a collar.
B. Animals participating in pet shows or classes approved by the Town of Oro Valley shall be exempt from the restraint requirement, provided that the animal is accompanied by and under the control of his/her owner or handler.
C. Dog owners or handlers must clean up all litter created by the animal and place it in trash cans. Owners of Seeing Eye dogs are exempt. ((O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-4 Intoxicants and Disturbing the Peace in Town Parks
A. No person shall consume spirituous liquor in any Town park facility unless as part of a major special event permitted by the Town of Oro Valley.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the sale and consumption of spirituous liquor may be permitted at the Town-owned Steam Pump Ranch Facility upon approval of the Town Manager and Chief of Police.
C. "Spirituous liquor" includes alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine, port, ale, beer, and malt liquor, malt beverage, absinthe or compound or mixture of any of them, or of any of them with any vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing alcohol, and any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which produces intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits, and beverages containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume.
D. No person shall intentionally or knowingly disturb the peace or quiet of a group, family or person by: loud or unusual noise; tumultuous or offensive conduct; threatening, trading quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting; applying any violent, abusive, or obscene epithets to one another. ((O)18-03, Amended,  01/17/2018; (O)13-02, Amended,  04/03/2013; (O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-5 Use and Occupancy Regulations of Park
It shall be unlawful;
A. To operate motorbikes, motorcycles, or other motor vehicles on trails, or cross country, or on primitive unsurfaced roadways that have been posted, signed, or barriered to prohibit vehicle use.
B. To operate a motor vehicle except on roads and parking areas designated for such purposes; to operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than that posted or to fail to obey traffic signs. In all cases, motor vehicles shall be operated in compliance with Arizona Motor Vehicle Code as provided under Title 28, A.R.S., while within the boundaries of any Town Park.
C. To destroy, damage, deface, or remove any regulatory sign or property, or facility in any Town Park.
D. To use any Town Park for commercial purposes, public meetings or assemblies, erection of signs, fences, barriers or structures, to distribute advertising materials, or to sell any goods and/or services without first obtaining a written permit from the Town of Oro Valley.
E. To litter, deposit, or abandon in any Town Park any garbage, sewage, refuse, trash, waste, or other obnoxious materials except in receptacles or containers provided for such purposes. These receptacles are not to be used for residential trash disposal.
F. To enter upon or use for any purpose any Town Park when a fee, rental, admission, or other consideration has been established for such use unless the person entering or using such land, water, or facility has paid said fee, rental, admission or other consideration.
G. To enter, use or occupy any Town Park for any purpose when said park or areas are posted against such entrance, use or occupancy.
H. To discharge firearms or other weapons in any Town Park.
I. To bring saddle, pack, or draft animals into any Town Park except in areas approved for such use.
J. To allow grazing or forage consuming domestic livestock to graze or to roam-at-large within the fenced and/or posted boundaries of any Town Park.
K. To build fires, except in designated places, or in fireplaces, stoves or grills either provided or approved by the Town of Oro Valley.
L. To operate any aircraft, parachute, model, or hang glider in any Town Park except in an emergency; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the operation of electric-powered or non-powered model aircraft weighing not greater than twenty-five (25) pounds at altitudes below two hundred (200) feet above ground level within designated areas of the Naranja Town Site Park or future town parks as may be appropriate by Academy of Model Aeronautics-affiliated groups acting under a license agreement with the Town. Hours of operation shall be 6:00 a.m. to dusk. Special events outside these hours may be approved at the discretion of the Parks and Recreation Director.
M. To collect, remove, destroy, mutilate, damage, and/or deface any natural resource including but not limited to all live and dead vegetation and all parts thereof, wildlife, soil, rocks, and water, without obtaining prior written approval from the Town.
N. To undertake mechanical repair of maintenance of any vehicle, including but not limited to, automobile oil changes or engine tune-ups, except in the case of an emergency where the vehicle is not operable.
O. To use metal detectors without Town permit. These permits shall be obtained through the Town of Oro Valley Parks and Recreation Services. Any such use will have a mandatory requirement that upon completion of usage of the device in any Town Park, that there be no visible sign of soil disturbances or damage to the park vegetation and/or permanent fixtures.
P. To swim, bathe, or wade in any waters other than approved swimming pool at any park and at such places as are provided therefore, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or as may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereafter when such activity is prohibited by the Town upon finding such use of the water would be dangerous.
Q. To use any portion of a park for golf purpose, or make use of any golf club or ball in any park, except in a municipal golf course or during golf activities sponsored by the Town.
R. For any children six (6) years of age and under, to be unaccompanied and unsupervised by an adult or responsible teenager at least fourteen (14) years of age when entering any park area except when the child is participating in an activity sponsored directly by the Town.
S. For any person to possess a glass beverage container in any park. No person shall throw, toss, or otherwise propel, or break any glass object in any park or any street or alley adjacent to any such park.
T. To operate or ride any skateboard, rollerskates, bicycle, or rollerblades in a Town park facility unless such usage is conducted in an area specifically set aside for those purposes.
U. No apparatus, furniture or equipment shall be moved into a recreation facility unless special permission is granted in advance and so stated in the permit. Such apparatus, furniture or equipment (provided by the holder of the permit) shall be removed promptly after use. Failure to comply shall prohibit such groups from using facilities at a later date.
V. No material, banner or sign of any kind shall be attached to any part of the facility or area without the permission from the Parks and Recreation Administrator. ((O)09-08, Amended,  05/20/2009; (O)08-13, Amended,  07/16/2008; (O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-6 Reserved Uses of Town Parks
A. A permit shall be obtained from the Town of Oro Valley for large group events and usage of Town park facilities. The Town shall interpret these articles and may act in any case not specifically covered by this article. Any request for a use not contemplated or prohibited by this article may be forwarded to the Town Manager who shall take the request before the Town Council for consideration.
B. Priority Use. Activities sponsored by or co-sponsored by the Town shall have first priority in the use of any park or recreation facility.
C. Insurance and Indemnification. Groups or organizations using Town parks shall indemnify the Town and its employees for any and all damage to the facility by any person or persons attending the affair, and all liability and damages to any person for injuries, including death. Adequate insurance as determined by the Town shall be provided by each organization using any park to cover such liability, listing the Town and its employees as an additional insured. Responsibility for loss, breakage, or need for repair of any piece of furniture, equipment, or portion of the facility or area, shall be upon the individual signing the permit.
D. All activities shall be under competent, adult supervision, with the organization using the facility assuming full responsibility for any damage to the facility or the equipment. A responsible party shall be in attendance at the event. The Parks and Recreation employee on duty shall exercise authority over the organization or its activities. If the adult supervision is inadequate, it shall be the responsibility of the Parks and Recreation employee on duty to report same to the Parks and Recreation Office.
E. Cleanup of the contracted area will be the responsibility of the user. The user shall be charged on an hourly basis to pay for cleanup if it is necessary for the Town to provide additional cleanup services.
F. No Town kitchen facility shall be used except as specifically outlined by the Parks and Recreation Administrator. Facilities shall be thoroughly cleaned after use (see concession operations).
G. All functions shall be confined to the specific part or area of the facility assigned to the permittee.
H. All park rules and regulations shall be observed while using any park or recreation facility and the permittee shall be held responsible for any loss or damage resulting from any such violation of these rules. ((O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-7 Fees
A. The Town of Oro Valley reserves the right to charge fees for the following situations:
    1. The Parks and Recreation Administrator shall have the authority to establish such fees, as prescribed administratively, for recreation activities, education activities, and admission to events. Such fees shall be determined as to the direct correlation of the cost of providing such activities.
    2. The Town Council shall have the authority to establish such fees, as adopted by resolution, for facility usage.
B. A cleanup deposit may be required if deemed necessary. All fees and charges are due no later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to use. ((O)02-32, Amended,  10/16/2002; (O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-8 Equipment
A. The use of special equipment shall be permitted only when operated by Parks and Recreation employees or any other person specifically authorized in the permit. When used by other than Town employees and so stated in the permit, the special equipment shall be returned in the same condition (with the exception of normal wear) or the user shall be responsible for repair or replacement charges. ((O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-9 Violations
A. Enforcement and Penalty. 
    1. The Administrator, Park Attendants, and Police Officers shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article.
    2. Ejection for Violations. The Administrator, Park Attendants and Police Officers shall have the authority to eject from the park any person violating any provisions of this article.
    3. Confiscation of Property. The Administrator, Park Attendants, and Police Officers shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing, or device in the park, being used in violation of this chapter.
    4. Violation of the code provisions will be punished as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed twenty five hundred ($2500.00) dollars or a period of incarceration for a term not to exceed six months or both. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein above described. ((O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

Section 16-1-10 Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
All procedures relating to this organization shall be adopted pursuant to Article 3-6 (Advisory Board) of the Oro Valley Town Code. ((O)96-54, Enacted,  12/18/1996)

CHAPTER 17 FLOODPLAIN AND EROSION HAZARD MANAGEMENT

Articles:
17-1         Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
17-2         Definitions
17-3         General Provisions
17-4         Administration
17-5         Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
17-6         Appeal and Variance Procedures
17-7         Ordinance Amendments
17-8         Fees

Article 17-1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS

Sections:
17-1-1       Statutory Authorization
17-1-2       Findings of Fact
17-1-3       Statement of Purpose
17-1-4       Methods of Reducing Flood Losses

Section 17-1-1 Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Arizona has, in ARS § 48-3610, enabled the Town of Oro Valley to assume the powers and duties for floodplain management and adopt regulations in conformance with ARS § 48-3609 that are designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town Council of Oro Valley, Arizona, does ordain as follows. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-1-2 Findings of Fact
A. The flood hazard areas of Oro Valley are subject to periodic inundation that may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the regulatory floodplain, which increase flood heights and velocities. Also, when these obstructions are inadequately anchored, they may cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-1-3 Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in the regulatory floodplain;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the protection of regulatory floodplain and erosion hazard areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a regulatory floodplain;
H. To ensure that those who occupy an area in a regulatory floodplain assume responsibility for their actions; and
I. To participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-1-4 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to the public health, safety, and welfare as well as public and private property, due to water or development hazards; or which result in increased damages to development or increases in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of start of construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help to accommodate natural flood storage potential or the channelization of floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development that may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that unnaturally divert floodwaters, or that may increase flood hazards in other areas. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Article 17-2 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
17-2-1       Definitions

Section 17-2-1 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage, and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
Accessory Structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Alluvial Fan means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported downstream by flood flows, and then deposited on valley floors, and that is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement, deposition, and channel migration.
Alluvial Fan – Inactive means an alluvial fan where floodwaters typically flow within incised channels, and adjacent lands are stable.
Alluvial Fan Flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan, or similar landform, which originates at the apex; and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, deposition, and unpredictable flow paths.
Alluvial Fan High Hazard Area (AFHH) means an area of active alluvial fan flooding that is reserved to convey and receive sediment and floodwater without altering, and thereby potentially increasing, the distribution of flood hazards across the fan to otherwise inactive areas and areas located down slope.
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan, or similar landform, below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable, and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appeal means a request for a review of the decision of the Floodplain Administrator or Town Engineer concerning previous determinations or actions, pursuant to this chapter. Appeals are heard and decided by the Floodplain Board.
Area of Shallow Flooding means a designated zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Base Flood means a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood shall mean the peak discharge of a one hundred (100) year flood of fifty (50) cubic feet per second (cfs) or greater. Said flood shall be determined from an analysis of floods on a particular watercourse, and other watercourses in the same general region, in accordance with the criteria established by the Arizona Department of Water Resources and the Town of Oro Valley, which criteria are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
Basement means any area of a structure with a subgrade floor, i.e., below the adjacent ground level.
Building. See “Structure.”
Community means any state or area or political subdivision thereof, or any Indian tribe, authorized tribal organization, or authorized native organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.
Critical Facility means a facility such as a hospital, nursing home, police and fire stations, and other public safety facilities that would be severely impacted by flooding interrupting critical services or leading to significant sheltering needs for the sick or elderly.
Detention System means a type of flood control system which delays the downstream progress of floodwaters in a controlled manner, generally through the combined use of a temporary storage area and a metered outlet device, which causes a lengthening of the duration of the flow and thereby reduces downstream flood peaks.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, and storage of materials and equipment located within the regulatory floodplain.
Dwelling means a habitable structure.
Elevation Certificate means an administrative tool of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) that is used to provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management ordinances, to determine the proper insurance premium rate, and to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F).
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, landscape vegetation, fill, excavation, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain that may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. An equal degree of encroachment is a standard applied to the evaluation of the effects of the encroachment on increases in flood heights. It assumes that an encroachment, if permitted, may confer on all property owners on both sides of the watercourse an equal right to encroach to the same degree within that reach. Since the factors affecting hydraulic efficiency are usually not uniform within a reach, this standard will usually not result in equal measured distances between regulatory floodway limit lines and the regulatory floodplain boundaries of the watercourse.
Erosion means the process of the gradual wearing away of landmasses. This peril is not, per se, covered under the National Flood Insurance Program.
Erosion Hazard Area means lands adjoining a watercourse that is regulated by this chapter which are deemed by the Town Engineer to be subject to flood-related erosion losses (ref. the adopted Drainage Criteria Manual, Town of Oro Valley).
Erosion Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure or permanent feature and the channel bank necessary to protect the structure/feature from flood related erosion damage. For method to be used for determination of the erosion setback, see the adopted Drainage Criteria Manual, Town of Oro Valley.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) was completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means an agency of the Federal government responsible for programs of disaster response and recovery, disaster preparedness, hazard mitigation, flood insurance, and other programs of technical and financial assistance.
Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration (FIMA) manages the National Flood Insurance Program.
Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of floodwaters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official report provided by Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Flood Protection System means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended; and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to designation as a regulatory floodplain as well as the extent and depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see “Flooding”).
Floodplain Administrator is the Town Engineer, or his/her designee, whose duty it is to oversee administration and enforcement of the floodplain management regulations contained in this document.
Floodplain Board means the Town Council of Oro Valley, at such times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.
Floodplain Management means the operation of an integrated natural resource management program encompassing corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood and erosion damage. Floodplain management includes but is not limited to emergency preparedness planning, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of legal and regulatory authority that control use of, and development in, flood-prone areas. This term describes Federal, State, or local regulations, and any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
Floodplain Use Permit means an official document that authorizes special activity within the regulatory floodplains or erosion hazard areas of Oro Valley.
Flood-proofed means a watertight structure with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy, and by means other than elevation.
Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduces or eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents by means other than elevation.
Flood-Related Erosion means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
Floodway. See “Regulatory Floodway.”
Floodway Fringe is that area of the floodplain lying on either side of a regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.
Functionally Dependent Use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Governing Body is the local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality) empowered to adopt and implement regulations providing for the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
Hardship means that the physical characteristics of the property in question are so unusual, exceptional, and peculiar that a variance regarding its use may be requested and granted. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, be construed to qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, requires the property owner to build elsewhere, or means that the parcel must be put to a different use than originally intended.
Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface immediately adjacent to a structure prior to construction of the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure means any structure that is:
    A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
    B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
    C. Individually listed on the State of Arizona inventory of historic places, as approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
    D. Individually listed on the Town of Oro Valley’s inventory of historic places and that has been certified by an approved State of Arizona program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
Levee means a human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices, for the purpose of containing, controlling, or diverting the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including the basement (see “Basement” definition) or crawl space under a manufactured home if it is not vented. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered to be the lowest floor of a structure; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market Value means the determination of the estimated cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation that has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. Alternatively, the market value is the valuation made by the Pima County Assessor’s Office.
Mean Sea Level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD ’88), or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means a program administered by FEMA that makes Federally backed flood insurance available for purchase by individuals that live in NFIP participating communities.
New Construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across, or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or which due to its location influences its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, thereby reducing its likelihood of being carried downstream as well as reducing the channel’s ability to convey flow.
One Hundred (100) Year Flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (see “Base Flood”).
Person means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or the State of Arizona or its agencies or political subdivisions.
Program means the National Flood Insurance Program authorized by 42 U.S.C. 4001 through 4128, or as authorized by subsequent Federal statutes.
Reach is a hydraulic engineering term to describe longitudinal segments of a stream or watercourse. A reach will generally include the segment of the flood hazard area where flood heights are primarily controlled by manmade or natural obstructions or constrictions. In an urban area, an example of a reach would be the segment of a stream or watercourse between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings.
Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle that is:
    A. Built on a single chassis;
    B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less in area, when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
    C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
    D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Flood Elevation means an elevation that is one (1) foot above the calculated water surface elevation of the base flood.
Regulatory Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area means that portion of the geologic floodplain associated with a watercourse, including its channel or any other floodplain or flood-prone area that would be inundated by the base flood. It also means areas which are subject to sheet flooding, special flood hazard areas, and those areas mapped as floodplains/flood-prone on recorded subdivision plats or other flood hazard boundary maps.
Regulatory Floodway means the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated amount.
Remedy a Violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter, otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
Repetitive Loss Structure means a structure, covered by a contract for flood insurance issued pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Act, that has incurred flood-related damage on two (2) occasions during any ten (10) year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, and for which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on average, equaled or exceeded twenty-four percent (24%) of the market value of the structure at the time of each such flood event. In addition to the current claim, the NFIP must have paid the previous qualifying claim.
Retention System means a type of flood control system that stops the downstream progress of flood water by employing methods of total containment which generally involve creation of storage areas that incorporate infiltration devices, such as dry wells, to dispose of stored waters, principally by percolation over some specified period of time, thereby eliminating basin contributions to downstream flood peaks or flood volumes.
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Sheet Flow Area. See “Area of Shallow Flooding.”
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. A SFHA may be designated on a FIRM as a Zone A, AO, AE, or AH for the base flood, as well as for areas that the Town Engineer, using the best available data, has determined may be subject to a flood hazard during the base flood.
Start of Construction includes substantial improvement or other proposed new development, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within the time period when the permit was active. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as the installation of streets and/or walkways, the installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a structure, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
Structure means any building or containment unit that is constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to a foundation having a location on the ground.
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin, cumulatively tracked over a period of ten (10) years, sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed forty-nine percent (49%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. “Substantial damage” also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a rolling ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-four percent (24%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, cumulatively tracked over a period of ten (10) years, the cost of which equals or exceeds forty-nine percent (49%) of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
    A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official, and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
    B. Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that is granted by the Floodplain Administrator or the Floodplain Board (for FEMA floodplains) upon a finding that strict enforcement of the provisions would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property for which the variance is granted, and not caused by the applicant for said variance.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the Town of Oro Valley floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter, is presumed to be in violation until such time as such documentation is provided. Violation also means unauthorized construction, grading, encroachment, diversion, or lack of maintenance of private drainage structures.
Water Surface Elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. “Watercourse” includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur, including regulatory floodplains as designated by FEMA or the Town of Oro Valley. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Article 17-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
17-3-1       Lands to Which This Chapter Applies
17-3-2       Basis for Establishing the Regulatory Floodplain Areas
17-3-3       Compliance
17-3-4       Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
17-3-5       Interpretation
17-3-6       Statutory Exceptions
17-3-7       Floodplain Violations
17-3-8       Abatement of Violations
17-3-9       Unlawful Acts
17-3-10      Remedies
17-3-11      Severability
17-3-12      Warning and Disclaimer of Liability

Section 17-3-1 Lands to Which This Chapter Applies
This chapter shall apply to all regulatory floodplain areas within the corporate limits of the Town of Oro Valley. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-2 Basis for Establishing the Regulatory Floodplain Areas
The regulatory floodplain areas identified by the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration (FIMA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Pima County, Arizona and Incorporated Areas, revised June 16, 2011, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated June 16, 2011, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and attendant mapping may be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow implementation of this chapter. The Floodplain Board, within the incorporated limits of the Town of Oro Valley, shall require developers of land to delineate, within areas where development is ongoing or imminent, floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by FEMA, the Arizona Director of Water Resources, and the Town Engineer, pursuant to the Town’s adopted Drainage Criteria Manual. The Flood Insurance Study, and FIRMs are on file at the Town of Oro Valley.
Additionally, areas determined by the Town Engineer, including floodplains/flood-prone areas identified on previously recorded subdivision plats (and those recorded hereafter), are also hereby adopted, by reference, and declared a part of this chapter.
A. Regulatory floodplains shall be subject to the following regulations, except as hereinafter provided:
    1. No person or persons shall construct any structure which will divert, retard, or obstruct the flow of water in any stream, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain area without having secured all necessary permits from any governmental agency from which approval is required by Federal or State or local law, and said permits or copies thereof shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator for review.
    2. No person shall construct any structure that will divert, retard, or obstruct the flow of water in any stream, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain area without securing written authorization in the form of a Floodplain Use Permit from the Town of Oro Valley, except as exempted in Section 17-3-6.
    3. The FIS and areas shown on FIRMs together with floodplains associated with washes and/or sheet flow areas having one hundred (100) year peak discharges of fifty (50) cfs or more, are the minimum areas of applicability of this chapter, and may be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow implementation of this chapter. Applicants for development in the Town of Oro Valley shall delineate floodplains consistent with criteria developed by FEMA, the Town Engineer, and/or pursuant to the Town’s adopted Drainage Criteria Manual.
    4. All property in the regulatory floodplains, except that covered by statutory exceptions, shall be governed according to the provisions herein.
    5. Any use of land otherwise authorized by law shall be permitted, provided such use meets the minimum standards of the regulations hereinafter set forth.
B. Elevation and Boundary Refinements. 
    1. The determination of elevations (water surface, lowest finished floor, and adjacent land) and regulatory floodway and regulatory floodplain boundaries is an engineering function with calculations and decisions made in accordance with the concepts and policies set forth in this chapter. The best technical data available shall be used for such calculations and decisions. Initial determinations shall be based on floodplain information reports of the Pima County Flood Control District, U.S. Corps of Engineers, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Geological Survey, and/or other general data that are pertinent for the conditions of the streams or the watercourses at the time the data are obtained.
    2. Additional and more detailed technical analysis will, from time to time, become available through private or governmental studies and activities. These data will permit refinements in the elevations and boundaries of regulatory floodway and regulatory floodplains in the respective reaches of the streams or watercourses.
    3. Whenever such additional data become available and it seems desirable to make refinements, i.e., Letter of Map Amendments (LOMAs) or Letter of Map Revisions (LOMRs), such refinements or revisions may be made at the request of the property owners or developers or by the Town Engineer. The necessary engineering calculations shall be made for the property owner or developer by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer (at the owner’s/developer’s expense) in conformance with requirements of this chapter, the FEMA, and the Arizona Department of Water Resources. These findings will need approval of the Town Engineer. Following the Town’s approval of these refinements to regulatory floodplain areas identified on FIRMs, the property owner shall have calculations and forms forwarded to FEMA for review and approval.
    4. The Town Engineer or his/her duly designated representative shall have the authority and responsibility to revise and refine elevations and boundaries of regulatory floodways and regulatory floodplains whenever such revisions and refinements are for the purpose and in accordance with the conditions set forth in Sections 17-4-3(B)(1)(d), 17-5-8(B)(3), 17-5-8(B)(4), and 17-5-8(B)(5).
        a. The Flood Insurance Rate Map for Pima County and Incorporated Areas shall be revised to show the refined area boundaries and/or elevations.
        b. The Town Engineer shall notify the owner of each property for which area boundaries and/or elevations have been revised or refined, as well as those owners of adjoining property immediately upstream and downstream, by first class mail following a duly noticed public hearing on the property involved.
        c. An appeal to the Floodplain Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, in accordance with Article 17-6. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-3 Compliance
All development of land, construction of residential, commercial, or industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain areas is subject to the terms of this chapter. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-4 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any ordinance, rule, regulations, or permit previously adopted or issued, and not be in conflict with any provision of this chapter or any regulation that shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of structure or ordinance not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties, except when this chapter imposes a greater restriction, this chapter shall control. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-5 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally constructed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-6 Statutory Exceptions
A. In accordance with ARS § 48-3609(H), unless expressly provided this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this article do not affect:
    1. Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of such legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a structure is discontinued for twelve (12) months or destroyed to the extent of forty-nine percent (49%) or more of its market value, as determined by a competent appraiser, or the valuation made by the Pima County Assessor’s Office, any further use shall comply with this article and regulations of the Town of Oro Valley.
    2. Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or any regulations affecting such property takes effect, except that any alteration, addition, or repair to a nonconforming structure which would result in increasing its flood damage potential by forty-nine percent (49%) or more shall be either flood-proofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
    3. Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written authorization required by ARS § 48-3613.
    4. Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of environmental compatibility issued pursuant to ARS Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2.
B. Before the following types of construction authorized by this section may begin, the responsible person must submit grading plans and a grading permit application. The applicant must obtain necessary plan and permit approvals, as well as meet requirements pursuant to the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised, Town of Oro Valley Drainage Criteria Manual, and any other applicable Town standards:
    1. The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes, and other structures necessary for the construction of public highways, roads, and streets intersecting or crossing a watercourse.
    2. The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of, or damage to, adjoining land, if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the natural channel of the watercourse, or dams for the conservation of floodwaters as permitted by ARS Title 45, Chapter 6.
    3. The construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This subsection does not exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with, and acquiring authorization from, the Town Engineer or the Floodplain Board pursuant to regulations adopted by the Floodplain Board under this article.
    4. Other construction, if it is determined by the Town Engineer that a Floodplain Use Permit is unnecessary.
    5. Any flood control district, county, city, town, or other political subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under ARS Chapter 21, Article 1.
    6. The construction, by a public agency or political subdivision, of streams, waterways, lakes, and other auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation facilities.
    7. The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations, support structures, guy wires, and other facilities related to power transmission as constructed by any utility, whether a public service corporation or a political subdivision.
C. In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided by law, the State of Arizona, a political subdivision thereof, or a person who may be damaged or has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation, or obstruction of a watercourse has the right to go through an Administrator/Board to commence, maintain, and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate, or otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate this section or regulations adopted pursuant to this article. If a person is found to be in violation of this section, the Administrator/Board shall require the violator either to comply with this section, if authorized by the Floodplain Board for FEMA regulated floodplains (the Town Engineer for non-FEMA regulated floodplains), or to remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original state. The court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured parties resulting from the violation, including reasonable costs and attorney fees. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-7 Floodplain Violations
A. Declaration of Public Nuisance. All development located or maintained within any regulatory floodplain area after August 8, 1973, in violation of this chapter, and without written authorization from the Floodplain Board for FEMA regulated floodplains (the Town Engineer for non-FEMA regulated floodplains), is a public nuisance per se, and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of the Floodplain Board. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-8 Abatement of Violations
Upon discovery of a violation to this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall either:
A. Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation; or
B. Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for determination by the Floodplain Administrator. Such information must be provided to the Floodplain Administrator within thirty (30) days of such order. Within thirty (30) days, the Floodplain Administrator shall either order the abatement of said violation or shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of Section 17-6-4; or
C. For FEMA regulated floodplains, submit to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration a declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and as amended. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-9 Unlawful Acts
A. It is unlawful for any person to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse whenever it creates a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization required by ARS § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is unlawful to excavate or build any structure affecting the flow of waters without securing written authorization required per ARS § 48-3613.
B. It is unlawful for any person to neglect maintenance responsibilities on private drainage improvements.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalties pursuant to Article 1-8, Penalties, Oro Valley Town Code. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-10 Remedies
All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such person from the responsibility to correct prohibited conditions or to remove prohibited structures, obstructions, or improvements; nor prevent the enforcement, correction, or removal thereof. In addition to the other penalties or remedies provided in this article, the State of Arizona, any political subdivision thereof, or any person who may be damaged as a result of the diversion, retardation, or obstruction of a watercourse shall have the right to commence, maintain, and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate, or otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate any provision of this chapter. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-11 Severability
This chapter, and its various parts thereof, is hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof, other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-3-12 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes, and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the regulatory floodplain areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Oro Valley, any officer or employee thereof, the State of Arizona, the Federal Insurance Administration, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Article 17-4 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
17-4-1       Establishment of Floodplain Use Permits
17-4-2       Enforcement and Inspection
17-4-3       Duties of Floodplain Administrator and Use Permit Procedures
17-4-4       Designation of the Floodplain Administrator

Section 17-4-1 Establishment of Floodplain Use Permits
A. Responsibility For Permits. It shall be the duty of the Town Engineer, and all departments, officials, and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, to enforce the provisions of this chapter; and no such license or permit shall be issued for uses or building where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void.
B. Floodplain Use Permits. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, or change the use of any structure within any regulatory floodplain area covered by this chapter without first applying for and obtaining a Floodplain Use Permit from the Town Engineer.
C. Application for Floodplain Use Permit. Application for a Floodplain Use Permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Town Engineer, and must include, without limitation, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the areas in question; existing or proposed structures including walls, bank protection, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
    1. Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. In a designated Zone AO, elevation of existing highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures must be obtained;
    2. Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure will be flood-proofed;
    3. Certification by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer or an Arizona registered professional architect that the flood-proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood-proofing criteria in Section 17-5-1(C);
    4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivisions or other developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser; and
    5. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. Each such application shall be accompanied by an application fee, as set forth by the Town, payable to the Town of Oro Valley. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-4-2 Enforcement and Inspection
A. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Town Engineer, through his/her duly appointed Floodplain Administrator and officials of the Town otherwise charged with the enforcement of the law, to enforce this chapter and all of the provisions of the same.
B. Inspections. Inspections shall be made by the Town Engineer or by a duly appointed Floodplain Administrator.
C. Cooperation. The Town Floodplain Administrator may request, and shall receive so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his/her duties, the assistance and cooperation of all departments, agencies, officials, and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, licenses, or to enforce the regulations of this chapter.
D. Town of Oro Valley Administration. Hydrologic, hydraulic, and related floodplain regulations, as well as engineering matters pertaining to the administration and direction of this chapter, shall be referred to the Town of Oro Valley Town Engineer or his/her designated representative, who shall be responsible for such reviews, advice, and recommendations.
E. Cooperation Agreements and Consultants. The Floodplain Administrator, through the applicable procurement and/or intergovernmental agreement procedures, may retain consultants and experts; and may enter into cooperative agreements for the delineation of floodplains and floodways as well as for such other assistance and guidance considered appropriate and necessary to obtain maximum reasonable protection and benefits under this chapter. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-4-3 Duties of Floodplain Administrator and Use Permit Procedures
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue Floodplain Use Permits required by this section.
B. The following procedure shall be used by the Floodplain Administrator in considering issuance of Floodplain Use Permits.
    1. Upon receiving an application for a Floodplain Use Permit involving the use of fill, construction of structures, or the storage of materials, and prior to rendering a decision thereon the Floodplain Administrator may:
        a. Require the applicant to submit, where applicable, plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood-proofing measures; and the relationship of the above to the location of the channel, regulatory floodway, the regulatory floodplain with base flood elevations, the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the plans for flood protection. The applicant shall provide a new delineation of all regulatory floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation and reports shall be prepared in conformance with FEMA requirements and this chapter. The delineation shall show pre- and post-project floodplain limits and water surface elevations upstream, adjacent, and downstream of the project.
        b. Require, where circumstances necessitate more detailed information, the applicant to furnish as much of the following additional information as is deemed necessary by the Floodplain Administrator for the evaluation of the effects of the proposed use upon flood flows and the consideration of other factors necessary to render a decision on suitability of the proposed use:
            i. A typical valley cross-section showing the floodway, floodway fringe area, and the floodplain of the watercourse; elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel; cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development; and high water information;
            ii. A plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location, and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, sanitary facilities; photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream, and soil types, as well as other pertinent information;
            iii. A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the watercourse;
            iv. Specifications for building construction and materials, flood-proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply, and sanitary facilities.
        c. Ensure that the proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of channels at locations where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated.
        d. For FEMA regulated floodplains, may require the applicant to submit appropriate (e.g., CLOMR, CLOMR-F, etc.) applications, forms, and information to FEMA for review and approval. A Floodplain Use Permit shall be issued by the Town of Oro Valley upon acknowledgement from FEMA of the acceptance of the CLOMR.
        e. Ensure other related State of Arizona and Federal permits have been issued.
    2. No permit shall be issued for any development that is not in conformance with this chapter, FEMA regulations, or some other provision of law relating to such development. A Floodplain Use Permit may be denied if the proposed development constitutes a danger or hazard to life or property.
C. The Floodplain Administrator shall be responsible for the following duties:
    1. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available the following:
        a. Certification of the regulatory flood elevation required in Sections 17-5-1(C)(1), 17-5-1(C)(3), and 17-5-5;
        b. The Zone AO certification required in Section 17-5-1(C)(2);
        c. The flood-proofing certification required in Section 17-5-1(C)(3);
        d. The certified opening elevation required in Section 17-5-1(C)(4);
        e. Review and maintain records of all development permits for improvements and/or damages to existing structures to determine if the application of the substantial improvement rules applies, including establishing a definition of market value determination and verifying that the estimated improvement and/or repair costs are less than forty-nine percent (49%) of the market value of the structure, calculated over a ten (10) year period from the initial application for improvement or repair of damages. The substantial improvement rules shall apply to the following:
            i. Qualifying structures located in regulatory floodplains as designated by FEMA; those areas mapped as floodplains/flood-prone on recorded subdivision plats; or on flood hazard boundary maps prepared by, or for, the Floodplain Administrator. Qualifying structures shall also satisfy one of the following two (2) additional conditions:
                (A) Pre-FIRM structures constructed before the date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map issued for the Town dated December 4, 1979; or
                (B) Legal nonconforming structures constructed on, or after, December 4, 1979, in compliance with the effective FIRM at the time of construction, and in compliance with the terms and conditions of the written authorization in effect at the time of construction;
        f. Certification of elevation for subdivisions required by Section 17-5-4(E);
        g. Certification for floodway encroachments required by Section 17-5-7(A);
        h. Records of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance required by Section 17-6-3(C).
    2. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
        a. Notify adjacent communities and ADWR prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA through appropriate notification means; and
        b. Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse be maintained.
    3. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after completion of construction of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the ADWR.
    4. Advise the district of Pima County and any adjunct jurisdiction having responsibility for floodplain management in writing and provide a copy of a development plan of all applications for Floodplain Use Permits or variances to develop land in a floodplain or floodway within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of the Town of Oro Valley, Arizona. Also, advise the district of Pima County in writing and provide a copy of any development plan of any major development proposed within a floodplain or floodway, which could affect floodplains, floodways or watercourses within the district’s area of jurisdiction. Written notice and a copy of the plan of development shall be sent to the district no later than three (3) working days after having been received by Town of Oro Valley.
    5. Notify FEMA of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction.
    6. A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with Volume 44 Code of Federal Regulations Section 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.
    7. Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17-3-2 (Basis for Establishing the Regulatory Floodplain Areas), the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer Section 17-5-1 (Standards for Construction). Any such information shall be consistent with the requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources and may be submitted to the Floodplain Board for adoption.
    8. Make map interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article 17-6 (Appeal and Variance Procedures).
    9. Take remedial actions on violations of this chapter as required in Section 17-3-8 (Abatement of Violations). ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-4-4 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The Town Engineer or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter and guidelines set forth in this article by processing Floodplain Use Permits in accordance with its provisions. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Article 17-5 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION

Sections:
17-5-1       Standards of Construction
17-5-2       Standards for Storage of Materials and Equipment
17-5-3       Standards for Utilities
17-5-4       Standards and Submittal Requirements for Subdivisions
17-5-5       Standards for Manufactured Homes
17-5-6       Standards for Recreational Vehicles
17-5-7       Floodways
17-5-8       Floodway Fringe Area Requirements
17-5-9       Flood Related Erosion-Prone Area

Section 17-5-1 Standards of Construction
In all regulatory floodplain areas, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring. 
    1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
    2. All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 17-5-5.
B. Construction Materials and Methods. 
    1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
    2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
    3. All new construction, substantial improvements, and other proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, as well as other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
    4. Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
C. Elevation and Flood-Proofing. 
    1. New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above the regulatory flood elevation. In areas without a detailed study but within regulatory floodplain boundaries, the applicant shall have an Arizona registered professional civil engineer prepare a detailed study to determine the depth of the regulatory flood. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in Section 17-5-1(C)(3). Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement, shall be certified by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer or an Arizona registered professional land surveyor, and provided to the Floodplain Administrator and the Town Building Official.
    2. New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in Zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, higher than the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot higher than the depth number on the FIRM, or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in Section 17-5-1(C)(3). Upon completion of the structure an Arizona registered professional civil engineer shall certify to the Floodplain Administrator that the elevation of the structure meets this standard.
    3. Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with Section 17-5-1(C)(3) or 2, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
        a. Be flood-proofed so that below the regulatory flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
        b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
        c. Be certified by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer or an Arizona registered professional architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator and the Town Building Official.
    4. Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures, that have fully enclosed areas below the regulatory flood elevation that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials to the regulatory flood elevation, have all service facilities elevated at or above the regulatory flood elevation, and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by an Arizona Registered Professional Civil Engineer or an Arizona registered professional architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
        a. A minimum of two (2) openings, on different sides of each enclosed area, shall be provided having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
        b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
        c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
    5. Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in Section 17-5-5. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-5-2 Standards for Storage of Materials and Equipment
A. The storage or processing of materials is prohibited if they are, in time of flooding: buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be noxious, deadly, or injurious to human, animal, or plant life.
B. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if they are not subject to major damage by floods, or if they are firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if they are readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-5-3 Standards for Utilities
A. All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.
B. On-site waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a regulatory floodway, erosion setback, or as established by ADEQ, whichever is most restrictive. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-5-4 Standards and Submittal Requirements for Subdivisions
A. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All subdivision proposals (also referred to as a final site plan) shall have all public utilities and facilities, including but not limited to sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
C. All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards (See adopted drainage Criteria Manual).
D. Suitability of the Land. Land that has been found by the Floodplain Board to be unsuitable for development with permanent structures based on hydrological and engineering studies of flooding can be platted and used for only open space and greenbelt uses such as those identified in Section 17-5-7(B)(1). This includes land which is:
    1. Physically unsuitable because of flooding, poor drainage, and other features which may endanger health, life, or property, aggravate erosion, increase the flood hazard; or increase the burden imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its citizens;
    2. Subject to flooding because of its proximity to the stream or watercourse; or because of low elevation. In applying this provision, the Floodplain Board, with technical support and recommendations from the Town Engineer, shall consider:
        a. Land subject to flooding by the base flood shall not be platted for residential occupancy, or building sites, or for any other uses that may increase the flood hazard or endanger health, life, or property, unless each lot contains a building site that meets requirements set forth below, in subsections (G) and (H) of this section, and within other pertinent sections of this chapter;
        b. Fill shall not be used to raise land within the regulatory floodway. In other areas subject to flooding by the base flood, fill may be used; provided, that the proposed fill does not restrict the flow of water and increase flood heights or velocities in the regulatory floodway, according to the same standards established in Section 17-5-8, and provided that compensatory flood storage is provided.
E. Flood Situation to Be Shown on Plat. Plats submitted shall show the following:
    1. Tentative development plans and preliminary development plans (plats) shall show the location, by survey, of watercourses, channels, irrigation laterals, private ditches, culverts, lakes, or other water features, including direction of flow, water level elevations, and the location and extent of areas subject to frequent inundation;
    2. All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the area of special flood hazard, regulatory floodplain, the elevation of the base flood, pre- and post-development water surface elevations, and pre- and post-development floodplain limits;
    3. All tentative, preliminary, and final subdivision plans will provide the elevation(s) of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final lowest floor and pad elevation shall be certified by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer or an Arizona registered professional land surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator and the Town Building Official;
    4. Final and preliminary plats shall show the limits of the regulatory floodplain and the regulatory floodway;
    5. Tentative and preliminary plats and plans (also referred to as a final site plan) shall show proposed improvements for areas subject to flooding and/or for areas which contain extremely poor drainage facilities such that the proposed improvements make the areas safe from flooding for the respective type of occupancy.
F. Street Elevations. 
    1. Refer to the Town’s adopted Drainage Criteria Manual and subdivision street standards for additional information and requirements.
    2. Fill used for the streets in areas subject to flooding shall not increase flood heights more than a designated amount as defined in Section 17-5-8(A)(1)(b).
    3. The developer shall provide pre- and post-developed water surface elevation for streets proposed for placement in or adjacent to areas subject to flooding. Headwater ponding limits and water surface elevations shall be shown upstream of all culvert crossings.
G. Building Site. 
    1. Residential lots shall contain a building site, either natural or manmade, which is not subject to flooding by the base flood.
    2. In areas subject to flooding by the base flood, where no fill is proposed, the building line shall be located no closer to the watercourse or channel than the edge of the area subject to flooding by the base flood. In areas where fill is used to raise the elevation of the building site, no fill shall be placed in the regulatory floodway, and the building line shall be located no less than twenty-five (25) feet landward from the edge of the fill.
H. Setback from Channels. Along reaches of all regulated watercourses, erosion hazard setback requirements from banks of washes shall be established in accordance with the Town’s adopted Drainage Criteria Manual or standards accepted by the Town Engineer.
I. Easements for Drainage. Whenever any watercourse is located in the area being subdivided, an easement or common area encompassing each side of the watercourse shall be provided for the purpose of protecting and/or maintaining the watercourse for flood and drainage purposes, and such further width for construction of bank protection or for allowing for natural meander of the stream or watercourse that may be reasonably expected, or for all these as will be adequate for the purpose, as determined by the Town Engineer.
J. Detention/Retention Systems. See Town’s adopted Drainage Criteria Manual for requirements pertaining to detention/retention systems by visiting the administrative offices of the Town of Oro Valley. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-5-5 Standards for Manufactured Homes
All manufactured homes that are placed within or substantially improved while located within a regulatory floodplain shall:
A. Be elevated so that the lowest structural member or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above the regulatory flood elevation; and
B. Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
C. Upon completion of installation of the manufactured home, certification by a registered professional engineer or surveyor that the elevation requirements of this section have been satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-5-6 Standards for Recreational Vehicles
All recreational vehicles placed within a regulatory floodplain area will either:
A. Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
B. Meet the permit requirements of Article 17-4, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 17-5-5. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-5-7 Floodways
Located within regulatory floodplain areas, established in Section 17-3-2, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and increase erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
A. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are prohibited in floodways. The Floodplain Administrator will consider encroachments where certification by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments will result in no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, and that the encroachment will not pose a threat to life or property.
B. Floodway Requirements. 
    1. Uses Permitted. The following open space uses shall be permitted within a floodway to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or State or Federal permit requirements, nor conflict with uses permitted in adjoining zones, and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials or equipment:
        a. Agricultural uses, including general farming, pasture, grazing or outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, sod farming, wild crop harvesting, and restoration of native vegetation;
        b. Private and public recreational uses;
        c. Accessory residential uses, including lawns, gardens, and play areas.
C. Limitations. 
    1. No use shall be allowed within a floodway which:
        a. Acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses creates a danger or hazard to life or property;
        b. Increases the water surface elevation of the base flood; or
        c. Adversely affects groundwater recharge.
    2. No on-site waste disposal systems or septic drain fields shall be installed wholly or partly in a floodway.
D. If Section 17-5-9 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions in this article. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-5-8 Floodway Fringe Area Requirements
A. Floodway fringe areas shall be subject to the following regulations:
    1. The following uses shall be permitted within a floodway fringe area to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance but only upon issuance of a Floodplain Use Permit:
        a. Any use permitted in Section 17-5-7.
        b. Any other use not involving structures, provided it is elevated above the regulatory base flood elevation and a determination is made by the Town Engineer that the use will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot where the owner of the land doing the development owns both sides of the floodway, and not more than one-tenth (0.1) foot where only one (1) side is owned. In no case shall the development increase the water surface elevation more than one-tenth (0.1) foot on the property owned by others upstream and downstream, nor unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodway of tributaries to the main stream or watercourse, drainage ditches, or other drainage facilities or systems. The aforementioned water surface elevation increases apply to all watercourse channels in Oro Valley except the Canada del Oro Wash where the elevation of the existing levee system and bank protection will allow for no water surface elevation increases due to encroachment. Additionally, when main channel flood-flow velocities are greater than four (4) feet per second (fps), a land use/development activity shall not increase flood-flow velocities immediately downstream of the activity by more than one (1) fps or ten percent (10%), whichever is less, in the regulatory floodway. Any velocity increase greater than the aforementioned criteria must be reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer.
        c. Structures, including dwellings, may be erected or moved, provided the lowest floor or basement floor is placed at or above the regulatory flood elevation. Land may be filled, provided that the top of such fill shall be at or above the regulatory flood elevation for the particular area, and shall extend at such elevations at least twenty-five (25) feet beyond the limits of any structure erected or placed thereon. The placement of structures and any accompanying fill shall not affect base flood elevation beyond the limits set in subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section.
B. The following minimum requirements apply in all zones designated on the FIRM, and the floodplain of those watercourses with a base flood flow rate equal to or greater than fifty (50) cfs:
    1. All new construction (including prefabricated structures and mobile homes) and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation and lateral movement, and be constructed with flood resistant materials and methods.
    2. All proposed plats and proposals for other developments, including their utilities, streets, and drainage structures, shall be located and designed to be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
    3. All tentative development plans, site plans, final site plans, improvement plans, and final plats, and other proposed new developments shall include base flood elevation data or as otherwise directed by the Town Engineer.
    4. The Town must be furnished, for permanent record, all elevations and flood-proofing levels for all new or substantially improved structures, whether such structures contain a basement.
    5. If in a riverine situation, all adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Office must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse, and copies of such notifications must be sent to the FEMA. Within the proposed altered or relocated portion of any watercourse, the flood carrying capacity shall be maintained.
    6. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after completion of construction of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the flood, or changes the configuration of the floodplain, the person or agency responsible for installation of the protective works shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the protective works a new delineation of all floodplains affected. The new floodplain delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the State of Arizona Director of Water Resources.
C. Limitations. 
    1. No use shall be allowed within a floodway fringe which:
        a. Acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses creates danger or hazard to life or property.
        b. Increases the water surface elevation for the base flood by more than that allowed under subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section;
        c. Adversely affects groundwater recharge.
D. Critical Facilities. 
    1. Critical facility means any of the following:
        a. A structure or facility that produces, uses or stores highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, and/or water reactive materials;
        b. Hospitals, emergency medical facilities, nursing homes and/or housing facilities likely to have occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid injury or death during a flood;
        c. Essential emergency response facilities, such as police stations, fire stations, emergency shelters and/or operation centers that are needed for public safety and/or flood response activities before, during and after a flood; and
        d. Public and private utility facilities, such as but not limited to power, water and wastewater treatment, and/or communications, that are vital to maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during and after a flood.
    2. Applicability. The critical facility requirements shall only apply along watercourses which have FEMA designated floodplains. Where the two-tenths percent (0.2%) chance floodplain has not been established, the Town Engineer may require that this floodplain be delineated by the applicant.
    3. Critical facilities shall be located outside of the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) floodplain, if possible. If a critical facility must be located in a two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) floodplain, it must be demonstrated that there is either a critical need to locate it within the floodplain, or that there is not a suitable alternative site, as justified by an Arizona registered civil engineer. Any critical facility located within a two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) floodplain shall be protected from that event. Protection includes, but is not limited to, elevating the lowest floor and all utilities and mechanical services to a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood or to the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) floodplain water surface elevation, whichever is greater, providing elevated access ramps, if appropriate, adequately protecting the facility from both lateral and vertical erosion associated with the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) floodplain, providing all weather access during the base flood and developing an emergency response plan.
    4. Existing critical facilities within the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) floodplain that propose substantial improvements and/or repairs shall be protected from the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) flood event. Protection includes, but is not limited to, elevating or flood proofing the lowest floor and all utilities and mechanical services to a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood or to the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) floodplain water surface elevation, whichever is greater, providing elevated access ramps, if appropriate, adequately protecting the facility from both lateral and vertical erosion associated with the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual chance (five hundred (500) year) floodplain, providing all weather access to the base flood and developing an emergency response plan. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-5-9 Flood Related Erosion-Prone Area
The protection of Town residents and their property from injury and damage that can occur as a result of streambank lateral migration due to erosion and scour is of primary importance in the administration of this chapter and the following criteria apply:
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall require Floodplain Use Permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood related erosion-prone areas, as determined by lateral migration analysis described in the Town’s Drainage Criteria Manual or in other predetermined, documented evidence. Areas generally most susceptible to lateral erosion and scour include, but are not limited to, locations of historical stream/wash meandering, locations where poorly defined or poorly consolidated banks occur, wash reaches characterized by changes in the direction, velocity, or amount of streamflow, and locations in the proximity of stabilizing features or structures such as rock outcrops or bridges.
B. Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion, and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.
C. If a proposed development or structure including associated permanent features such as a patio wall or swimming pool or any other feature is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion, or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvements shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.
D. Adjacent to all washes with a base flood flow rate of fifty (50) cfs or more, a setback from the wash is required for all new development to create a safety buffer. The setback shall be determined using the method outlined in the Town of Oro Valley Drainage Criteria Manual. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. The erosion setback shall be calculated streamward from the outermost permanent/fixed feature on the property and this structure or feature constructed in such a manner that it will be protected should lateral channel migration occur to its base. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Article 17-6 APPEAL AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES

Sections:
17-6-1       Nature of Variances
17-6-2       Floodplain Board
17-6-3       Appeals and Request for Variance Considerations
17-6-4       Conditions for Variances

Section 17-6-1 Nature of Variances
The variance criteria set forth in this article are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
It is the duty of the Town of Oro Valley to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below the base flood elevation are so serious (as much as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage) that variances from the base flood elevation shall not be granted. Variances from other requirements in the floodplain management ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.
Additionally, ARS § 48-3609(J) states that the land for which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of State land pursuant to the flood relocation and land exchange program provided for by Title 26, Chapter 2, Article 2. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the Pima County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances in a biennial report to FEMA and ADWR. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-6-2 Floodplain Board
A. The Floodplain Board of Oro Valley shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter to FEMA regulated floodplains, as well as hear appeals to decisions from previous determinations or actions on non-FEMA regulated floodplains by the Floodplain Administrator or the Town Engineer.
B. The Floodplain Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter with regard to FEMA regulated floodplains and floodplains identified on the Town’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-6-3 Appeals and Request for Variance Considerations
A. In passing upon appeals and requests for variance, the Floodplain Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, and all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and also consider:
    1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
    2. The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
    3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
    4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
    5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
    6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
    7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
    8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area encompassing the proposed use;
    9. The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
    10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
    11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system, and streets and bridges.
B. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (A) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the Floodplain Board may attach such conditions to the granting of appeals and variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
C. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance and shall report any such variances that are issued in FEMA regulated floodplains in its biennial report, which is also submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
D. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the Floodplain Administrator, or their designee, that:
    1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
    2. Such construction below the regulatory flood elevation increases risks to life and property; and
    3. The land upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of State land pursuant to the flood relocation and land exchange program provided by ARS § 37-610. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the Pima County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
E. A person aggrieved in any manner by an action of the Floodplain Review Board may within thirty (30) days appeal to the Floodplain Board. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Section 17-6-4 Conditions for Variances
A. Variances shall only be issued upon:
    1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
    2. A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;
    3. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
    4. A showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes only facilities defined in Article 17-2 in the definition of “functionally dependent use” (which is unlikely due to the Town of Oro Valley’s arid climate); and
    5. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
B. Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in regulatory floodway elevation would result during the base flood discharge.
C. Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure, and that the variance is the minimum necessary in order to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
D. The Floodplain Administrator, at his/her discretion, may grant a variance for non-FEMA regulated flood hazard areas.
E. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (0.5) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the regulatory flood elevation, provided the procedures of Articles 17-4 and 17-5 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (0.5) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Article 17-7 ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS

Sections:
17-7-1       Procedures

Section 17-7-1 Procedures
A. The Floodplain Board may from time to time, after a public hearing required by law (ARS § 38-431.01, and other open meeting laws), amend, supplement, or change the regulations set forth herein or subsequently established. Any amendment, supplement, or change may be initiated by the Floodplain Board or by petition of affected persons hereafter provided.
B. The procedures established by this article are to provide for appropriate and timely ordinance amendments, with due consideration of the purpose of this article. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

Article 17-8 FEES

Sections:
17-8-1       Fee Schedule

Section 17-8-1 Fee Schedule
Fees for Floodplain Use Permits will be charged based on the fee schedule approved by the Town Council. ((O)17-04, Amended,  04/05/2017; (O)05-35, Enacted,  10/05/2005)

CHAPTER 18 ANIMAL CONTROL CODE

Articles:
18-1         Definitions
18-2         License and Vaccination Required/Tags/Duplicate License Tags/Transfer of License/Violations; Penalties/Fees
18-3         Dogs at Large Prohibited; Exceptions/Dogs on School Grounds; Exceptions/Impoundment/Dog Waste Removal/Violations; Penalties
18-4         Feeding Nondomesticated Mammalian Predators/Exceptions/Violations; Penalties
18-5         Abandonment/Cruelty/Failure to Render Aid/Neglect/Violations; Penalties/Order to Show Cause – Abandonment/Cruelty/Neglect
18-6         Destructive or Vicious Animals/Impoundment/Sanctions
18-7         Dangerous Animals
18-8         Excessive Noise by an Animal; Violations; Penalties
18-9         Biting Animals
18-10        Sale of Animals
18-11        Penalties/Sanctions
18-12        Rules of Procedure
18-13        Authority of Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer

Article 18-1 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
18-1-1       Definitions

Section 18-1-1 Definitions
A. “Altered dog” means a spayed female dog or neutered male dog.
B. “Animal” means any fowl, reptile, amphibian or mammal, except for human beings.
C. “At large” means being neither confined by an enclosure nor physically restrained by a leash.
D. “Bite” means the penetration of the skin by the teeth of any animal.
E. “Biting animal” means any animal that bites or otherwise injures human beings or other animals without provocation.
F. “Collar” means a band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the neck of a dog to which a license may be affixed.
G. “Destructive animal” means any animal that has a propensity to destroy, damage or cause damage to the property of a person other than the animal’s owner.
H. “Dog” means any member of the canine species.
I. “Excessive noise” means unreasonable noise that travels over one (1) or more property lines and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by a neighbor or community. Factors considered in determining if noise is unreasonable include, but are not limited to:
    1. The level, character, frequency, and duration of the noise;
    2. The proximity to inhabited structures;
    3. The character and zoning of the neighborhood;
    4. Any discernible reasons that likely caused the noise to be made.
J. “Impound” means the act of taking or receiving an animal into custody for the purpose of confinement at the Town’s Animal Enforcement Agent’s facility.
K. “Leash” or “lead” means a chain, rope, leather strap, cord or similar restraint attached to a collar or harness or otherwise secured around an animal’s neck.
L. “Licensed dog” means any dog having a current license.
M. “Livestock” means neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules and asses.
N. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, maintaining or having custody and/or control of an animal within the Town limits.
O. “Peace officer” includes any animal control officer.
P. “Police dog” means any dog belonging to any law enforcement agency service dog unit.
Q. “Property line” means the line which represents the legal limits of property (including an apartment, condominium, room or other dwelling unit) owned, leased or otherwise occupied by a person, business, corporation or institution. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street or other public right-of-way, the “property line” shall be the nearest boundary of the public right-of-way.
R. “Provocation” means any behavior toward an animal and/or its owner or its owner’s property which is likely to cause a defensive reaction by said animal.
S. “Tie-out” means a chain, leash, wire, cable or similar restraint attached to a swivel or pulley.
T. “Town Enforcement Agent” means the Pima Animal Care Center director and/or his/her designee.
U. “Under restraint” means an animal secured by a leash or lead and under control of a responsible person, confined within a vehicle or located upon the real property limits of its owner.
V. “Vaccination” means an anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine approved by the State Veterinarian and administered by a State-licensed veterinarian.
W. “Vicious animal” means any animal that bites, attempts to bite, endangers and/or injures people and/or other animals. ((O)19-03, Amended,  02/20/2019; (O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-2 LICENSE AND VACCINATION REQUIRED/TAGS/DUPLICATE LICENSE TAGS/TRANSFER OF LICENSE/VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES/FEES

Sections:
18-2-1       License and Vaccination Required
18-2-2       Tags
18-2-4       Duplicate License Tags
18-2-5       Transfer of License
18-2-6       Violations; Penalties
18-2-7       Fees

Section 18-2-1 License and Vaccination Required
Dogs kept within the Town shall be licensed and vaccinated in accordance with the Pima County Animal Control Code. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-2-2 Tags
A. All licensed dogs are required to wear a collar with the license tag affixed. The collar and tag must be worn by the dog at all times. The tag shall be inscribed with the name of the licensing city or county, the license number and the date the license expires. Failure of the owner to comply is a civil infraction.
B. Dog license tags are not transferable from one (1) dog to another dog.
C. Tag Exceptions. Dogs are not required to wear a collar with a tag; provided, that the owner shows proof that the dog(s) is/are properly vaccinated and licensed in the following conditions:
    1. While being exhibited at an American Kennel Club approved show.
    2. A police dog at any time.
    3. This article shall not apply to a nonresident who keeps a dog within the Town limits for a maximum of thirty (30) days per calendar year; provided, that the nonresident shows proof the dog is licensed elsewhere upon demand. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-2-4 Duplicate License Tags
If a dog license tag is lost, a duplicate license tag shall be issued upon the owner filing an application with Pima Animal Care Center. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-2-5 Transfer of License
Whenever the ownership of a dog is changed, the new owner must secure a transfer of license. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-2-6 Violations; Penalties
A. Violations of this article shall be civil infractions punishable as follows:
    1. For the first violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of no less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and no more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
    2. For the second violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
    3. For the third violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of no less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and no more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
B. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion of a day during which any violation of this article is committed and/or permitted.
C. In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the Magistrate shall order abatement as necessary. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-2-7 Fees
Any and all fees as required by this article shall be determined by Pima Animal Care Center, as amended from time to time. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-3 DOGS AT LARGE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS/DOGS ON SCHOOL GROUNDS; EXCEPTIONS/IMPOUNDMENT/DOG WASTE REMOVAL/VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES

Sections:
18-3-1       Dogs at Large Prohibited; Exceptions
18-3-2       Dogs on School Grounds Prohibited; Exceptions
18-3-3       Impoundment
18-3-4       Dog Waste Removal; Exceptions
18-3-5       Violations/Penalties

Section 18-3-1 Dogs at Large Prohibited; Exceptions
A. Any dog owned, possessed, harbored, kept or maintained on public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public property within the Town shall be restrained by a leash, chain, rope, cord or similar device.
B. Any dog owned, possessed, kept, harbored or maintained upon or about the private property of any person, including the property of the dog’s owner, shall be confined inside a house or other building, or confined by a fence or similar enclosure of sufficient strength and height, to prevent the dog from escaping from the property.
C. Exceptions. Dogs accompanied by and under the control of their owners are exempt from this article under the following circumstances:
    1. While participating in field trials, dog obedience classes, and/or kennel club events, provided the dog is accompanied by and under the control of the dog’s owner or trainer.
    2. While assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties.
    3. Guide dogs while assisting blind, deaf or physically handicapped persons, as long as such dogs are under direct and effective voice control of such individuals to assure that they do not violate any other provisions of this chapter.
D. The Town Enforcement Agent and/or a peace officer are authorized to impound any dog running at large in accordance with the provisions of this article. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-3-2 Dogs on School Grounds Prohibited; Exceptions
A. It shall be unlawful to bring a dog onto the grounds of any school, regardless of whether the dog is restrained by a leash, chain, rope, cord or similar device.
B. Dogs shall be allowed on school grounds as an exception to this section under the following circumstances:
    1. While participating as part of a formal school activity or event.
    2. While serving as a guide dog for the blind, deaf or physically disabled.
    3. While assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-3-3 Impoundment
A. The Town Enforcement Agent shall impound any dog running at large in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Town Enforcement Agent shall promptly notify the dog’s owner in person or by written notice that the dog is impounded. The owner may reclaim the dog within seven (7) days from the date of the actual notice or mailing of notice, upon proof of ownership and payment of all costs and fees, including veterinary fees incurred to remove, impound, board, care for and/or microchip the dog.
C. Any licensed dog not claimed within seven (7) days of its impoundment may be placed for adoption or humanely destroyed at the discretion of Pima Animal Care Center.
D. When an unlicensed dog is impounded, the owner may reclaim the dog within three (3) days of impoundment by securing a vaccination and a license for the dog, providing proof of ownership and payment of all costs and fees, including veterinary fees incurred to remove, impound, board, care for and/or microchip the dog.
E. Any unlicensed dog not claimed within three (3) days of its impoundment may be placed for adoption or humanely destroyed at the discretion of Pima Animal Care Center.
F. Pima Animal Care Center may, in addition to the provisions of this article, microchip the animal at the owner’s sole expense. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-3-4 Dog Waste Removal; Exceptions
A. It is a civil infraction for the owner or person having custody of any dog to fail to immediately remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, any solid waste deposited by such dog on public property and/or on any private property without the consent of the person in control of the property.
B. Nothing in this article or chapter shall be deemed to permit or otherwise allow any violation of applicable State, County or Town ordinances, including health codes and nuisance regulations.
C. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
    1. Blind persons.
    2. Persons with mobility disabilities.
    3. Police officers or other law enforcement officers accompanied by police dogs while on emergency. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-3-5 Violations/Penalties
A. Violations of this article shall be civil infractions punishable as follows:
    1. For the first violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of no less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and no more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
    2. For the second violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
    3. For the third violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of no less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and no more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
B. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which any violation of this article is committed and/or permitted. Any individual who receives notice of such violation and fails to appear at the designated hearing time in the notice, or at the time designated for hearing by the Court, shall be deemed to have admitted the allegations of the complaint and the Court shall enter judgment for the Town and impose civil sanctions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If any penalty ordered by the Court to be paid and/or forfeited pursuant to default is not paid within thirty (30) days of the magistrate’s order, the Town Attorney may initiate appropriate civil proceedings to seek legal and/or equitable relief to enforce the order, and the magistrate may initiate judicial proceedings as provided by law to collect the penalty. All penalties collected pursuant to this article shall be paid to and become the property of the Town.
C. In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the Magistrate shall order abatement as necessary. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-4 FEEDING NONDOMESTICATED MAMMALIAN PREDATORS/EXCEPTIONS/VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES

Sections:
18-4-1       Feeding
18-4-2       Exceptions
18-4-3       Violations/Penalties

Section 18-4-1 Feeding
No person shall feed and/or provide drink at any time for one (1) or more nondomesticated mammalian predators including, but not limited to, coyotes, raccoons, foxes, javelinas, skunks and opossums. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-4-2 Exceptions
This article shall not apply under the following circumstances:
A. Where the person is the owner of such nondomesticated predator and such predator is kept under a valid certificate or permit issued by the State of Arizona.
B. Where the person provides food and/or drink for a trapped, injured or unweaned nondomesticated predator between the time Pima Animal Care Center is notified and such predator is picked up by Pima Animal Care Center. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-4-3 Violations/Penalties
Any violation of this article is a civil violation punishable by a minimum mandatory fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) up to a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) per incident. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-5 ABANDONMENT/CRUELTY/FAILURE TO RENDER AID/NEGLECT/VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES/ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE – ABANDONMENT/CRUELTY/NEGLECT

Sections:
18-5-1       Abandonment
18-5-2       Cruelty
18-5-3       Failure to Render Aid
18-5-4       Neglect
18-5-5       Violations/Penalties
18-5-6       Order to Show Cause – Abandonment/Cruelty/Failure to Render Aid/Neglect

Section 18-5-1 Abandonment
It is unlawful for any owner to leave an animal in any location for more than forty-eight (48) hours without providing for that animal’s care and well-being. The requisite intent to abandon for more than forty-eight (48) hours shall be demonstrated by proof that: (A) the owner left the animal in an abode that is not presently occupied; and/or (B) the owner released the animal out of a vehicle onto public or private property without making arrangements for its care. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-5-2 Cruelty
It is unlawful for any person to, or to allow any person to, overload, overwork, torture, torment, cruelly beat, kick, mutilate, cruelly injure, or cruelly or unlawfully kill an animal. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-5-3 Failure to Render Aid
It is unlawful for any person to accidentally or otherwise hit and/or injure an animal with an automobile or other vehicle and to leave the scene without making a reasonable effort to obtain aid, render aid and/or assist in the care of such animal. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-5-4 Neglect
It is unlawful for any owner of any animal to fail to comply with the following:
A. Provide the animal with food and/or water, free from contamination, which is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the animal in good health.
B. Provide access to natural or artificial shelter for the animal throughout the year. Such shelter must be maintained in good repair to protect the animal from injury and the elements, and must be of sufficient size to permit the animal to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Livestock are not included in this article.
C. Provide the animal with the care and medical treatment for injuries, parasites and diseases sufficient to maintain the animal in good health and minimize suffering.
D. Provide the animal with adequate exercise space. With the exception of temporary tethering of horses, the use of tie-outs such as chains, leashes, wires, cables, ropes, or similar restraining devices for the purpose of animal confinement is hereby prohibited.
E. Provide the animal with adequate ventilation and protection from temperature extremes at all times. Violation of this provision may include intentionally, knowingly or recklessly leaving an animal unattended and confined in a motor vehicle or other enclosed space where physical injury to or death of the animal is likely to result. In that event, a peace officer or Town Enforcement Agent may use reasonable force to open a vehicle to rescue an animal. No Animal Control Enforcement Agent and/or peace officer shall be liable for damages to property caused by the use of reasonable force to remove an animal from such a vehicle or other enclosed space under such circumstances. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-5-5 Violations/Penalties
Any violation of this article shall be a Class One misdemeanor with a maximum potential penalty of six (6) months in jail, two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500) fine or a period of probation not to exceed three (3) years, or any combination thereof. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-5-6 Order to Show Cause – Abandonment/Cruelty/Failure to Render Aid/Neglect
A. Impoundment/Criminal Violation. If a peace officer and/or Town Enforcement Agent issue a citation for a violation of this article and/or pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes § 13-2910, and reasonably believe the violation will continue, the Town Enforcement Agent and/or peace officer are authorized to remove and impound the animal.
B. Impoundment/Exigent Circumstances. The Town Enforcement Agent and/or peace officer are authorized and empowered to remove and impound any animal in plain view that is suffering from immediate life-threatening exigent circumstances.
C. Costs. The owner of any animal removed and impounded under the provisions of this article shall be solely responsible for any impoundment, boarding and/or veterinarian fees incurred in connection herewith.
D. Hearing. 
    1. Within ten (10) days of any animal’s impoundment, the owner of the animal may file a petition in Oro Valley Magistrate Court for an order to show cause why the animal should not be returned to the owner pending the outcome of the complaint.
    2. The Town Magistrate, upon hearing the order to show cause and finding by a preponderance of the evidence that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the prohibited treatment of the animal will continue and/or that the owner willfully or through gross negligence caused and/or allowed the animal to be caused pain, suffering or serious injury, shall order the animal to be retained by the Pima Animal Care Center pending the outcome of the complaint.
    3. If the owner fails to appear at the order to show cause hearing and/or if no petition is filed within ten (10) days, the Pima Animal Care Center may place the animal up for adoption or dispose of the animal as humanely as possible. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-6 DESTRUCTIVE OR VICIOUS ANIMALS/IMPOUNDMENT/SANCTIONS

Sections:
18-6-1       Keeping Destructive or Vicious Animals Prohibited
18-6-2       Impoundment/Order to Show Cause Hearing
18-6-3       Sanctions

Section 18-6-1 Keeping Destructive or Vicious Animals Prohibited
A. It is unlawful for a person to keep, control, harbor or otherwise have under control any animal which is destructive or vicious. This article does not apply to zoos, wild animal parks or animal shelters, or to persons who are in compliance with an order of the Town Magistrate issued pursuant to this article.
B. The owner of any animal that bites, attempts to bite, endangers or otherwise injures or causes injury to people and/or animals, or destroys, damages or causes damage to the property of another person, is guilty of a Class One misdemeanor.
C. It is a civil infraction for any person to fail to comply with the Town Magistrate’s order regarding a destructive or vicious animal. It is a separate offense for each day that such person fails to comply with the Magistrate’s order. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-6-2 Impoundment/Order to Show Cause Hearing
A. If any animal within the Town limits is determined to be a destructive or vicious animal, a peace officer and/or Town Enforcement Agent shall immediately impound the animal.
B. Within ten (10) days of the date of the animal’s impoundment, the Town Magistrate shall conduct a hearing and, upon a petition filed by the Town Prosecutor’s Office, the Magistrate Court shall order that an order to show cause hearing be held, at which time the owner must appear and show cause why the animal should not be declared a destructive or vicious animal and sanctions be ordered pursuant to this article. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-6-3 Sanctions
Upon the Court’s determination that the animal is destructive or vicious, the Magistrate may order one (1) or more of the following:
A. That the animal shall be kept in an enclosure so that the animal cannot bite, harm or injure any person and/or animal outside the enclosure and/or jump over the enclosure; that the enclosure and property where the enclosure is located be posted with conspicuous warning signs; and that at no time shall the animal leave the enclosure unless it is muzzled, leashed and under the control of an adult; and/or
B. That the animal shall be banished from the Town limits; and/or
C. That the animal be humanely destroyed; and/or
D. The owner shall make restitution up to one thousand dollars ($1,000) to the victim. This remedy shall not abridge any civil cause of action by the victim. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-7 DANGEROUS ANIMALS

Sections:
18-7-1       Definitions
18-7-2       Declaring an Animal Dangerous; Notice
18-7-3       Hearing; Burden of Proof; Appeal
18-7-4       Order of Compliance
18-7-5       Consent to Inspection; Inspection; Order of Compliance; Seizure
18-7-6       Required Acts and Unlawful Activities
18-7-7       Violations; Penalties

Section 18-7-1 Definitions
A. A “dangerous animal” means one which has been declared to be vicious or destructive pursuant to this chapter and/or displays or has a tendency, disposition or propensity, as determined by the Town Enforcement Agent, to:
    1. Injure, bite, attack, chase or charge, or attempt to injure, bite, attack, chase and/or charge, a person or domestic animal in a threatening manner; or
    2. Bare its teeth and/or approach a person and/or domestic animal in a threatening manner; or
    3. Be owned and/or harbored primarily or in part for the purposes of fighting or has been trained for fighting.
B. A dangerous animal does not include an animal used in law enforcement or in the custody of zoos or wild animal parks, animals placed in animal shelters, animals under care of veterinarians or wild animals. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-7-2 Declaring an Animal Dangerous; Notice
A. The Town Animal Enforcement Agent shall make the determination if an animal is a dangerous animal.
B. Whenever the Town Animal Enforcement Agent has reason to believe an animal may be dangerous, an evaluation of the animal shall be conducted.
C. If the Town Animal Enforcement Agent declares that an animal is dangerous, the owner shall be notified and issued an order of compliance. Once an animal is declared dangerous, the animal is dangerous until a hearing officer or judge determines otherwise. If the owner is known, he/she shall be provided with a written notice of his/her right to file, within five (5) days of receipt of the notice, a written request with the Town Enforcement Agent for a hearing to determine if the animal is dangerous. If the owner’s whereabouts cannot be determined or the animal poses a threat to public safety and/or the safety of domestic animals, the animal shall be impounded and notice shall be posted on property or mailed forthwith to the owner at his/her last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-7-3 Hearing; Burden of Proof; Appeal
A. The owner of the animal may request a hearing to contest the declaration of dangerousness or contest the confinement conditions ordered by the Town Enforcement Agent.
B. If the owner of an impounded animal fails to appear at a hearing and/or fails to request a hearing, the animal shall be forfeited to the Town Enforcement Agent to be humanely destroyed.
C. If the owner of a nonimpounded animal fails to appear at a hearing or fails to request a hearing, the animal shall be declared to be dangerous and the order of compliance shall remain in effect.
D. After request for a hearing, the Town Enforcement Agent shall set a hearing date within five (5) working days at a time and place designated by the Town Animal Enforcement Agent. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer selected by the Town Enforcement Agent.
E. The hearing shall be held in an informal manner and a record of the hearing shall be made by stenographic transcription or by electronic tape recording. The rules of evidence do not apply and hearsay shall be admissible.
F. It is the burden of the owner of the animal to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the animal is not dangerous. The owner may be represented by counsel and present witnesses at the animal owner’s cost.
G. The hearing officer shall make a written decision within five (5) working days of the hearing and notify the owner of the animal of the decision.
H. If the decision of dangerousness is sustained by the hearing officer, the owner of the animal shall obey the order of compliance issued by the Town Enforcement Agent within the time given by the order of compliance or ten (10) days, whichever is greater.
I. If the animal is found not to be dangerous, the order of compliance shall be null and void. The finding that an animal is not dangerous does not prevent the Town Enforcement Agent from declaring the same animal dangerous again if the agent has additional reasons to believe the animal is dangerous after a new evaluation of the animal is conducted.
J. Appeal of the decision of the hearing officer shall be by way of special action to the Superior Court of Pima County on the record of the hearing. If either party claims the record to be incomplete or lost, and the hearing officer who conducted the hearing so certifies, a new hearing shall be conducted before that officer. The appealing party shall bear the cost of preparing the record of the hearing on appeal. No appeal shall be taken later than thirty (30) days after the hearing officer’s decision. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-7-4 Order of Compliance
A. When an animal is declared dangerous, the Town Enforcement Agent shall issue an order of compliance requiring the owner within thirty (30) days to:
    1. Confine the animal sufficiently to prevent the animal’s escape as follows:
        a. The Town Enforcement Agent shall determine the appropriate fencing requirements for the size and nature of the animal. The Town Enforcement Agent may require a fence, including gates, to be six (6) feet in height; the fence from five (5) feet in height to six (6) feet in height to incline to the inside of the confinement area at a forty-five (45) degree angle from the vertical; or that the confinement area be wholly covered by a material strong enough to keep the animal from escaping.
        b. The Town Enforcement Agent may require the bottom of the confinement area to be of concrete, cement or asphalt, or of blocks or bricks set in concrete or cement; or if the bottom is not provided, a footing of such material shall be placed along the whole perimeter of the confinement area to a depth of one (1) foot below ground level, or deeper if required by the Town Enforcement Agent.
        c. The gates to the confinement area shall be locked at all times with a padlock except while entering or exiting.
        d. The Town Enforcement Agent may require temporary confinement measures until the order of compliance has been obeyed or the hearing officer determines that the animal is not dangerous. If the owner does not immediately comply with the temporary confinement requirements, the animal shall be impounded.
    2. Muzzle and restrain the animal outside the confinement area with a leash, chain, rope or similar device not more than six (6) feet in length, sufficient to restrain the animal and be under the control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging in any prohibited behavior.
    3. Post a sign on every gate or entryway to the confinement area stating “Beware of Dangerous Animal.”
    4. Obtain and maintain liability insurance in a single incident amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), unless the animal has been declared to be vicious or destructive pursuant to this chapter, in which case the amount of insurance shall be no less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), to cover any damage and/or injury that may be caused by the dangerous animal. The Town Enforcement Agent shall maintain a registry of the animals, owners and insurance carrier for each animal declared dangerous.
    5. Pay the reasonable cost to the Town Enforcement Agent to tattoo the animal with an identification number. The Town Enforcement Agent shall maintain a registry of the numbers and the owners of the animals.
    6. Have a licensed veterinarian spay or neuter the animal at the owner’s sole expense. The owner shall obtain written certification signed by the veterinarian that the spaying or neutering has been performed. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-7-5 Consent to Inspection; Inspection; Order of Compliance; Seizure
A. By continuing to own an animal declared dangerous, an owner gives consent to the Town Enforcement Agent or any peace officer to inspect the animal declared dangerous, the premises where the animal is kept, the liability insurance documents required for the animal, and the veterinarian’s certificate of spaying or neutering for the animal.
B. The Town Enforcement Agent may seize and impound the dangerous animal if the owner fails to obey the order of compliance. Five (5) days after the seizure, the Town Enforcement Agent may humanely destroy the animal unless the owner has demonstrated obedience to the order of compliance. The owner of the animal is solely responsible for any impound fees. If the owner of the animal demonstrates proof that the order of compliance has been obeyed, the animal shall be returned to the owner after payment of impound fees. Any action taken under this chapter shall be in addition to any available criminal penalties. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-7-6 Required Acts and Unlawful Activities
A. An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall obey the order of compliance.
B. An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall not sell, give away, abandon or otherwise dispose of the animal without notifying the Town Enforcement Agent in writing in advance.
C. An owner of an animal declared to be dangerous shall provide proof of liability insurance and the veterinarian’s certificate of spaying or neutering the animal to the Town Enforcement Agent upon demand.
D. An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall not prevent or attempt to prevent inspection of the animal and/or the premises where the animal is kept.
E. When the owner of an animal is notified that the Town Enforcement Agent is evaluating an animal or requests to evaluate an animal to determine if the animal is dangerous, the owner of the animal shall present the animal for inspection within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by the Town Enforcement Agent. The owner shall not sell, give away, hide or otherwise prevent the Town Enforcement Agent from making an evaluation of the animal.
F. The owner of an animal declared to be dangerous shall prevent the animal from running at large as defined in this chapter.
G. The owner of an animal declared to be dangerous shall prevent the animal from biting, injuring and/or attacking any person and/or domestic animal outside of the confinement area. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-7-7 Violations; Penalties
A. Wherever in this article any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of that provision is a Class One misdemeanor punishable, except for the penalties already set forth in this article, by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) and/or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months. No judge may grant probation to and/or suspend the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed in this subsection. In addition, a person may be placed on probation for not more than three (3) years. This shall not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of the minimum mandatory penalties provided in this subsection.
B. Each day or portion of a day any violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-8 EXCESSIVE NOISE BY AN ANIMAL; VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES

Sections:
18-8-1       Excessive Noise Prohibited
18-8-2       Sanctions
18-8-3       Impoundment and Orders to Show Cause

Section 18-8-1 Excessive Noise Prohibited
No person shall knowingly allow, cause, possess, permit, make, or harbor any animal that makes excessive noise. ((O)19-03, Amended,  02/20/2019; (O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-8-2 Sanctions
A person found responsible for a violation of Section 18-8-1 shall be – separate and apart from the provisions of Section 18-8-3 – sanctioned by the Magistrate or hearing officer as follows:
A. A first violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
B. A second violation within a twelve (12) month period by the same animal(s): a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
C. A third or subsequent violation, or an offense after a criminal conviction of a similarly related offense (such as disorderly conduct or nuisance), by the same animal(s) within a twelve (12) month period: a Class One misdemeanor with sanctions up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in fines, up to six months in jail, and up to three (3) years of probation. The minimum sanction shall be a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and a minimum probationary period of one (1) year. Personal appearance at any arraignment shall be required so the Magistrate may set any necessary release conditions. In addition, after conviction and as part of probation, the Magistrate or hearing officer may impose the use of certain technological or surgical deterrents at defendant’s expense.
D. Default. If an individual receiving a notice of violation fails to appear at the hearing time designated in the notice of violation and/or the time designated for a hearing by the Court, that individual shall be deemed to have admitted the allegation in the complaint and the Court shall enter judgment and impose a civil sanction in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If it is a criminal violation a warrant may be issued for the owner’s arrest.
E. If any penalty ordered to be paid by the Magistrate or forfeited pursuant to default is not paid within thirty (30) days of the Magistrate’s order, appropriate civil proceedings, both legal and equitable, may be initiated by the Town’s legal department in order to enforce the administrative order. The Magistrate may also institute judicial proceedings as provided by law to collect such penalty. All penalties collected pursuant to this article shall be paid to and become the property of the Town of Oro Valley.
F. Each day and/or portion of a day a violation continues under this article shall constitute a separate offense. ((O)19-03, Amended,  02/20/2019; (O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-8-3 Impoundment and Orders to Show Cause
A. Removal. If a peace officer and/or a Town Enforcement Agent issues a citation for Section 18-8-1, for a third offense, or subsequent excessive noise offense, or prior criminal conviction for the same animal(s) within a twelve (12) month period, and reasonably believes the animal(s) will continue to cause Section 18-8-1 violations, the peace officer and/or Town Enforcement Agent are authorized to seize and impound the animal(s) by removing them and placing them in the custody of Pima County Animal Control or a similar agency.
B. Costs. The custodian or owner of any animal removed and impounded shall be solely responsible for any impoundment, removal, boarding, veterinarian, destruction fees or any other costs associated with the removal, impoundment and care of the seized animal(s).
C. Hearing/Order to Show Cause. 
    1. Within ten (10) days of any impoundment described above, the custodian or owner of the animal(s) may file a petition in the Oro Valley Magistrate Court for an order to show cause why the animal(s) should not be returned to the custodian or owner pending the outcome of the complaint.
    2. The Town Magistrate or hearing officer, upon a showing by preponderance of the evidence that reasonable grounds exist to believe the prohibited conduct will not continue, may order that the animal(s) be released by Pima County Animal Control or similar agency and returned to the custodian or owner pending the outcome of the complaint. The Magistrate shall set whatever release conditions as are necessary to alleviate the excessive noise problem the animal(s) allegedly caused.
    3. If the custodian or owner is convicted of a third offense or subsequent offense for the same animal(s) over a period of twelve (12) months, and the custodian or owner fails to appear for hearing, sustain the burden at hearing, or fails to request a hearing, Pima County Animal Control or similar agency may place the animal(s) up for adoption or dispose of the animal in a humane manner.
    4. If the custodian or owner is acquitted or the complaint is dismissed, the Pima County Animal Control Care Center or similar agency shall immediately return the animal(s) to the owner. ((O)19-03, Enacted,  02/20/2019)

Article 18-9 BITING ANIMALS

Sections:
18-9-1       Offenses
18-9-2       Order to Show Cause/Biting Animal

Section 18-9-1 Offenses
A. The owner of any animal found to have bitten and/or otherwise injured human beings and/or other animals shall be guilty of a Class One misdemeanor except as provided in Section 18-9-2(E)(6).
B. It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an order of a Town Magistrate regarding a biting animal. Such offense is a Class One misdemeanor and it is a separate offense for each day or portion of a day the owner fails to comply with the Magistrate’s order.
C. A violation of this article is punishable with a sentence of imprisonment for up to six (6) months, three (3) years’ probation and/or a two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500) fine.
D. Misdemeanor Compromise. A violation of this article may be misdemeanor compromised pursuant to the procedures set forth within Arizona Revised Statute § 13-3981. The recommendation of the Town Prosecutor’s Office shall be necessary before such arrangement can be entered into. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-9-2 Order to Show Cause/Biting Animal
A. The Town Enforcement Agent, upon determining that any animal within the Town limits is a “biting animal,” and is an immediate danger to the safety of any person or other animal, shall immediately impound the animal.
B. Within ten (10) days of the date of impoundment, the Town Magistrate shall conduct a hearing as described in this article.
C. The Oro Valley Magistrate Court, for good cause shown in a petition filed by the Town Prosecutor’s Office, shall order that an order to show cause hearing be held, at which time the owner shall appear and show cause why the animal should not be declared a biting animal and sanctions ordered.
D. The owner of the animal shall be notified of this hearing by the Court. Upon proof of such notification, such hearing may proceed in the owner’s absence.
E. Sanctions. Upon the declaration of an animal as a biting animal, a Town Magistrate may order one (1) or more of the following:
    1. That the animal shall be kept in an enclosure that is high enough so that the animal cannot bite, harm, and/or injure anyone outside the enclosure; that the enclosure and property whereon it is located shall be posted with conspicuous warning signs; and that at no time shall the animal leave the enclosure unless it is muzzled, leashed and under the control of an adult human being; or
    2. That the animal be banished from the Town limits of the Town of Oro Valley; or
    3. That the animal be humanely destroyed; or
    4. That the animal be spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense; or
    5. Restitution up to one thousand dollars ($1,000) may be ordered made by the owner to the victim. This remedy shall not abridge any civil cause of action by the victim.
    6. Defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to this article if:
        a. Provocation existed at the time of the bite; or
        b. The dog is a police dog under the command of its trainer. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-10 SALE OF ANIMALS

Sections:
18-10-1      Sale of Animals at Swap Meets and Public Property Prohibited
18-10-2      Exceptions
18-10-3      Penalties

Section 18-10-1 Sale of Animals at Swap Meets and Public Property Prohibited
No animals including birds or reptiles shall be offered for sale, gift or other transfer of ownership, and no animals including birds or reptiles shall be sold, given away or otherwise transferred, on or from any public street, roadway, right-of-way, sidewalk, park or swap meet. A “swap meet” is defined for the purpose of this section as a place of commercial activity popularly known as a swap meet, flea market or park-and-swap, which is open to the general public and composed of enclosed, semi-enclosed or outdoor stalls, stands or spaces rented or leased to persons on a temporary basis for the purpose of display and sale, barter or exchange of new or used merchandise. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-10-2 Exceptions
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, gift, or other transfer of ownership of animals at county fairs, animal exhibitions or shows, 4-H activities, and other activities or events that are regulated by other State or County agencies. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-10-3 Penalties
A violation of this article shall be a Class One misdemeanor punishable by a fine of no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-11 PENALTIES/SANCTIONS

Sections:
18-11-1      Civil Sanctions
18-11-2      Criminal Penalties

Section 18-11-1 Civil Sanctions
Unless otherwise specified, a civil infraction for violation of this chapter carries the following penalties:
A. First violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
B. Second violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
C. Third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period: a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
D. Default. Any owner of an animal receiving a notice of violation and failing to appear at the hearing time designated in the notice of violation, and/or at a time designated for a hearing by the Court, shall be deemed to have admitted the allegations of the complaint, and the Court shall enter judgment for the State and impose a civil sanction in accordance with the provisions of this article.
E. In the event any penalty ordered to be paid by the Court or forfeited pursuant to default is not paid within thirty (30) days of the Magistrate’s order, appropriate civil proceedings both legal and equitable may be initiated by the Town Attorney in order to enforce the administrative order. The Magistrate may institute judicial proceedings as provided by law to collect said penalty. All penalties collected pursuant to this article shall be paid to and become the property of the Town of Oro Valley. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Section 18-11-2 Criminal Penalties
Unless otherwise specified, a criminal violation of any provision in this chapter shall be a Class One misdemeanor carrying a maximum penalty of up to six (6) months’ imprisonment, three (3) years’ probation and/or a fine in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500). ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-12 RULES OF PROCEDURE

Sections:
18-12-1      Civil Proceedings

Section 18-12-1 Civil Proceedings
All civil proceedings under this chapter shall be governed by the Procedures for Civil Traffic Violations, Arizona Revised Statutes § 28-1591 et seq. and amendments thereto. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)

Article 18-13 AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER OR PEACE OFFICER

Sections:
18-13-1      Enforcement

Section 18-13-1 Enforcement
The Town Enforcement Agent and/or peace officers are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and issue citations for violations thereof. Pima Animal Care Center shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter. ((O)08-22, Enacted,  11/05/2008)


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Oro Valley Zoning Code

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER 20 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
Section 20.1 Purpose and Title
Section 20.2 Interpretation and Conflict
Section 20.3 Effect of Repeal on Pending Suits, etc
Section 20.4 Severability
Section 20.5 Section Headings
Section 20.6 References to this Code
Section 20.7 Effective Date
Section 20.8 Publications of Code For Sale

Section 20.1 Purpose and Title
A. Purpose 
For the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Oro Valley and to provide for the social, physical and economic advantages resulting from a comprehensive and orderly planned use of land resources, a Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map are hereby established and adopted by the Town Council.
B. Title 
This ordinance may be cited as the “Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised.”

Section 20.2 Interpretation and Conflict
A. Interpretation 
When the provisions of this Code are interpreted or applied, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, and general welfare.
B. Conflict 
The provisions of this Code are not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation or permit previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any provision of this Code, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of building or ordinance not in conflict with this Code; nor it is intended by this Code to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties, except when this Code imposes a greater restriction, this Code shall control.
C. Repeal 
All ordinance or parts of ordinance in conflict with this Code are repealed and, specifically, the following ordinances are repealed: 4, 9, 12, 13, 15, 18, 20, 24, 28, 29, 31, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 46, 48, 52, and 54.

Section 20.3 Effect of Repeal on Pending Suits, etc
The repeal of the ordinances, or parts thereof, specified in Section 20.2 shall not:
A. Affect suits pending or rights existing immediately prior to the effective date of this ordinance;
B. Impair, avoid or affect any grant or conveyance made or right acquired or cause of action now existing under any such repealed ordinance or amendment thereto; or
C. Affect or impair the validity of any bond or other obligation issued or sold in constituting a valid obligation of the issuing authority prior to the effective date of this ordinance.

Section 20.4 Severability
This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any court of competent jurisdiction hold that any phrase, clause, sentence or section of this ordinance violates or in any way is inconsistent with any statute, State or Federal, or with any provision of the Arizona or United States Constitutions, the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences and sections shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in force and such holding shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole.

Section 20.5 Section Headings
Headings of the several sections of this Code are intended as a convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute a part of the law.

Section 20.6 References to this Code
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.

Section 20.7 Effective Date
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage.

Section 20.8 Publications of Code For Sale
The Town Clerk is hereby directed to cause this Code to be published for the purpose of sale.

CHAPTER 21 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES

Sections:
Section 21.1 Officers and Agencies
Section 21.2 Town Council
Section 21.3 Planning and Zoning Commission
Section 21.4 Planning and Zoning Department
Section 21.5 (Repealed by (O)17-05)
Section 21.6 Board of Adjustment
Section 21.7 Appeal Hearing Officer
Section 21.8 (Repealed by (O)11-15)
Section 21.9 Historic Preservation Commission

Section 21.1 Officers and Agencies
A. Purpose 
Sections 21.2 through 21.7 describe the responsibilities, powers and duties exercised by the principal officers and agencies involved in the planning, zoning, and subdivision of land within the Town of Oro Valley.
The specific procedures by which these responsibilities, powers, and duties are exercised are found in the applicable Chapters of this Code.

Section 21.2 Town Council
A. Scope 
As the legislative body, the Town Council establishes planning and zoning policies and performs the planning and zoning actions of this section as authorized by A.R.S. Title 11.
B. Powers and Duties 
    1. General Plan 
    Upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Town Council adopts, repeals, or amends the General Plan, which establishes the goals of the Town of Oro Valley regarding future development of the Town.
    2. Other Land Use Plans 
    The Town Council adopts, repeals, or amends other land use plans which describe in greater detail, and apply the intent of, the General Plan to smaller geographic sectors and planning areas.
    3. Zoning Regulations and Districts 
    By ordinance, the Town Council establishes, repeals, or amends the zoning regulations of this Code and provides for zoning district changes and amendments in accordance with Chapter 22, Review and Approval Procedures.
    4. Land Use Policies 
    The Town Council adopts, repeals, or amends, by resolution, policies relating to land use issues and review procedures.
    5. Subdivision and Development Plan Regulations 
    The Town Council adopts, repeals, or amends, by ordinance, regulations for the subdivision of land within the Town and for development plans which establish the features of a development (refer to Chapter 26, Subdivisions and Development Plans).
    6. Appeals and Special Permits 
    The Town Council hears and decides appeals and special permits to developmental or procedural requirements when authorized by this Code.
    7. Enforcement 
    The Town Council establishes, by ordinance, rules and procedures for the enforcement of this Code by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    8. Appointments 
    The Town Council appoints the members of the following boards, commissions, and committees:
        a. Planning and Zoning Commission
        b. Board of Adjustment
        c. Other committees, as necessary ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)

Section 21.3 Planning and Zoning Commission
A. Scope 
The Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC) primarily advises the Town Council on planning and zoning policies, land use, development plans, amendments and regulations as authorized by A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4. The Planning and Zoning Commission is the planning agency for the Town of Oro Valley, and has the powers necessary to enable it to fulfill its planning function, in accordance with A.R.S. 9-461.01(A) and B, as described in subsection B of this section. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)
B. Powers and Duties 
The Planning and Zoning Commission performs the following duties:
    1. Planning and Zoning Work Plan 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate and shall provide recommendations to the Town Council on the Planning Division Work Plan, which outlines primary work objectives of the Planning Division.
    2. General Plan 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate and shall provide recommendations to the Town Council on the General Plan and amendments thereto which establishes the goals of Oro Valley regarding future development of the Town.
    3. Land Use Plans 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate and shall provide recommendations to the Town Council on special land use plans or studies.
    4. Zoning Code Amendments 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate and shall provide recommendations to the Town Council on amendments to this Code in accordance with Section 22.3, Amendments.
    5. Conditional Use Permits 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission provides recommendations to the Town Council on conditional use permits.
    6. Rezoning 
        a. The Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate and shall provide recommendations to the Town Council on rezoning of property in accordance with Section 22.3.
    7. Design Review and Other Authorities 
        a. The Planning and Zoning Commission makes decisions or provides recommendations to the Town Council regarding conceptual design submittals and other applications as provided in Table 22-9.
    8. Other Matters 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate or, at the request of the Town Council, shall conduct special studies or perform other functions relating to planning and zoning matters. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
C. Transaction of Business 
    1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct its business in accordance with the Arizona Revised Statutes, applicable Town regulations, and its rules and procedures as approved by the Town Council.
    2. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be the Executive Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    3. The Planning and Zoning Commission Chair, or his/her designee, has the right to appear before the Town Council on items of interest to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    4. Recommendations and/or decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission should be based exclusively on the merits of the application, validity of the testimony presented at hearings and conformance with the General Plan and Town Codes. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)
D. Effect of Decisions 
All Planning and Zoning Commission recommendations, final actions, and findings of decisions shall be transmitted to the Town Council regardless of vote. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)

Section 21.4 Planning and Zoning Department
A. Scope 
The Planning and Zoning Department is the lead agency for the administration of this Code and serves as the professional staff of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. Powers and Duties of the Planning and Zoning Administrator 
The Planning and Zoning Administrator, with the applicable staff, performs the following duties in accordance with the A.R.S.:
    1. Supervision 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator supervises the various operations of the department.
    2. Annual Planning Program 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator develops the annual plan program after initiation by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    3. Plans and Regulations 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator maintains the General Plan and the land use plans, policies, and regulations for their implementation.
    4. Specific Plans 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator provides recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council on specific plans and administers adopted specific plans.
    5. Rezoning 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator provides recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council on the rezoning of property and administers approved rezonings.
    6. Subdivision Plats and Development Plans 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator reviews, coordinates, and administers the processing of subdivision plats and development plans in accordance with Chapter 26, Subdivision and Site Plans.
    7. Boards, Commissions and Committees 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator provides administrative assistance to the planning and zoning boards, commissions, and committees appointed by the Town Council.
    8. Compliance Review 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator reviews all permits for use or improvement of property prior to issuance by the Town in order to determine if the proposed activity will be in compliance with this Code.
    9. Interpretation 
        a. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for interpretation of the zoning code. Interpretations may be considered if there is a question of clarity of any provision of the zoning code, or a determination of analogous use is required within the permitted uses of a specified zoning district.
        b. An interpretation is a formal explanation of a provision of the zoning code issued in writing by the Planning and Zoning Administrator based on a request, as differentiated from an administrative decision pursuant to Section 22.12 which is the routine application of the zoning code.
        c. Requests for interpretation shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator with the required fee. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may also initiate an interpretation. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall issue a written interpretation within ten (10) days following receipt of the request.
        d. Planning and Zoning Administrator interpretations may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 21.6.G.
        e. Interpretations issued pursuant to this section shall be published on the Town’s website. Additionally, a record of interpretations shall be maintained and available for public review and inspection at the office of the Town Clerk.
    10. Enforcement 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator enforces the provisions of this Code and acts as the Planning and Zoning Administrator, in accordance with A.R.S. 9-462.05, by all means prescribed by law.
    11. Other Duties1 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator acts as the Executive Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Administrator is responsible for accurate and complete transmittal and recordation of Commission actions. When functioning as Executive Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission before the Town Council, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall represent the Planning and Zoning Commission actions to the Town Council. The Planning and Zoning Administrator performs such other functions as may be necessary in the administration of the department or as provided by the Town Council and Town Manager.
1 Code reviser’s note: This subsection was amended at the Town’s request to remove references to the Conceptual Design Review Board.
((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-13, Amended,  05/04/2011)

Section 21.5 Conceptual Design Review Board
(Repealed by (O)17-05)

Section 21.6 Board of Adjustment
A. Scope 
The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances and appeals of interpretations of this Code in accordance with A.R.S. Section 9-462.06.
B. Powers and Duties 
    1. Interpretation 
    The Board of Adjustment shall interpret this Code on appeal when:
        a. There is a dispute between the appellant and the Planning and Zoning Administrator or other Town Official as to a decision or interpretation as set forth in subsection F of this section; or
        b. The location of a zoning district is in doubt.
    2. Variances 
    The Board of Adjustment may allow variances from the provisions of this Code in accordance with subsection J of this section, Findings.
C. Meetings, Administration of Oaths, and Compelling Attendance of Witnesses 
All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Chairman, or, in his absence, the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses in accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona.
D. Composition 
    1. Appointment 
    The Board of Adjustment shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by the Town Council.
    2. Terms 
    Appointments are for staggered terms of two (2) years each with no limit on the number of terms.
    3. Vacancies 
    Vacancies shall be filled for the un-expired portion of that term within a reasonable time period as provided for by appointments of the Town Council.
    4. Removal 
    The Town Council has the authority to remove, by majority vote, any member for neglect of duty, inefficiency, or misconduct in office.
E. Transaction of Business 
    1. The Board of Adjustment shall conduct its business in accordance with the Arizona Revised Statutes and applicable Town regulations and any rules and procedures as adopted by the Town Council.
    2. The Town Clerk, or an appointed representative from the Town Clerk’s office, shall serve as the Executive Secretary of the Board of Adjustment and the minutes and records of all Board proceedings will be kept and filed as public record in the files of the Town Clerk.
F. Appeals from Administrative Decisions 
Appeals may be taken to the Board of Adjustment by persons aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by a decision of an administrative official, within thirty (30) days, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Said appeal shall be filed on a form provided by the Town Clerk.
    1. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board that, by reason of the fact stated in the certificate, the stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties in interest and the public.
    2. The concurring vote of a majority of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order or decision of an administrative official, or to pass or to affect any variations from the terms and conditions of this ordinance.
G. Appeals from Planning and Zoning Administrator Interpretations 
Appeals may be taken to the Board of Adjustment by persons aggrieved by a Planning and Zoning Administrator interpretation within twenty (20) days from the date the interpretation is published on the Town’s website. The appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk and the Board of Adjustment shall issue a decision within thirty (30) days following receipt of the appeal. ((O)11-13, Enacted,  05/04/2011)
H. Application for Variances 
    1. Application for a variance of zoning regulations shall be made to the Board of Adjustment in the form of a written application. Said application shall be filed with the Town Clerk upon forms provided by the Board of Adjustment. ((O)11-13, Amended,  05/04/2011)
I. Hearing and Notice 
Upon receipt in proper form of any such application, the Board of Adjustment shall proceed to hold a public hearing upon said application not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than fifteen (15) days, after such filing, at which time all persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Such Board of Adjustment shall cause one notice of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Oro Valley and one notice to be posted on the subject property, giving at least fifteen (15) days’ notice of said hearing, and the time and place where said hearing will be held. Said notice, both as published and posted, shall also show the nature of the variance or exception requested and state that anyone wanting to protest may appear in person or by writing. All property owners within three hundred (300) feet must be notified. ((O)11-13, Amended,  05/04/2011)
J. Findings 
A variance from the provisions of this Code shall not be authorized unless the Board shall find upon sufficient evidence:
    1. That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the property referred to in the application including its size, shape, topography, location or surroundings which do not apply to other properties in the district; and
    2. That special circumstances were not created by the owner or applicant; and
    3. That the authorizing of the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; and
    4. That any variance granted imposes such conditions as will assure that the authorizing of the adjustment shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is located; and
    5. That the authorizing of the variance will not be materially detrimental to persons residing in the vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood or the public welfare in general. ((O)11-13, Amended,  05/04/2011)
K. Action 
The Board shall prescribe, in connection with any variance, such conditions as the Board may deem necessary in order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this Code. Such conditions may include, among other things, a limitation of the time for which such variance shall be valid. Violation of any such condition shall be a violation of this ordinance and such violation shall render the variance null and void. ((O)11-13, Amended,  05/04/2011)
L. Review 
    1. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board after hearing on application made by any taxpayer or municipal officer may petition for a writ of certiorari to review the Board’s decision pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-465 (1956) as amended. ((O)11-13, Amended,  05/04/2011)

Section 21.7 Appeal Hearing Officer
A. Scope 
The Appeal Hearing Officer shall hear and decide requests for appeals of Town required dedications or exactions in accordance with A.R.S. Sections 9-500.12 and 9-500.13.
B. Powers and Duties 
    1. Appeals 
    The Appeal Hearing Officer shall hear and decide appeals of required exactions or dedications, once an administrative agency or official makes a final determination that grants an approval, subject to a required exaction or dedication. The Appeal Hearing Officer shall not hear appeals to a dedication or exaction required in a legislative act of the Town that does not give future discretion to an administrative agency or official to determine the nature or extent of the dedication or exaction. The property owner may request an appeal of the exaction or dedication to the Appeal Hearing Officer, as set forth in subsection F of this section.
C. Meetings, Administration of Oaths and Compelling Attendance of Witnesses 
All meetings of the Appeal Hearing Officer shall be held at the call of the Appeal Hearing Officer. All meetings of the Appeal Hearing Officer shall be open to the public. The Appeal Hearing Officer may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses in accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona.
D. Composition 
    1. Appointment 
    The Appeal Hearing Officer shall be an individual appointed by the Town Council.
    2. Terms 
    Appointment is for a term of one (1) year each with no limit on the number of terms and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Council.
    3. Vacancies 
    Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of that term within a reasonable time period as provided for by appointments of the Town Council.
    4. Removal 
    The Town Council has the authority to remove, by majority vote, an Appeal Hearing Officer for neglect of duty, inefficiency, or misconduct in office.
E. Transaction of Business 
    1. The Appeal Hearing Officer shall conduct his/her business in accordance with the Arizona Revised Statutes and applicable Town regulations and any rules and procedures as adopted by the Town Council.
    2. The Town Clerk, or an appointed representative from the Town Clerk’s office, shall serve as the Executive Secretary for the Appeal Hearing Officer and the minutes and records of all proceedings will be kept and filed as public record in the files of the Town Clerk.
F. Appeals from Required Dedication and Exactions 
Appeals may be taken to the Appeal Hearing Officer by a property owner aggrieved by a decision of an administrative agency or official, within thirty (30) days, by filing a written appeal with the Appeal Officer. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Said appeal shall be filed on an appeal form provided by the Town.
Completed appeal forms shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
G. Hearing and Notice 
Upon receipt in proper form of any such application, the Appeal Hearing Officer shall proceed to hold a public hearing upon said application not more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the appeal. The property owner must be given notice of the hearing ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
The Appeal Hearing Officer shall cause one notice of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Oro Valley and one notice to be posted on the subject property, giving at least ten (10) days’ notice of said hearing, and the time and place where said hearing will be held. Said notice, both as published and posted, shall also show the nature of the appeal and state that anyone wanting to protest may appear in person or by writing.
H. Burden of Proof 
In the appeal hearing, the Town has the burden of establishing that the applicable standards for requiring exactions and dedications have been met. These standards include the following:
    1. That there is an essential relationship between the dedication or exaction and a legitimate governmental interest; and
    2. That the proposed dedication or exaction is roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed use.
I. Action 
The Appeal Hearing Officer must decide the appeal within five (5) working days after the hearing, and must modify or delete the required exaction or dedication if the Town does not meet its burden or proof.
J. Appeal to Superior Court 
    1. A property owner may appeal an adverse decision of the Appeal Hearing Officer to Superior Court within thirty (30) days of the decision. [A.R.S. 9-500.13(E) and 11-810(E)].
    2. Appeal is by complaint for a trial de novo on the facts and law regarding the issues of the condition or requirements of the exaction or dedication. [A.R.S. 9-500.13(E) and 11-810(E)].
K. Interim Remedies, Damages, and Attorney Fees 
    1. Consistent with the standard for preliminary injunctions, the court may exercise any legal or equitable interim remedies to permit the owner to proceed with the use or development of the property, but that would not render moot the proposed exaction.
    2. The court may award damages to compensate for delay if it finds that the Town of Oro Valley acted in bad faith.
    3. The court has the authority to award attorney fees for the appeal and trial to the prevailing party.

Section 21.8 Art Review Commission
(Repealed by (O)11-15)

Section 21.9 Historic Preservation Commission
A. Scope 
In accordance with the General Plan: Archaeological and Historic Resources Element, the Historic Preservation Commission facilitates the conservation of cultural resources in the Oro Valley community. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
B. Powers and Duties 
In addition to other powers and duties of the Historic Preservation Commission specified in Article 6-10 of the Oro Valley Town Code, the Historic Preservation Commission performs the following:
    1. Planning and Zoning Work Plan 
    The Historic Preservation Commission provides recommendations to the Town Council on the annual work plan, which is a formal list of the Planning Department’s annual land use policy and zoning work projects.
    2. General Plan 
    The Historic Preservation Commission reviews and recommends cultural resource conservation policies for inclusion in the General Plan.
    3. Zoning Code Amendments 
    The Historic Preservation Commission reviews and recommends zoning requirements, historic districts, and design guidelines pertaining to conservation of cultural resources.
    4. Development Review 
    The Historic Preservation Commission considers evidence and recommends action upon appeal or review of the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s determination of cultural resource significance and/or action specified within a formal treatment plan.
    5. Special Inventories or Plans 
    The Historic Preservation Commission shall maintain a list of known significant cultural resources for consideration in planning of current and future development. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
C. Transaction of Business 
The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall apprise the Historic Preservation Commission of all determinations of significance, treatment plan approvals, and zoning enforcement actions that involve a cultural resource. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)

CHAPTER 22 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES

Sections:
Section 22.1 General Provisions
Section 22.2 General Plan Amendment Procedures
Section 22.3 Amendments and Rezonings
Section 22.4 Zoning in Conformance with the General Plan
Section 22.5 Use Permits
Section 22.6 (Repealed by (O)11-15)
Section 22.7 Building Permits
Section 22.8 Certificates of Occupancy
Section 22.9 Design Review
Section 22.10 Grading Permit Procedures
Section 22.11 (Repealed by (O)09-20)
Section 22.12 Appeals From Administrative Decisions
Section 22.13 Variances
Section 22.14 Administrative Approval Required
Section 22.15 Public Participation

Section 22.1 General Provisions
A. Form of Application and Application Filing Fees 
Applications required under this Chapter shall be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the application. Applications shall be accompanied by the fee that has been established by the Town Council. Fees are not required with applications submitted by the Town Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, or Town agencies. Application fees are nonrefundable, unless otherwise expressly stated.
B. Application Completeness 
An application will be considered complete if it is submitted in the required form, includes all mandatory information, including all exhibits specified by the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator, and is accompanied by the applicable fee. A determination of application completeness shall be made by the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator within 10 days of application filing. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the application’s deficiencies. No further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 30 days, the application shall be considered withdrawn and the application shall be returned to the applicant.

Section 22.2 General Plan Amendment Procedures
A. Purpose 
A General Plan amendment is any change that occurs between General Plan updates. Amendments may involve a change to the Land Use Map for specific properties or a change to the text. Requests for amendments, if approved, can effect change to any section of the document including, but not limited to, the various elements, goals, policies, or actions.
B. Rezoning Conformance with the General Plan 
Any zoning changes in land use must conform, in all respects, with the Town’s adopted General Plan and Land Use Map. See Section 22.3 for further information on rezoning compliance with the General Plan.
C. Types of Amendments to the General Plan 
Every year, applications are typically made to the Town of Oro Valley for amendments to the General Plan. These amendments are designated as either Type 1 amendments or Type 2 amendments. Both amendment types have unique criteria and process as defined herein. Text and land use map changes will be classified as follows:
    1. Type 1 Amendment 
    Type 1 amendments involve significant changes to the Town’s General Plan.
    Type 1 amendments are defined as major General Plan amendments in State law and involve a substantial alteration of the Town’s land use mixture or balance. A Type 1 amendment shall be required for any of the following substantial alterations to the General Plan:
        a. Any change to the Land Use Plan that affects forty (40) acres or more and is classified as a Type 1 amendment on the General Plan Amendment Matrix (Table 22-1).
        b. Increasing the amount of High Density Residential, regardless of acreage.
        c. Increasing the amount of Master Planned Community, regardless of acreage.
        d. Decreasing Neighborhood Commercial Office, Community/Regional Commercial or Commerce Office Park land use designations, regardless of acreage.
        e. Decreasing the amount of open space regardless of acreage.
        f. Planning area boundary changes.
        g. Amendments for properties outside the General Plan Urban Services Boundary (USB).
        h. Any text changes to an element, goal, policy, or action that alters the intent or purpose of any element, goal, policy, or action of the General Plan.
    2. Type 2 Amendment 
    Type 2 amendments involve changes with less impact to the General Plan and do not represent a substantial alteration of the Town’s land use mixture or balance. Type 2 amendments are not intended to be major General Plan amendments as provided by State law. A Type 2 amendment shall be required for any of the following changes to the General Plan:
        a. Any amendment not meeting the criteria for a Type 1 amendment.
        b. Amendments to the Urban Services Boundary.
        c. Open space trades resulting in no net loss of open space and that meet the Town’s environmental objectives.
        d. Any text changes to an element, goal, policy or action that do not alter the intent or purpose of any element, goal, policy, or action of the General Plan.
    3. Planning and Zoning Administrator Amendment Reclassification 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator may reclassify a Type 2 amendment to a Type 1 amendment based on the following findings:
        a. High visibility of the property by a significant portion of the community, beyond visibility by adjacent property owners. Areas of high visibility include, but are not limited to, locations along major thoroughfares, at major gateways into the community such as Town limits and properties that are highly visible due to elevation.
        b. The physical characteristics of a site such as environmental constraints, access or topography will likely result in significant environmental or grading impacts to the property.
        c. The proposed density or type of development would create a significant and abrupt transition in land use in comparison with the adjacent area and development context. The change may impact the surrounding development character or signal an overall change to the future of the area.
    4. Exceptions 
    The following shall not require a formal amendment to the General Plan and may be reviewed administratively:
        a. All scrivener’s errors will be subject to administrative approval. Scrivener’s errors are unintentional clerical mistakes made during the drafting, publishing, and copying process.
        b. Public schools are not subject to the amendment process.
        c. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to administer and interpret the provisions of the General Plan. Requests for interpretations may be filed by an applicant or an aggrieved party owning property within the required notification area for General Plan amendments. Information on interpretations shall be identified in all related staff reports for the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council.
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        |          |                              Proposed Designation (Change to)                              |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | Existing | R-LDR | LDR1 | LDR2 | MDR  | HDR  | MPC  | RGC  | NCO  | CRC  | COP  | PSP & | PARK |  OS  |
        |          |       |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      | SCH*  |      |      |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | R-LDR    | none  | 2    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | LDR1     | 2     | none | 2    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | LDR2     | 2     | 2    | none | 2    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | MDR      | 2     | 2    | 2    | none | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | HDR      | 2     | 2    | 2    | 2    | none | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 2     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | MPC      | 1     | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | none | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 2     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | RGC      | 1     | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | none | 2    | 1    | 2    | 2     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | NCO      | 1     | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 2    | none | 1    | 2    | 2     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | CRC      | 1     | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 2    | 2    | none | 2    | 1     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | COP      | 1     | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 2    | 2    | 2    | none | 1     | 2    | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | PSP &    | 2     | 2    | 2    | 2    | 1    | 1    | 2    | 2    | 2    | 2    | none  | 2    | 2    |
        | SCH*     |       |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |       |      |      |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | PARK     | 1     | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1     | none | 2    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | OS       | 1     | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1     | 1    | none |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | *Public schools are not subject to the amendment process.                                             |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | Type 1 Amendment        | 1    |                                                                      |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | Type 2 Amendment        | 2    | "                                                                    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        | None                    | none | "                                                                    |
        +----------+-------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+------+------+
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        |               DESIGNATION KEY                |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | R-LDR | Rural Low Density Residential (0 –   |
        |       | 0.3 homes per acre)                  |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | LDR1  | Low Density Residential 1 (0.4 – 1.2 |
        |       | homes per acre)                      |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | LDR2  | Low Density Residential 2 (1.3 – 2.0 |
        |       | homes per acre)                      |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | MDR   | Medium Density Residential (2.1 –    |
        |       | 5.0 homes per acre)                  |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | HDR   | High Density Residential (5.1+ homes |
        |       | per acre)                            |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | MPC   | Master Planned Community             |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | RGC   | Resort and Golf Course               |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | NCO   | Neighborhood Commercial and Office   |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | CRC   | Community/Regional Commercial        |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | COP   | Commerce/Office Park                 |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | PSP   | Public/Semi Public                   |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | SCH   | Schools                              |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | PARK  | Parks                                |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        | OS    | Open Space                           |
        +-------+--------------------------------------+
        For a complete definition of the land use designations, please refer to the General Plan.
D. General Plan Amendment Procedures 
All Type 1 and Type 2 amendments to the General Plan shall follow the procedures outlined below:
    1. Application 
        a. Amendments to the Land Use Map may be initiated by the Town or by the landowner only.
        b. Text amendments including, but not limited to, the General Plan elements, goals, policies, and actions may be requested by any individual, whether a land holder in the Town or not, or by a Town official or Town resident.
    2. Administrative Review 
    At least sixty (60) days before the General Plan or an element or Type 1 amendment of a General Plan is noticed, the Planning Division shall:
        a. Transmit the amendment to the Mayor, the Town Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
        b. Submit a copy for review and further comment to:
            i. Pima County Association of Governments.
            ii. Pima County, the Town of Marana, the City of Tucson and Pinal County.
            iii. The Arizona Commerce Authority.
            iv. The Arizona Department of Water Resources for review and comment on the Water Resources Element.
            v. Any person or entity that requests in writing to receive a review copy of the amendment.
    3. Review Process 
        a. Type 1 Amendment 
            i. Submittal requirements are established by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Additional studies or other materials may be required when warranted as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
            ii. Applications are accepted from January 1st to April 30th.
            iii. Type 1 General Plan amendment applications for property which has not been mapped for environmentally sensitive lands conservation categories shall include mapping for primary conservation categories (major wildlife linkage, critical resource area and core resource area) in accordance with Section 27.10.B.1.b.iv with the initial submittal of the amendment application.
            iv. Neighborhood meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 22.15.
            v. All applications must be reviewed concurrently at a minimum of two (2) public hearings by the Planning and Zoning Commission in different locations.
            vi. All Type 1 amendments are to be presented to the Council at a single public hearing prior to the end of the calendar year that the proposal is made.
            vii. Public Notification for All Public Hearings 
            Public notification shall be given at least fifteen (15) and no more than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing date and will include at a minimum:
                a) Notice of the proposed amendment will be advertised a minimum of three (3) times in two (2) widely distributed newspapers.
                b) All property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property will be directly notified of the amendment when the amendment involves a change in land use. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may expand the notification area in accordance with Section 22.15.B.2.b.
                c) All homeowner’s associations registered in Oro Valley will be notified of the amendment.
                d) Signs noticing the proposed amendment will be posted on or near the property on a sign or signs a minimum of three (3) feet by four (4) feet in size, with a header of letters no less than five (5) inches in height.
            viii. Adoption of a Type 1 amendment requires a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Town Council.
        b. Type 2 Amendment 
            i. Submittal requirements are established by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Additional studies or other materials may be required when warranted as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
            ii. Amendments may be submitted any time of the year.
            iii. Type 2 General Plan amendment applications for property which has not been mapped for environmentally sensitive lands conservation categories shall include mapping for primary conservation categories (major wildlife linkage, critical resource area and core resource area) in accordance with Section 27.10.B.1.b.iv with the initial submittal of the amendment application.
            iv. Neighborhood meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 22.15.
            v. Public Notification for All Public Hearings 
            Public notification shall be given at least fifteen (15) and no more than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing date and will include at a minimum:
                a) Notice of the proposed amendment will be advertised a minimum of two (2) times in a widely distributed newspaper.
                b) All property owners within six hundred (600) feet of the subject property will be directly notified of the amendment when the amendment involves a change in land use. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may expand the notification area in accordance with Section 22.15.B.2.b.
                c) Signs noticing the proposed amendment will be posted on or near the property on a sign or signs a minimum of three (3) feet by four (4) feet in size, with a header of letters no less than five (5) inches in height.
            vi. Adoption of a Type 2 amendment requires a majority vote of the Town Council.
        c. Environmentally Sensitive Lands Evaluation 
        Information regarding the primary conservation categories (major wildlife linkage, critical resource area and core resource area) shall be considered as part of Type 1 and Type 2 General Plan amendment applications. The reasonableness of proposed land use intensity shall be determined by Town Council upon consideration of the environmental resources present on the property.
    4. Adoption of Amendment 
    General Plan amendment evaluation criteria provide a tool for the Town to judge the merits of a specific amendment request. The criteria identify broad themes from the General Plan that an amendment should address, as well as specific development-related issues that will be evaluated by the Town in relation to the amendment request. The intent of this criteria is to gather information that forms the basis for Town decision-making on amendment requests. The criteria are purposely written using broad language to enable review of applications based on the full breadth of General Plan topics. The ultimate decision regarding compliance with the criteria will be made by Town Council. Mitigation as needed may be incorporated as special area policies by Town Council, or addressed in subsequent zoning development processes.
        a. The review and analysis shall include the following criteria:
            i. On balance, the request is consistent with the vision, guiding principles, goals, and policies of the General Plan as demonstrated by the following criteria. The request shall not:
                a) Significantly alter existing development character and land use patterns without adequate and appropriate buffers and graduated transitions in density and land use.
                b) Impact existing uses with increased infrastructure without appropriate improvements to accommodate planned growth.
                c) Impact other public services including police, fire, parks, water and drainage unless careful analysis and explanation of anticipated impacts are provided to the Town for review.
                d) Impact the natural beauty and environmental resources without suitable mitigation.
            ii. The applicant has implemented effective public outreach efforts to identify neighborhood concerns and has responded by incorporating measures to avoid or minimize development impacts to the extent reasonably possible, as well as to mitigate unavoidable adverse impacts.
            iii. All non-residential amendment requests will contribute positively to the long-term economic stability of the Town as demonstrated by consistency with goals and policies related to economic development and financial stability.
        b. The applicant may develop special area policies, which typically address concerns such as setbacks, building heights, screening and traffic management, with the understanding that they may be refined during the rezoning process to address public safety concerns and new information.
        c. It shall be the responsibility of an applicant to submit information, studies and analysis that will enable all participants to adequately assess the request in relation to the criteria. ((O)17-01, Amended,  01/18/2017; (O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016; (O)13-19, Amended,  09/18/2013; (O)11-21, Amended,  07/06/2011; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011; (O)09-01, Amended,  01/07/2009; (O)07-23, Amended,  05/02/2007)

Section 22.3 Amendments and Rezonings
A. Code May Be Amended 
The provisions of this Code may be amended, supplemented, modified or repealed. Such amendments may apply to the zoning map or to the regulations as set forth in this Code.
B. Initiation of Application to Amend, Filing 
    1. Amendments to the zoning map (rezonings) may be initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council or a real property owner in the area included in the proposed amendment. A pre-application conference with the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator is required.
    2. Amendments to general requirements and uses may be submitted by members of the Planning and Zoning Commission or members of the Town Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall order such amendments to public hearing, duly noticed as hereinafter provided.
    3. Real property owners, residents, and Town personnel may request amendments to the general requirements and uses, in writing, to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council shall consider such amendments and may: (1) order such amendments to public hearing, duly noticed as hereinafter provided; or (2) deny the request. A denial of public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the Town Council.
C. Neighborhood Meetings 
Neighborhood meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 22.15. ((O)16-02, Enacted,  01/20/2016)
D. Requirements for Rezoning Application 
    1. It is the burden of the applicant that all requirements of the application shall be in the form and in such numbers as specified by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    2. A detailed written analysis from the applicant describing how the proposed rezoning complies with the goals, policies, and applicable elements of the plan, as well as the Land Use Element and Map, is required as part of the submittal.
    An application for rezoning, or any change in land use, not in compliance with the adopted General Plan will require an amendment to the General Plan or the application for rezoning. Amendments to the General Plan may be pursued through the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council hearings concurrent with the request to rezone. Approval of the General Plan amendment must precede Town Council action on the rezoning application. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
E. Site Analysis and Tentative Development Plan with Application 
    1. Site Analysis 
        a. Purpose 
        The site analysis is to serve as a tool that will enable the public, elected officials, the Planning and Zoning Commission, staff and developers to comprehensively evaluate the suitability of the physical and man-made resources of a site for rezoning and development. This tool will have two parts: Part I - Inventory and Analysis and Part II - Land Use Proposal.
        b. General Requirements 
            i. The form, contact and number of copies of the site analysis will be specified by the Planning and Zoning Administrator with concurrence by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council.
            ii. A site analysis and rezoning application may be submitted prior to the Tentative Development Plan.
        c. Determination of Compliance with the General Plan 
            i. Applications to change the zoning map shall conform to the General Plan. The rezoning ordinance shall further the implementation of, and not be contrary to, the goals, policies, and applicable elements of the Plan.
            ii. Conformance is determined as follows:
                a) Proposals shall be evaluated in relation to all of the policies in the General Plan (not just the map and those in the Land Use Element).
                b) The proposed land uses, densities or intensities are within the range for the subject property’s land use designation as stated in the General Plan.
                c) Upon public hearing review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council, any rezoning proposal which does not comply with the General Plan will be subject to denial by the Town Council.
        d. Determination of Adequacy 
            i. A site analysis shall be determined inadequate if it is in gross non-compliance with existing ordinances or policies such that the development proposed cannot proceed to hearing without significant changes to achieve compliance.
            ii. For those site analyses determined to be inadequate, the petitioner will receive a written list of the additional information and/or materials necessary to bring the site analysis into compliance. The petitioner has two options:
                a) Correct any deficiencies in the site analysis, or
                b) Allow the development proposal to proceed directly to public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission at the earliest possible date with a negative recommendation from Town staff.
            iii. A determination of adequacy does not constitute project approval by the Town staff.
    2. Tentative Development Plan 
        a. All applications for rezoning shall be accompanied by a tentative overall development plan, which shall be prepared to specifications set by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        b. Any proposed changes to a Tentative Development Plan approved in conjunction with a rezoning shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator, who shall review the item and shall ascertain whether or not the change is significant. A significant change shall be determined by, but not be limited to, the following criteria:
            i. Any change to the permitted use or uses. Permitted uses shall mean the primary and alternative uses as set forth in the Tentative Development Plan and conditions attached to the approved rezoning.
            ii. Any change to the development standards or zoning conditions relating to building heights, perimeter setbacks, open space requirements, any reduction in open space, parking, floor area ratios and density.
            iii. Any change to the Tentative Development Plan associated with this rezoning which would vary any material terms or conditions of the rezoning, which would modify any proposed density standards, any kinds of street or land improvements proposed affecting the standards and layout for vehicular circulation, signs and nuisance controls intended for the development.
            iv. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize the Planning and Zoning Administrator to modify or approve any aspects of development reserved to the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to Section 22.5.
            v. Changes approved as flexible design options as permitted by Section 27.10.F.2.c shall be exempt.
        If a change is determined to be significant, revised plans shall be submitted for reconsideration by both the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016; (O)15-06, Amended,  02/04/2015; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
F. Amendments to General Requirements and Uses 
In the event that requests for amendments to the general requirements and uses are made, no application, posting or mailing shall be required, but all other requirements of this Chapter shall be adhered to. When amendments include substantive matters of administration, they shall be referred to the person who is charged with that administration. Such person shall have an opportunity to present his comments, suggestions and objections, if any, prior to passage of the amendments. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
G. Administrative Review - Rezoning 
When an application has been filed, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall make a report based on a review of the application with regard to the requirements of this Code, the General Plan and other considerations. He shall transmit, as appropriate, pertinent information on the requested zone change to the Town Engineer, County Engineer, County Wastewater and appropriate school district, the County and State Health Departments, and Arizona Department of Transportation and Rural Metro Fire Department or any other interested public agency for review and recommendation and the report shall include the recommendations of the above-mentioned agencies. The report shall be made available to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant and other interested parties at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
H. Notice of Planning and Zoning Commission Hearing 
    1. With the filing of a complete application, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall set a date for public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission, which date shall not be more than fifty (50) days from the date of said filing. The date, time and place of such public hearing and the nature of the amendment requested shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Oro Valley and the notice of said hearing shall be posted on the subject property. Both the publication and posting shall give fifteen (15) days’ notice of such Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the posting.
    2. When the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council initiates an amendment that proposes a change in any zoning district on the zoning map, the notice required to be published and posted shall also be mailed by certified mail to the last known address of all owners of property which is proposed to be rezoned by said amendment, said owners to be determined by a current list of ownership. The list of owners will be obtained not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission with said notices to be mailed not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the first public hearing.
    3. Not less than fifteen (15) days before the first public hearing, copies of the notice as published and posted shall be sent by regular mail to the owners of property within the Town which is within six hundred (600) feet of the property or premises on which the proposed change would take effect if approved. Failure of such property owners to receive such notice shall not invalidate any amendment as may be approved.
        a. The applicant shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Administrator a list obtained from the office of the tax assessor of Pima County giving the names and addresses of all owners of property within the Town, any part of which is within six hundred (600) feet of the property or premises on which the proposed change would take effect if approved. Such list shall be made not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date of hearing before the Town Council.
        b. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall have the responsibility to secure the list of owners of property within six hundred (600) feet when the proposed change has been initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
I. Action of Planning and Zoning Commission 
Upon completion of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forthwith transmit copies of its findings and recommendations to the applicant and the Town Council. The report of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall become a permanent record in the office of the Town Clerk. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
J. Failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to Report on Amendment 
If the Planning and Zoning Commission fails to report on any Code or zoning map amendment within ninety (90) days after the filing of the complete application, such failure shall be deemed to constitute no recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the matter is referred to the Town Council. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
K. Hearing by Town Council 
The Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Town Council at which residents shall have an opportunity to be heard. The date, time and place of such public hearing and the nature of the amendment requested shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Oro Valley and notice of said hearing shall be posted on the subject property. Both such publication and notice of such Town Council meeting shall give fifteen (15) days’ notice of such Town Council meeting. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the posting. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
L. Written Protest by Property Owners 
If the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the property by area and number of lots, tracts and condominium units within the zoning area of the affected property file a protest in writing against a proposed amendment, the change shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the Town Council. If any members of the Town Council are unable to vote on such question because of conflict of interest, then the required number of votes for passage of the question shall be three-fourths (3/4) of the remaining membership of the Town Council; provided, that such required number of votes shall in no event be less than a majority of the full membership of the Town Council. For the purpose of this section, the vote shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. In determining the ratio of twenty percent (20%), the “zoning area” means both of the following:
    1. The area within one hundred fifty (150) feet, including all rights-of-way, of the affected property subject to the proposed amendment or change.
    2. The area of the proposed amendment or change.
A protest filed pursuant to this subsection shall be signed by the property owners opposing the proposed amendment and filed in the office of the Town Clerk no later than 12:00 noon, five (5) business days before the date on which the Town Council will vote on the proposed amendment or on an earlier time and date established by the Town Council. ((O)18-04, Amended,  01/17/2018; (O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
M. Conditional Zoning 
The Town Council may approve a change of zoning conditioned upon specific development requirements and/or a schedule for development of the specific use or uses for which zoning is requested. If, at the expiration of the period specified by Town Council, the property has not been developed according to said schedule and requirements, it shall revert to its former zoning classification without legislative action. Any request for an extension of, or amendment to, the conditions granted shall be considered a new application. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
N. Another Application After Denial or Withdrawal 
If the event that an application for amendment is denied by the Town Council or that the application is withdrawn after the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to refuse to accept another application for the same amendment within a year of the date of the original hearing. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
O. Annexations 
Whenever land previously zoned by Pima County is annexed by the Town of Oro Valley, such zoning shall continue in effect until Town of Oro Valley zoning is applied, but, in no event, for longer than 6 months after the annexation. The zoning applied shall comply with this Code unless specific exceptions or modifications are made by the Town Council upon annexation and translation of the zoning. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
P. Rezonings to Planned Residential Development or Planned Area Development 
Rezonings to PRD or PAD shall follow the requirements in these sections and the additional requirements and review procedures in their respective sections of the Code (Section 24.3, PRD, and Section 24.4, PAD). ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016; (O)07-23, Amended,  05/02/2007)

Section 22.4 Zoning in Conformance with the General Plan
In order to ensure the orderly implementation of the Town’s adopted General Plan, the following procedures shall be observed:
A. Zoning Conformance Analysis 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall initiate a yearly analysis of zoning conformance with the adopted Oro Valley General Plan. The analysis may include all or part of the Town boundaries, as established by the Commission’s work plan (as adopted by Town Council). The Commission shall forward the Zoning Conformance Analysis to the Town Council no later than December 1st of each year. The analysis shall include the following components:
    1. Parcel Inventory 
    An inventory of individual parcels with zoning not in conformance with the adopted General Plan.
    2. Zoning Status 
    The current zoning status of the parcels not in conformance with the adopted General Plan. Zoning status will be accorded one of the following designations:
        a. Conditional Zoning 
        Zoning which has been granted subject to conditions that have not yet been satisfied.
        b. "Hard" Zoning 
        Zoning for which the property owner has satisfied all conditions of the Town.
        c. Vested Zoning 
        Zoning that has been established by the issuance of a building permit and the property owner’s substantial expenditures in reliance on the building permit.
    3. Problem Statement 
    For each parcel with zoning not in conformance with the adopted General Plan, a Problem Statement shall be prepared, by the designated Town Staff, stating the threats that the existing zoning poses to orderly development of the community. The problem statement shall address the following issues, as pertinent:
        a. Environmental/Service System Issues 
            i. Environmental impacts (noise, air quality, riparian impacts, sensitive landforms, adverse soils) - Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator
            ii. Impacts to groundwater supplies - Town Engineer
            iii. Effects on surface water - Town Engineer
            iv. Traffic impacts relative to existing roadway systems - Town Engineer
            v. Adequacy of wastewater facilities - Town Engineer and Pima County Wastewater
            vi. Impacts public safety/police and fire protection - Police Chief
            vii. Adequacy of potable water - Town Engineer
        b. Design Issues 
            i. Compatibility with adjacent uses
            ii. Building height and viewshed considerations
            iii. Density and lot coverage issues
            iv. Parking and lighting concerns
B. Conflict Priority List 
Along with the yearly Zoning Conformance Analysis, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward a prioritized list of specific parcels, having zoning not in conformance with the adopted General Plan, that pose the most significant threats to the orderly development of the Town. The most significant threats will be those judged to present significant environmental and service system issues, as outlined in subsection T.1.c.i. The prioritized list of conflicts shall form the basis for an Action Plan.
C. Action Plan 
The Action Plan shall include recommendations to the Town Council to resolve zoning conflicts with the General Plan. The Action Plan shall specify one or more possible recommended actions from the following list:
    1. Additional Performance Standards 
    For conflicts consisting primarily of design issues (subsection T.1.c.ii.) on parcels with hard zoning or vested zoning, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend enhanced performance standards for the appropriate district or to the individual rezoning application.
    Additional performance standards may include, but are not limited to, setback requirements, height limitations, buffer requirements, cluster incentives, or any other standard with a direct relationship to the design issues at hand.
    2. Transfer of Development Rights 
    For conflicts based on significant environmental and service system issues, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the Town Council may adopt provisions enabling the transfer of development rights to a parcel or parcels that have demonstrated service capacity and appropriate natural characteristics with agreement of the property owner(s).
    3. Change in Zoning Designation 
    In the case of parcels with conditional zoning, or parcels that pose an extreme danger to public health and/or safety due to environmental or service system issues, the Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate, and the Town Council may approve, a change in zoning designation to a category compatible with the General Plan Land Use Element.
    Any recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a change in the zoning designation of a parcel must be accompanied by the following documentation:
        a. Legal Analysis 
        A legal analysis, prepared by the Town’s attorney, analyzing the defensibility of the Problem Statement prepared for the parcel and verifying the zoning status of the property.
        b. Supporting Documentation 
        The designated Town Staff is responsible to provide the supporting documentation, as specified by the Problem Statement.
    4. Town Acquisition of Property 
    In the case of parcels with conditional zoning, or hard zoned and vested parcels that pose an extreme danger to public health and/or safety due to environmental or service system issues, but in which the Town of Oro Valley has limited ability to effect a zoning change, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the Town Council may approve, the purchase of the property.
    Any recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the purchase of a property must be accompanied by the following documentation:
        a. Legal Analysis 
        A legal analysis, prepared by the Town’s attorney, analyzing the defensibility of the Problem Statement prepared for the parcel and verifying the zoning status of the property.
        b. Supporting Documentation 
        The designated Town Staff is responsible to provide the supporting documentation, as specified by the Problem Statement.

Section 22.5 Use Permits
A. Use Permits: Issuance 
[IMAGE: <OroValley22.5.png>]
Use Permits may be granted only when expressly permitted by this Code. Applications shall be made according to the provisions of this section. If a conditional use permit is permitted, but no criteria for the specific use are defined in Section 25.1, the conditions for such use shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Use Permits, which may be revocable, conditional or valid for a term period, may be granted only when expressly permitted by this Code and only after the Planning and Zoning Commission has made a recommendation and the Town Council has found in writing as follows:
    1. That the granting of such conditional use permit will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. In arriving at this determination, the factors which shall be considered shall include the following:
        a. Damage or nuisance arising from noise, smoke, odor, dust, vibration or illumination;
        b. Hazard to persons and property from possible explosion, contamination, fire or flood;
        c. Unusual volume or character of traffic.
    2. That the characteristics of the proposed use are reasonably compatible with the types of use permitted in the surrounding area and sufficient mitigation measures are employed to minimize impact on adjoining properties.
    3. That the proposed use is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan.
    4. That the hours of operation of the proposed use will not adversely impact neighboring properties.
The burden of proof for satisfying the aforementioned requirements shall rest with the applicant.
B. Use Permits: Application 
Application for use permit shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    1. Notice of Public Hearing 
    With the filing of an application, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall set a date of public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. Refer to submittal calendar for deadlines. The date, time and place of such public hearing and the nature of the use permit requested shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and one notice of the said hearing shall be posted conspicuously on the property. Both such publication and posting shall give fifteen (15) days’ notice of such Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the posting.
    2. The notice, as published and posted, shall be sent by regular mail to owners of adjacent property not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the first public hearing. The applicant shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Administrator an accurate verified list made within sixty (60) days prior to the date of hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission giving the names and addresses of the recorded owners of all properties, any part of which is within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed use permit, or more as the Planning and Zoning Administrator may determine necessary to provide reasonable notice. Failure of property owners to receive such notice shall not invalidate a use permit that may be subsequently approved.
C. Neighborhood Meetings 
Neighborhood meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 22.15. ((O)16-02, Enacted,  01/20/2016)
D. Action of the Planning and Zoning Commission 
Upon completion of the public hearing on a use permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forthwith transmit copies of its findings and recommendations to the applicant and the Town Council. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
E. Action of the Town Council 
The Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Town Council at which residents shall have an opportunity to be heard. The time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Oro Valley not less than fifteen (15) days before the Town Council hearing date. The time and place of such public hearing and the information concerning the use permit requested shall be posted within the area included in the amendment at least fifteen (15) days before such Town Council hearing. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the posting. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
F. Decision 
Following the conclusion of the public hearing before the Town Council upon the application for a use permit, the Town Council may approve the use permit stipulating those conditions it feels necessary to carry out the provisions and intent of this Code. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
G. Development Review Board 
Repealed by (O)11-15.
H. Violation 
The violation of any condition imposed by the use permit shall constitute a violation of this Code. Failure to maintain any of the approved conditions may result in revocation of the use permit by Town Council. Amendment or addition to any use permit is subject to the same procedures as those that apply to a new application. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)

Section 22.6 Development Review
(Repealed by (O)11-15)

Section 22.7 Building Permits
A. When Required 
    1. It shall be unlawful to construct, alter, repair, remove or demolish or to commence the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or structure without first filing with the Building Official an application in writing and obtaining a formal permit.
    [IMAGE: <OroValley22.7.png>]
    2. The following are excluded from building permit requirements:
        a. Fences up through six (6) feet in height and freestanding masonry walls up to five (5) feet unless required as a swimming pool enclosure.
        b. Curbs and planter walls up to thirty (30) inches in height and retaining walls up to thirty (30) inches in height unless used to support any surcharge load.
        c. A detached building, ramada, playhouse or similar structure not more than the (10) feet in height nor larger than one hundred forty-four (144) square feet.
        d. Residential television and radio antenna supported on roofs.
        e. Awnings supported only from the exterior walls of buildings.
        f. Repairs and remodeling which involve only the replacement of component parts of existing work with similar materials and which do not aggregate over one thousand dollars ($1,000) in valuation, excluding labor, in any twelve (12) month period and do not affect any structural, electrical, mechanical or plumbing installations. Construction exempt from permit requirements shall not include any conversion of space to a private garage or sleeping area, exit facilities, permanent fixtures or equipment. Specifically excepted from any permit requirement without limit to valuation are:
            i. Painting or decorating
            ii. Installation of floor covering
            iii. Cabinet or trim work
            iv. Outside paving or walks in R-1 Districts
            v. Re-roofing and roofing repairs.
Whenever electrical, mechanical or plumbing work is to be done in connection with the above exemptions, permits shall be required. This section shall not be construed to require separate permits for dwelling and accessory buildings or structures on the same property that are described in the building permit application, plot plan and other drawings.
B. Completion of Existing Buildings 
Nothing in this Code shall require changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which lawful permit has been issued or which has been otherwise lawfully authorized and the construction of which entire building shall be completed, as authorized, within two (2) years thereafter.
C. Approval in Part 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Building Official from issuing a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and detailed statements of said building or structure have been presented and have been found to comply with this Code.
D. Revocation 
The Building Official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this Code if there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.

Section 22.8 Certificates of Occupancy
A. Certificate of Occupancy for Land 
A Certificate of Occupancy for the use of vacant land or the change in the character or the use of land, as herein provided, shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used and a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued within three (3) days after the application has been made provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
B. State if Compliance with Law; Record; Copies 
The Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of this Code. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the affected building.

Section 22.9 Design Review
Design review entails a two (2) step process, conceptual design and final design. The conceptual design submittal consists of conceptual site plan, conceptual public art, conceptual architectural design, and conceptual landscape plan.
Final design submittals include construction drawings (including final site plan based on the approved conceptual site plan; building plans; improvement plans; final public art plans; final architectural design submittal; native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plans; and landscape, irrigation, water harvesting, and buffer yard plans and/or final plat). Final design submittals are subject to Town staff approval. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)12-20, Amended,  11/07/2012)
A. Authorities 
    1. Design Review Authorities 
        a. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review all applications prescribed in Section 21.3. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authorities granted within this section, and additional authorities as may be expressly granted in other sections of the zoning code.
        b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make recommendations to the Town Council regarding conceptual design submittals for all residential or non-residential development, conceptual non-residential architectural design, conceptual public art (for non-call to artists projects), master sign programs, pad sign exemptions, and Tier II minor communications facilities that exceed the height requirement of the zoning district and major communications facilities.
        c. The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the design of Tier II minor communications facilities (that meet the height requirement of zoning district), conceptual model home architecture, and sign criteria. Planning and Zoning Commission decisions are subject to Town Council appeal in accordance with subsection D.8 of this section. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall base its decision on the design principles in subsection D of this section and the design standards within Addendum A of the zoning code.
        d. Table of Authorities 
        The following table establishes the review, recommendation and approval authorities of staff, Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council:
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        |      Submittal Type      | Staff Authority | Planning and Zoning  |  Town Council  | Additional  |
        |                          |                 | Commission Authority |   Authority    | Regulations |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Conceptual Site Plan     | Review          | Recommendation       | Final Decision | 22.9.D      |
        |                          |                 |                      |                | 24.9.C      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Conceptual Architecture  | Review          | Recommendation       | Final Decision | 22.9.D      |
        |                          |                 |                      |                | 24.9.C      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Conceptual Public Art    | Review          | Recommendation       | Final Decision | 27.3.F      |
        |                          |                 |                      |                | 24.9.C      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Signs                    |                 |                      |                | 28.2.B      |
        |                          |                 |                      |                | 28.2.C      |
        |                          |                 |                      |                | 24.9.C      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Communication Facilities | Review          | Recommendation       | Final Decision | 25.1.B      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Grading Exception        | Review          | Recommendation       | Final Decision | 22.10.E     |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Alternative Parking      | Review          | Final Decision       | Appeal         | 27.7.C      |
        | Ratio                    |                 |                      |                | 24.9.C      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Final Site Plan          | Approve         | N/A                  | Appeal         | 22.9.E      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Final Architecture       | Approve         | N/A                  | Appeal         | 22.9.E      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
        | Final Public Art         | Approve         | N/A                  | Appeal         | 27.3.F      |
        +--------------------------+-----------------+----------------------+----------------+-------------+
Design review entails a two (2) step process as provided below: ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)12-11, Amended,  09/05/2012)
B. Preapplication Conference/Development Review Committee 
    1. Development Review Committee (DRC) 
        a. The DRC shall include the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or the Town Engineer or designees and additional members appointed by the Community Development and Public Works Department Director to serve on a regular or temporary basis.
        b. The DRC shall meet with the developer during the preapplication conference and, as necessary, to carry out the provisions of this section.
    2. Preapplication Conference; Purpose 
        a. The preapplication conference stage of subdivision or development planning comprises an investigatory period that precedes actual preparation of preliminary plans by the developer. During this stage, the subdivider makes known his intentions to the DRC and is advised of specific public objectives related to the subject tract and other details regarding platting procedures and requirements. The preapplication conference is recommended to all applications.
        b. During this stage, it may be determined that a change in zoning would be required for the subject tract or a part thereof and, in such case, the developer shall initiate the necessary rezoning application.
        c. In carrying out the purpose of the preapplication stage, the developer and the DRC shall be responsible for the actions described in the following sections.
    3. Actions by Developer 
    The developer may meet informally with the DRC. An application shall be submitted ten (10) working days prior to the pre-application conference.
    4. Actions by Development Review Committee (DRC) 
    The DRC shall discuss the proposal with the developer and advise them of procedural steps, design and improvement standards and general plat requirements. Depending upon the scope of the proposed development, the DRC shall proceed with the following reviews:
        a. Check existing zoning of the property and make recommendations if a zoning change is necessary or desirable.
        b. Determine if the land is covered by the hillside development regulations, Section 27.10 and Addendum I of the zoning code, or is controlled by the Floodplain Management Code (Ordinance No. 44).
        c. Inspect the site after the developer has determined its relationship to major streets, utility systems and adjacent land uses and determine any unusual problems such as topography, utilities, flooding and geological hazards.
        d. Repealed by (O)11-15.
        e. Determine if certain lands may either not be subdivided due to adverse topography, periodic inundation, adverse soils, subsidence of the earth’s surface, high water table, lack of water or other natural or manmade hazards to life or property; or control the lot size, establish special grading and drainage requirements; and impose other regulations deemed reasonable and necessary for the public health, safety or general welfare on any lands to be subdivided affected by such characteristics.
        f. Identify applicable codes, policies and standards of development.
    5. Repealed by (O)11-15.
((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)12-11, Amended,  09/05/2012)
C. Conceptual and Final Design Stages 
The preparation, submittal, review and approval of all developments and subdivisions located in the Town shall proceed through the following progressive stages:
    1. Preapplication conference and DRC (subsection B of this section).
    2. Public outreach/neighborhood meetings (see Section 22.15).
    3. Conceptual design review (subsection D of this section). Conceptual design review shall include conceptual site plan, conceptual architectural design, conceptual public art, and conceptual landscape plan.
    4. Final design (subsection E of this section) shall include construction documents, including final site plan, final architectural design, and final public art based on approved conceptual design submittal; building plans; improvement plans; native plant preservation and salvage plans (Section 27.6), landscape, irrigation and buffer yard plans; and final plat (subsection F of this section if required).
    5. Exceptions: all minor land divisions require Stage I followed by administrative review and acceptance per subsection G of this section. ((O)12-20, Amended,  11/07/2012; (O)12-11, Amended,  09/05/2012)
D. Conceptual Design Review 
    1. Conceptual Design Review Applicability 
        a. Conceptual design approval is required for all new residential and nonresidential projects in the Town, except for individual detached single-family custom homes or as otherwise specified in this code. The conceptual design review stage of land development includes submittal, review, and approval of the conceptual site plan, conceptual public art and conceptual architectural design. Residential subdivisions do not require conceptual public art.
        b. Amendments or expansions to single-family or multifamily projects which increase the number of units or increase project gross land area by more than twenty-five percent (25%) shall require conceptual design approval. All other amendments or expansions may be approved administratively by staff.
        c. Amendments or expansions to non-residential projects which involve one or more of the following shall require conceptual design approval:
            i. Increase in the project gross land area by more than twenty-five percent (25%).
            ii. Increase in the building gross floor area by more than twenty-five percent (25%).
            iii. Change in project land use for the entire parcel (e.g., changing retail commercial to religious institution).
            iv. Major alteration to circulation patterns as determined by the Town Engineer and the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        d. Amendments or expansions below the thresholds established by subsection D.1.c of this section can be required to complete the conceptual design review process if significant compatibility, traffic and other impacts will result on adjoining properties, as determined by the PZA.
        e. Exceptions 
            i. New development projects or expansions of existing developments within the Economic Expansion Zone (EEZ) are not subject to Planning and Zoning Commission review or Town Council approval except as provided in Section 24.9.
            ii. Environmentally sensitive land (ESL) modified review process pursuant to Section 27.10.
            iii. Site plans without significant changes from an approved tentative development plan, as defined in Section 22.3, for properties rezoned in the last five (5) years.
    2. Contents 
        a. The Planning and Zoning Administrator, Building Official, and Town Engineer shall prescribe the form and content of applications and necessary accompanying data. The application shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        b. The conceptual design submittal shall consist of the following:
            i. Conceptual site plan including general layout of all buildings, structures including refuse enclosures, site access and general circulation, parking and loading areas, drive-through(s), buffer yards, setbacks, landscape, monument and entry sign locations, recreation locations, associated site and building data table.
            ii. Conceptual architectural design plan, including overall building composition, facade design elements, architectural features, building materials, building color palette, building cross-sections with floor elevation and heights (roof, parapet, screen, architectural features). Site cross-sections depicting overall topography in relation to neighboring property and existing grade line.
            iii. Conceptual public art plan including narrative, artist information and background, conceptual design, materials, color palette, location and other information required by Section 27.3.
        c. Applications shall be made by the owner of the property or authorized agent.
        d. The submittal shall be checked by the Planning and Zoning Administrator for completeness and adequacy and assigned a case number. If incomplete or otherwise inadequate, the submittal shall be returned to the applicant with deficiencies noted.
        e. To avoid delay in processing the application, the applicant shall provide all information essential to determine general code conformance and general acceptability of the proposed development.
        f. Scheduling of the case for Planning and Zoning Commission meeting shall be dependent upon information presented and completion of review. The case shall be scheduled for the first available Planning and Zoning Commission agenda.
    3. Conceptual Design Review Process 
        a. Compliance with Zoning, Including Conditions of Rezoning 
        The development shall be designed to meet the specific requirements for the zoning district within which it is located. In the event that amendment of zoning is deemed necessary, the rezoning shall proceed according to the requirements of Section 22.3. A conceptual design review application may proceed through the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council hearings concurrently with associated rezoning or other land use development applications. Approval of applicable rezoning or conditional use permit applications must precede Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council actions on conceptual design.
        b. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies of the conceptual design review submittal, including the conceptual site plan, to the following review offices:
            i. The Planning Division for compliance to public objectives, giving special attention to design principles as set forth in subsection D.5 of this section; applicable design standards within the zoning code; streets and thoroughfares as related to the Town streets and highway plans and to the neighborhood circulation; utility methods and systems; existing and proposed zoning and land use of the tract and its environs; and land required for schools, parks and other public facilities.
            ii. The Town Engineer for review of the proposed street system; street plans and general compliance with Town street standards; tentative determination of street and drainage improvement and maintenance requirements; location of artwork for safety and visibility; and water and sewerage disposal proposals.
            iii. Police Chief for review of features of proposed development related to public safety and police protection.
            iv. Fire District for review of features of proposed development relating to public safety and fire protection.
            v. County Health Department and Pima County Wastewater Management Department for review of water and sewerage disposal proposal.
            vi. Superintendent of the school district for their information.
            vii. Where the land abuts a State highway, to the Arizona Department of Transportation for recommendations regarding right-of-way and intersection design.
            viii. Appropriate utilities for preliminary review of conceptual design.
            ix. Other agencies that may be affected.
        c. The reviewing departments shall transmit their recommendations in writing to the Planning and Zoning Administrator (PZA). The PZA shall provide recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council.
    4. Conceptual Design Approval Process 
        a. If the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s (PZA’s) report indicates that the requirements of this section have been met, the Planning and Zoning Commission will consider the conceptual design submittal at the next regular meeting. Upon consideration, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward the plans with its recommendations to the Town Council.
        b. The Town Council shall consider the conceptual design submittal and the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
        c. The Town Council shall approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the conceptual design review submittal. The PZA shall record the Town Council’s action upon an official copy of the conceptual design submittal. Documentation, including any conditions of approval, shall be sent to the applicant.
        d. The Town shall provide notice of conceptual site plan applications to all property owners within six hundred (600) feet of the project boundary as indicated in the records of the Pima County Assessor’s office prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council meetings.
        e. If any portion of a subdivision falls within the required notification area, the entire subdivision (as defined by subdivision name or unit number) may be required to be notified if the impacts of the proposal would have impacts affecting the entire subdivision or neighborhood, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        f. Findings and Conditions 
        The Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council may approve, with or without conditions, an application if they find that all provisions of ordinances of the Town have been complied with including all provisions of master plans, the zoning code, Planned Area Developments, and development policies and standards of the Town.
        g. The Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council may impose such conditions as it may deem necessary in order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this code. Violation of any such condition shall be a violation of this code and such violation shall render any subsequent approval or permit null and void.
    5. Conceptual Design Review Principles and Town Action 
    Background: the following design principles are created as primary guidance to inform staff, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council actions for conceptual design review. Applicable principles are intended to provide a framework for assessment of the overall project design.
    The principles listed below are designed as tools to analyze the relationship of project characteristics (e.g., building placement, scale, massing, colors, materials, architectural style) to the surrounding area and are intended to require consideration of the project impacts on adjacent development.
    These design principles are not intended to require proposed new development to mirror or match adjacent development nor establish a finding for project denial based on differences between the proposed development and the surrounding area. It is important to note that dissimilar land uses will have dissimilar development standards and design elements. Transitional development standards should be employed to lessen the impact of the development on the surrounding area.
        a. Conceptual Site Design 
            i. Building Orientation: the location, orientation and size of structures shall promote a complementary relationship of structures to one another.
            ii. Drainage/Grading: site grading shall minimize impacts on natural grade and landforms and provide for subtle transitions of architectural elements to grade. Significant cuts and fills in relation to natural grade shall be avoided or minimized to the extent practical given property constraints.
            iii. Connectivity: strengthen the usability and connectivity of the pedestrian environment internally and externally by enhancing access to the public street system, transit, adjoining development and pedestrian and bicycle transportation routes. Where appropriate, buildings and uses should provide access to adjacent open space and recreational areas.
        b. Conceptual Architectural Design 
            i. Design: building architectural design shall be appropriate for the climate and characteristics of the Sonoran Desert, including indigenous and traditional textures, colors, and shapes found in and around Oro Valley. All development shall maintain and strengthen the high quality of design exemplified in Oro Valley through project creativity and design excellence.
            ii. Scale, Height and Mass: building scale, height and mass shall be consistent with the Town-approved intensity of the site, designated scenic corridors, and valued mountain views. Buildings shall be designed to respect the scale of adjoining areas and should mitigate the negative and functional impacts that arise from scale, bulk and mass.
            iii. Facade Articulation: all building facades shall be fully articulated, including variation in building massing, roof planes, wall planes, and surface articulation. Architectural elements including, but not limited to, overhangs, trellises, projections, awnings, insets, material, and texture shall be used to create visual interest that contributes to a building’s character.
            iv. Signs: sign colors, design and placement shall be complementary and integral to the project’s architectural and site design themes.
            v. Screening: building design and screening strategies shall be implemented to conceal the view of loading areas, refuse enclosures, mechanical equipment, appurtenances, and utilities from adjacent public streets and neighborhoods.
            vi. Communication Towers: wireless communication facilities shall be located in areas and designed in a manner which reduces the visual impact on the proposed project and surrounding area.
        c. Conceptual Public Art Design 
        Refer to Section 27.3 for public art design criteria and requirements.
    6. Expiration of Approval 
        a. Conceptual design approval shall expire and become null and void two (2) years from the date of approval if a building permit has not been issued unless a different time period is made a condition of Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council approval or unless an extension has been granted.
        b. An extension of any development approval may be granted by the Town Council if the applicant files for the extension prior to the approval becoming void and the Town Council determines the circumstances justify an extension. Extensions up to two (2) years may be granted. The Town Council may impose conditions on extensions to require conformance to zoning codes or other development standards adopted subsequent to the original approval.
    7. Enforcement 
        a. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall ensure that all matters approved pursuant to this section are undertaken and completed according to the approved conceptual design.
        b. Prior to issuance of a building or sign permit the Building Official shall ascertain that the Town has approved plans which are in conformance with conceptual approval and the time limitations imposed by this code. No building permit shall be issued less than twenty (20) days after Planning and Zoning Commission or administrative approval in order to allow appeal or review as stated in subsection D.8 of this section.
        c. Town Engineer approval of grading and improvement plans is required prior to issuance of the grading permit.
    8. Appeal and Town Council Review 
        a. The approval, with or without conditions, or denial by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town staff of an application shall be final unless, within twenty (20) days from the date of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s or staff’s decision, the applicant files an appeal in writing to the Town Council. Such appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Town Clerk and shall indicate where, in the opinion of the appellant, the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town staff was in error. The Town Clerk shall schedule the appeal for Town Council review and the Town Council, at its meeting, shall uphold, modify or overrule the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission or staff. The decision of the Town Council shall be final.
        b. The Town Council shall have the right and prerogative to initiate its own review of any decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town staff and shall uphold, modify or overrule said decision. Council shall have twenty (20) days to initiate a review and the applicant shall be notified. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)12-20, Amended,  11/07/2012; (O)12-15, Amended,  10/03/2012; (O)12-11, Amended,  09/05/2012; (O)11-25, Amended,  10/05/2011)
E. Final Design Review 
    1. Final Design 
        a. The final design stage includes the review and approval of the final design, including the construction documents package composed of the following items:
            i. Final site plan and associated reports based on the approved conceptual site plan or tentative development plan in accordance with subsection D of this section;
            ii. Building plans;
            iii. Improvement plans;
            iv. Final architectural design plan based on the approved conceptual architectural design plan;
            v. Native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plans;
            vi. Landscape, irrigation, buffer yard, and water harvesting plans;
            vii. Final public art plan based on the approved conceptual public art plan.
        The aforementioned plans are subject to Town staff approval. To avoid delay in processing this application, the applicant shall provide all required information found on the Town’s submittal checklists.
        b. Final design submittals that comply with conceptual design approval may be approved by Town staff, subject to appeal to Town Council in accordance with subsection D.8 of this section.
        c. All construction drawings must be stamped by a registered architect or engineer licensed in the State of Arizona.
    2. Contents 
    All plan and document submittals shall contain the necessary application and supporting data as specified by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Town Engineer, and Town Building Official.
    3. Final Design Review Submission 
    The submittal shall be checked by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Town Engineer, and Town Building Official for completeness. If incomplete, the submittal shall be returned to the applicant with deficiencies noted.
    4. Final Design Process 
        a. Copies of all construction documents listed in subsection E.1.a of this section shall be distributed to the following review offices:
            i. Zoning for compliance to public objectives, giving special attention to conformance to the approved conceptual site plan, including design principles and standards as set forth in subsection D.5 of this section and Addendum A of the zoning code, native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation, water harvesting, and landscaping requirements of Section 27.6.
            ii. Engineering for review of the proposed street system; street plans and compliance with Town street standards; determination of street and drainage/hydrology improvement and maintenance requirements; location and type of landscaping, irrigation, and water harvesting methods and locations; and water and sewerage disposal proposals.
            iii. Permitting Division for review of the building plans.
            iv. Oro Valley Water Utility for water plans.
            v. Fire District for review of specific features of proposed development relating to fire protection.
            vi. County Health Department and Pima County Wastewater Management Department for review of water and sewerage and public health and welfare.
            vii. Where the land abuts a State highway, to the Arizona Department of Transportation for specific recommendations regarding right-of-way and intersection design.
            viii. Appropriate utilities for review.
            ix. Other agencies that may be affected.
        b. The reviewing offices shall transmit their comments, conditions, and recommendations in writing to the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Town Building Official, and Town Engineer, who shall consider these recommendations in their decision for approval.
        c. Information Regarding Sanitary Sewerage 
        As a prerequisite of construction documents review, the applicant shall have informed the County Health Department and/or Pima County Wastewater Management Department of the proposed, tentative plans and learned the general requirements for sewage disposal as applied to the subject location.
    5. Final Design Approval Process 
    If all elements of the final design submittal meet all Town requirements of this section, the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Town Engineer, and Town Building Official may approve the final design, which includes improvement plans; building plans; native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plans; landscape, irrigation, buffer yard and water harvesting plans; and final site plan and associated reports, final architectural design plan, and final public art plan based on the approved conceptual plan.
    6. Significance and Basis of Construction Documents Approval 
    Construction documents approval constitutes authorization for the submittal of financial assurances and issuance of permits. Construction documents approval is based upon the following terms:
        a. The conditions under which approval of the construction documents is granted will not be changed prior to the expiration date.
        b. Approval shall expire if improvements have not been started within two (2) years of the date of approval of the final design. A request to extend the time beyond two (2) years must be submitted in writing to the Town Council within two (2) years of the date of approval. Before such extension is granted, the Town Council shall review the existing financial assurances to ensure that the required improvements have been made. If the approved final design is abandoned, the Town will return the financial assurances less any expenses the Town has incurred.
        c. Building plans are subject to the adopted expiration period of the Town Permitting Division.
        d. When improvement plans have been completed and approved by the Town Engineer, financial assurances may be submitted to the Town as provided in Section 26.6. Earthwork and improvements may begin following approval and acceptance of the financial assurances and all grading permit checklist items, as determined by the Town Engineer.
    7. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be permitted to approve minor changes to Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council approved conceptual plans in order to avoid the delay of using the normal review process. Minor, common sense changes or alterations include those that:
        a. Are reasonably similar to the approved plan;
        b. Benefit the Town or the environment;
        c. Are consistent with similarly situated property;
        d. Do not significantly affect building or wall mass or streetscape;
        e. Do not significantly affect final plats or final design, other than administrative changes;
        f. Achieve the same intent as the approved conceptual design. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)12-20, Amended,  11/07/2012; (O)12-11, Amended,  09/05/2012)
F. Final Plat 
    1. Final Plat 
        a. The final plat includes the final design of the subdivision and all other elements required by State statute and the subdivision requirements of Chapter 26. The final plat and plans shall be submitted by the subdivider for review and action by the Town Council. Final plat approval is required before any improvements such as grading, sewers, water and paving can begin in a subdivision.
        b. Final subdivision plats that comply with conceptual design approval shall be forwarded to Town Council for action.
    2. Zoning Requirements 
    The proposed use of the tract shall conform to the specific requirements for the zoning district within which it is located and any zoning amendment necessary shall have been authorized by the Town Council prior to filing of the final plat.
    3. Utility Easements 
    It is the responsibility of the subdivider to provide on the final plat, prior to plat recordation, such easements in such location and width as required for utility purposes.
    4. Final Plat Preparation 
    The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this section, State statute, and as specified by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and Town Engineer, and shall substantially conform to the approved conceptual design.
    5. Final Plat Dedication 
    A statement of dedication of all streets, alleys, crosswalks, drainage ways, pedestrian ways and easements for public use signed by the person holding title of record, by persons holding titles as vendees under land contract and by spouses of said parties, shall be included in the final plat. If lands dedicated are mortgaged, the mortgagee shall also sign the plat. Execution of dedication shall be acknowledged and certified by a notary public.
    6. Required Certification 
    The following certifications are required:
        a. Certification by the registered civil engineer or registered land surveyor making sure that the plat is correct and accurate and that the monuments described in it have either been set or located as described. All maps shall contain the seal of a registered civil engineer or land surveyor.
        b. A floodplain statement prepared by the registrant.
        c. Certification by the Town Clerk of the date the map was approved by the Town Council.
        d. Certification of recordation by the County Recorder.
    7. Final Plat Review and Approval Procedures 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall assemble the recommendations of the various reviewing offices and submit them with his/her report to the Town Council. The Town Council shall consider the final plat at the next regular meeting.
        a. The Town Council shall consider the final plat at a regularly scheduled meeting, following approval of the improvement plans by the Town Engineer and acknowledgement by the Town Engineer that all assurances have been filed with the Town and shall be considered with the final plat.
        b. If the Town Council rejects the plat for any reason whatsoever, the reason therefor shall become part of the official record.
        c. Upon approval of the final plat by the Town Council, the Clerk shall transcribe a certificate of approval upon the plat, first ensuring that the other required certifications pursuant to subsection F.6 of this section have been duly signed, that required easements for utility purposes have been included on the plat, that engineering plans have been approved by the Town Engineer and assurances have been accepted.
        d. When the certificate of approval of the Town Council has been transcribed on the plat, the Clerk shall record the approved final plat in the Office of the Recorder of Pima County.
    8. Final Plat Amendments 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be permitted to approve minor plat amendments according to the following:
        a. Minor plat amendments include:
            i. Scrivener’s errors which are unintentional clerical mistakes made during the drafting, publishing or copying process. Scrivener’s errors include corrected courses, distances, monumentations, property information, updated street names, and similar technical items.
            ii. Adjustments to utility easements and building pads.
            iii. Property line modifications with concurrence from all affected parties.
            iv. Adjustments to floodplain and erosion hazard boundaries as approved by the Town Engineer.
            v. Driveway relocations as approved by the Town Engineer.
        b. Review 
        Criteria to evaluate minor plat amendments include:
            i. Must be in substantial conformance with the approved subdivision design (e.g., lot number and pattern, street configuration, subdivision boundary, etc.).
            ii. No material changes to the terms or conditions of the approved final plat.
            iii. No changes to open space designation.
            iv. No adverse impacts to an adjacent property, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or Town Engineer.
        c. Decision and Findings 
            i. If it is determined that the proposed final plat amendment complies with the minimum requirements of this section, the approved amendment shall be sent to the Pima County Recorder’s Office for recordation.
            ii. The Town Council shall be notified of any approval.
            iii. if it is determined that the proposed final plat amendment does not comply with the minimum requirements of this section, a letter of denial shall be issued to the applicant informing them that the request requires a Town Council approval in accordance with subsection F.7 of this section. ((O)16-06, Amended,  05/04/2016; (O)12-11, Amended,  09/05/2012)
G. Administrative Review of Minor Land Divisions 
    1. Purpose and Intent 
    The purpose of this section is to establish a review process for land divisions, other than subdivisions, by which owners and prospective purchasers can be advised whether a proposed division of land complies with the Town regulations. This review is intended to:
        a. Protect and promote the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare.
        b. Assure that newly created lots are of sufficient size to meet the requirements of the applicable zoning classification.
        c. Assure that all lots resulting from a minor land division will have adequate public street access.
        d. Assure adequate easements are available for utility services.
        e. Assure adequate access is available for emergency vehicles.
    2. Application Submittal and Decision 
    Prior to recording any minor land division, a property owner shall submit an application for minor land division to the Planning and Zoning Administrator (PZA). This application also constitutes the application for review by the DRC per subsection B of this section. This application shall be checked for completeness and, if incomplete, the submittal shall be returned to the applicant with deficiencies noted.
    3. Review 
    Criteria to evaluate the minor land division include:
        a. Whether the proposed minor land division constitutes a subdivision as defined in Chapter 31.
        b. If the proposed land division does not constitute a subdivision, whether:
            i. The lots resulting from the proposed minor land division conform to the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning classification of the property.
            ii. Adequate access is available to public street(s) from the proposed lot(s).
            iii. The location of any existing building on any lot resulting from the proposed land division complies with building setbacks for the applicable zone.
            iv. Provision of, and access to, public utilities can be accommodated.
            v. Access for emergency vehicles can be accommodated.
    4. Decision and Findings 
        a. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the review decision and findings within twenty (20) working days after the minor land division application is filed.
            i. If it is determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator (PZA) and Town Engineer that the proposed minor land division complies with minimum requirements of this section, a letter of approval shall be issued to the applicant together with an approved copy of the minor land division.
            ii. If it is determined that the proposed minor land division does not comply with minimum requirements of this section, a letter of denial shall be issued to the applicant.
        b. Compliance with Town ordinances and regulations not reviewed as part of the minor land division review process will be determined at the time of application for building permits when more detailed information is provided on the proposed development of each lot.
    5. Appeal 
    The applicant may appeal the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s decision to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Section 22.12.
    6. Compliance 
    No building permit or zoning compliance certificate shall be issued for development on any parcel that does not comply with the minor land division regulations of this section. ((O)12-11, Amended,  09/05/2012; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)07-29, Amended,  06/06/2007)
H. Prohibition Against Circumvention of Chapter 
    1. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall sell or lease, or offer for sale or lease, any lot or parcel of land which is within a subdivision, as defined in Chapter 31, without first having recorded a plat thereof in accordance with the provisions of this code.
    2. No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot or parcel of land that is not a part of a recorded subdivision plat or an approved minor land division until final design has been approved in accordance with subsection E of this section. ((O)17-05, Enacted,  06/07/2017)

Section 22.10 Grading Permit Procedures
A. Applicability 
Grading permits are required prior to grading as specified in Section 27.9.D.
B. Type 1 Grading Permits 
    1. Permit Application and Review 
        a. The grading permit application, grading plan, and other required materials should be submitted for review to the Town.
        [IMAGE: <OroValley22.10a.png>]
        b. The grading permit application shall be completed and signed by the owner or owner’s authorized representative.
        c. The grading plan will be reviewed for consistency with the applicable regulations and standards, and if approved, a grading permit will be issued. The grading permit may be issued with additional conditions as deemed necessary by the Town.
        d. If determined to be inadequate, the materials submitted will be returned for corrections. The applicant may resubmit, without additional fees, corrected plans, or materials necessary to conform to submittal requirements.
    2. Permit Issuance and Expiration 
        a. Upon issuance of a grading permit, a copy of the permit and approved plan shall be kept in a conspicuous and accessible location on the site.
        b. A grading permit shall be null and void if the authorized work has not been completed within 180 days of permit issuance.
    3. Permit Extensions and Reapplication 
        a. Upon written request by the permit holder, the Town may grant a single extension up to 180 days. Requests must be submitted prior to the date of expiration. Consideration will be given to extension requests when quantifiable evidence is submitted.
        b. A reapplication for a grading permit shall be treated as a new application. Fees and additional conditions may be imposed as a result.
    4. Inspections 
        a. Pre-grading (when required by subdivision plat notes): The inspector will verify limitations for building pad and other areas to be graded, and identify vegetation required to be salvaged. The grading limitations must be staked or otherwise clearly identified prior to inspection.
        b. Rough grading (to be done prior to construction of residence): The inspector will verify grading to be within limitations of approved plans. Certification of the building pad elevation by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer shall be presented to the inspector at this time.
        c. Final grading (to be done prior to final building inspection): The inspector will verify that all prescriptive requirements of the approved grading/site plan have been satisfied.
    5. Incomplete Final Grading; Temporary Occupancy 
        a. In the event that the final grading cannot be completed in its entirety, an assurance, in a form acceptable to the Town, may be posted to allow inspection and occupancy of the residence. This assurance shall be in an amount equivalent to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost to complete the work as shown on the approved grading plan and/or in compliance with this Code. A cashier’s check made payable to the Town is an acceptable form of assurance for this purpose.
        b. The determination of the cost of the remaining work shall be by bids acquired by the permittee. The building official shall make the final judgment as to the adequacy of the assurance amount.
        c. If the balance of the work has not been completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of the temporary certificate of occupancy, the Town may use the assurance to complete the work.
        d. When an assurance is to be posted as a temporary substitute for a final grading inspection, it will still be necessary to have adequate drainage away from the structure. In addition, temporary or permanent means of preventing silting onto public rights-of-way will be required.
C. Type 2 Grading Permits 
    1. Permit Application 
        a. The grading permit application, grading plan and other required materials should be submitted to the Town for review and approval.
        [IMAGE: <OroValley22.10c.png>]
        b. The grading permit application shall be completed and signed by the property owner or his/her authorized representative.
        c. At the discretion of the Town, grading assurances may be required in the form of assurance or other security acceptable to the Town. In the event that grading is not completed as approved, the assurances may be applied to:
            i. Eliminate potential hazardous conditions; or
            ii. Mitigate the effects of dust, drainage, erosion, visual scars or hazardous conditions in a manner acceptable to the Town.
    2. Permit Application Review 
        a. Grading plans and related submittals will be reviewed concurrent with the final plat or development plan (submitted after Planning and Zoning Commission approval), plant salvage and landscape plan for the project.
        b. Grading plans, soils and drainage reports will be reviewed for consistency with applicable regulations and standards, plant salvage and landscape plans and any conditions imposed upon rezoning, development plan or subdivision plat approval. Plans determined to be inadequate or incomplete will be returned for correction and resubmittal. Where inconsistency between plans is evident, the appropriate plan will be resubmitted for review and approval.
        c. The Town will provide written review comments and/or redlined plans to the applicant upon review. Should the grading plans need to be submitted three (3) or more times for review by the Town, the applicant shall be required to pay an additional review fee at the time of the third and each subsequent resubmittal of the grading plans for review by the Town.
        d. Prior to approval of the grading plan, soils report and drainage report, the Town may inspect the site to determine that the submittals are current and reflect existing conditions.
        e. The Town shall require the plans and specifications to be modified to make them consistent with this Code and/or any prior conditions placed upon approval of the project. A grading permit may be issued with additional conditions.
        f. When the grading plans (and improvement plans) meet applicable Town Codes to the satisfaction of the Town, the Town Community Development Director or his/her designee will sign the approval block on said plans.
    3. Preliminary Grading Plan 
    A preliminary grading plan shall be submitted concurrently with the initial submittal of a preliminary plat and development plans.
    4. Permit Issuance and Expiration 
        a. Issuance: Grading permits may not be issued by the Town until the Town Council has approved the final plat or development plan and the necessary assurances have been posted. A copy of the permit and approved plan shall be kept in a conspicuous and accessible location on the site.
        b. Expiration: A grading permit shall be null and void if the authorized work has not been completed within twelve (12) months of permit issuance.
        c. At the discretion of the Town, a preliminary Type 2 Grading Permit may be issued prior to final plat or development plan approval by the Town Council for the purposes of clearing, brushing and grubbing only, provided:
            i. The Town staff has reviewed the grading plans and determined that said plan is viable; and
            ii. The preliminary grading will occur in accordance with the approved preliminary grading plan and no clearing, brushing or grubbing will take place within twenty-five (25) feet from the boundaries of the future development envelope, exclusive of approved entry points; and
            iii. Restoration assurances for the preliminary grading are collected prior to issuance of the preliminary permit; and
            iv. The Town has received a copy of an archaeological clearance letter; and
            v. Town staff members responsible for signing/approving the preliminary grading permit concur with issuance of the preliminary grading permit.
    5. Permit Extension and Reapplication 
        a. Upon written request by the permit holder, the Town may grant a single extension of up to one hundred eighty (180) days. Requests must be submitted prior to the date of expiration. Consideration will be given to extension requests when quantifiable evidence is submitted.
        b. A reapplication (after the one (1) time extension) for a grading permit shall be treated as a new application and additional conditions may be imposed as a result.
    6. Changes to Type 2 Grading Permits 
        a. Hazardous conditions: If drainage problems, flood hazards or other hazards occur, the Town may require that engineering modifications be submitted in a report and that the grading design be modified.
        b. Non-hazardous conditions: If unanticipated non-hazardous conditions are encountered during grading, which are beyond the scope of the grading permit, the permit holder may request engineering modifications in a report to be reviewed and approved by the Town.
    7. General Inspections 
        a. All grading which required a Type 2 Grading Permit will be inspected by the Town. The grading permit applicant (or applicant’s representative) shall request that a representative of the Town inspect or be on site for the following:
            i. Limits of grading and temporary fencing to protect natural areas; and
            ii. Rough grading to be done prior to construction of the project. The inspector will verify grading to be within the limitations of approved plans. Certification of the building pad elevation by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer shall be presented to the inspector at this time; and
            iii. Aggregate base course (ABC) material prior to paving and during compaction testing of the same; and
            iv. Paving of public and private streets and compaction/material testing of the same; and
            v. Open water line (and other utilities as specified by the Town) trenches and backfill materials prior to burial of trench; and
            vi. Any grading activity in addition to what was approved on the grading plans; and
            vii. Stockpiling areas on or off site; and
            viii. Any specific grading activities or areas identified by the Town at the pre-construction meeting (held between staff and the contractor at the time of permit issuance) or during the course of construction activities; and
            ix. Any on-site and off-site compaction testing or asphalt coring.
        b. The permit holder shall provide the Town with an inspection request notification at least twenty-four (24) (preferably forty-eight (48)) hours prior to (or as specified on the grading permit) the time the inspection is needed.
        c. The Town will provide an inspector within two (2) working days from the time the inspection request is received, with the exception of the final grading inspection done in conjunction with the release of assurance.
        d. The final grading inspection shall be done with the release of assurances for civil work or finalization of the project. Final grading inspections may be warranted at an earlier point in the project process.
        e. If the Town finds site conditions are not as stated in the approved grading permit conditions or approved grading plan, the Town may order work authorized by the grading permit to stop pursuant to subsection F.3 of this section.
        f. Whenever grading work requiring Town inspection is concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the Town may require, by written notice, that such work is:
            i. Exposed, for inspection by the Town, at no cost to the Town; or
            ii. Certified by the project civil engineer as being in conformance with approved plans and applicable regulations.
    8. Final Grading Inspection 
        a. All required grading work should be completed in accordance with the grading permit prior to final grading inspection by the Town and full release of assurances or final release of the project.
        b. Where conditions of a grading permit or grading plan include the establishment of vegetation or other final site grading work that extends beyond the expiration of the grading permit, the Town will make inspections per subsection C.7 of this section.
    9. Maintenance of Revegetation 
    The maintenance of revegetated areas shall be in accordance with Section 27.6.L of this Code. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
D. Type 3 Grading Permit 
    1. Permit Application and Review 
        a. Upon issuance of a grading permit, a copy of the permit and approved plan shall be kept in a conspicuous and accessible location on the site.
        [IMAGE: <OroValley22.10d.png>]
        b. A grading permit shall be null and void if the authorized work has not been completed within 180 days of permit issuance.
    2. Permit Extension and Reapplication 
        a. Upon written request by the permit holder, the Town may grant a single extension up to one hundred eighty (180) days. Requests must be submitted prior to the date of expiration. Consideration will be given to extension requests when quantifiable evidence is submitted.
        b. A reapplication for a grading permit shall be treated as a new application and additional conditions may be imposed as a result.
    3. Permit Inspections 
        a. Prior to commencement of grading (or stockpiling), the Town shall inspect the site where said activity is to occur. The applicant shall clearly identify areas to be graded (or earthen material stockpiled). Vegetation to be salvaged shall be identified.
        b. During construction/grading activity, the Town may occasionally inspect to ensure erosion/drainage control measures are in place, functional and maintained.
        c. Upon completion of grading activity, the Town shall inspect to verify that all prescriptive requirements of the approved grading plan and permit have been satisfied. The Town will do a similar inspection upon removal of stockpiled material.
E. Exceptions and Interpretation Review 
    1. Exceptions 
        a. Scope: An exception from a provision of this section may be applied for, and may be granted by the Town Council, when the intent of this section can be met by other means and when strict application of these provisions could require unnecessary disturbance to the land, would create a hazard to adjacent property, would be materially detrimental to persons residing in the vicinity or would be materially detrimental to the public welfare in general.
        b. Findings: Applications for Grading Exceptions shall address each of the below findings. The Planning and Zoning Commission will review and provide recommendation to the Town Council on all applications for grading exceptions at scheduled public hearings. When reviewing requests for grading exceptions, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council shall consider each of the findings and address them in their deliberations. To grant an exception the Town Council shall find that the request addresses the concerns of each finding and is in substantial compliance with the findings as a whole.
            i. The exception meets the intent and purposes of this code;
            ii. Granting the exception constitutes the minimum to allow the proposed improvement;
            iii. The conditions on the property are unique such that strict adherence to this section would cause an unnecessary hardship which substantially limits the preservation and enjoyment of property rights;
            iv. The exception imposes conditions so as not to constitute a granting of special privilege; and
            v. That the exception will not be materially detrimental to persons residing in the vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood or the public welfare in general.
        c. Conditions: At the Town Council’s discretion, conditions may be imposed on the exception that will:
            i. Assure that the intent and purpose of this chapter are met; and
            ii. Provide adequately for the protection of surrounding property owners and residents; and
            iii. Provide mitigation of scarring and restore the site to a natural appearance in terms of contours and vegetation, where possible.
        d. Application: The request for exceptions shall be made on a form provided by the Town. Hearing fees shall be required.
        e. Review and notice: The Planning and Zoning Commission will hold a duly noticed public hearing on the exception request and notice of the hearing will be mailed to all property owners within six hundred (600) feet of the grading site prior to such hearing.
        f. If any portion of a subdivision falls within the required notification area, the entire subdivision (as defined by subdivision name or unit number) may be required to be notified if the impacts of the proposal would have impacts affecting the entire subdivision or neighborhood, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        g. The decision of the Town Council on a grading exception shall be final.
    2. Requests for Interpretation 
        a. Scope: Upon request, the appropriate Town representative shall render an interpretation of the regulations of this chapter. Should any person be aggrieved of said interpretation, a request for review of that interpretation may be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission. At a subsequent meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the interpretation in the matter and render its decision, either to uphold the interpretation or to make a different interpretation of this chapter.
        b. The request for review of an interpretation shall cite:
            i. The disputed interpretation;
            ii. The words alleged to have been misinterpreted.
        c. Application: The request shall be made on a form provided by the Planning and Zoning Department and will be heard within sixty (60) days. Hearing fees shall be required.
        d. Review and notice: The Planning and Zoning Commission will hold a public hearing on the interpretation issue and notice of the hearing will be mailed to the applicant and all property owners within six hundred (600) feet of the grading site prior to such hearing. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)12-11, Amended,  09/05/2012; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
F. Grading Permit Authorization, Liability, Enforcement and Penalties 
    1. Authorization to Proceed with Work 
        a. The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work that is described or illustrated on the application for the permit, or on the site plans and specifications as approved by the Town. The issuance of a permit, or the approval of drawings and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, nor the approval of, any violation of, or deviation from, the provisions of this or any other Town ordinance, code or regulation. A permit issued shall become invalid if, in the work completed, a violation of this Section or deviation there from ensued. When such violation occurs, the permit shall be deemed to be canceled and the ground shall be restored to the condition it was in prior to start of the grading work.
        b. The issuance of a permit, based upon drawings and specifications, shall not prevent the Town from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said drawings and specifications, or from stopping unlawful construction operations being carried on thereunder.
        c. The Town may require grading operations and project designs be modified if weather-generated problems occur that were not considered at the time the grading permit was issued.
    2. Liability 
    Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions hereof, or with any conditions imposed in the permit issued hereunder, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the Town for damage to other persons or property.
    3. Enforcement 
        a. The enforcement of this Grading Ordinance and conditions of the grading permit shall be in accordance with this Section.
        b. If the Town makes a determination that noncompliance with the conditions of the grading permit, or any condition imposed by rezoning, plat or plan approval exists, the Town may issue a stop-work order and/or citation. Further, the Town shall hold in abeyance, by written notice, any/all Town review of other submittals related to the subject project and the issuance of Town permits for any aspect of it until remedial actions have received the written approval of the Town.
    4. Stop-Work Orders 
        a. Whenever the Town determines that grading does not comply with this ordinance or the grading permit conditions, or that the soil or conditions are not as stated on the permit, the Town may order the work stopped by written notice served on any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and/or issue a citation.
        b. Any such person shall immediately stop such work until written authorization is granted by the Town to proceed with the work.
    5. Citations 
    If deemed necessary and appropriate, citations for grading violations may be issued. The Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator will issue the citation. The Town Engineer shall co-sign citations issued for grading violations occurring within Town right-of-way.
    6. Penalties 
        a. Failure to obtain a grading permit: Unless exempted by this ordinance, failure to obtain a grading permit prior to commencement of grading shall be a violation of this ordinance. However, the Town may issue an exception permit if the Town finds that an emergency existed that made it impossible first to obtain a permit. Notification must be provided to the town within seventy-two (72) hours of occurrence.
        b. Violations: A violation of this ordinance may result in issuance by the Town of a stop-work order and/or a citation and penalties in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Section. Payment of fine shall not relieve any person from complying with the requirements of this ordinance.
        c. Penalties: Failure to comply with the approved grading plan, conditions of the grading permit, and/or grading not in compliance with this ordinance shall cause immediate revocation of all permits. At the Town’s discretion, a permit may be issued for the purposes of getting the illegally graded site into compliance with the grading ordinance, for the purposes of re-establishing the grades approved on the grading plan, and for replacing and maintaining protected native plant materials or public property destroyed as a result of the illegal grading operation. New permits for continuing the project shall not be issued until the required fines are paid to the Town. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)

Section 22.11 Native Plant Preservation, Salvage and Mitigation Plans
(Repealed by (O)09-20)

Section 22.12 Appeals From Administrative Decisions
A. General 
Appeals may be taken to the BOA by persons aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by a decision of an administrative official, within 30 days, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and with the BOA, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Said appeal shall be filed on a form provided by the Town Clerk.
[IMAGE: <OroValley22.12.png>]
B. Effect of Appeal 
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board that, by reason of the fact stated in the certificate, the stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties in interest and the public.
C. Majority Vote Necessary 
The concurring vote of a majority of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order or decision of an administrative official, or to pass or to affect any variations from the terms and conditions of this Code.

Section 22.13 Variances
A. Application 
Application for a variance of zoning regulations shall be made to the BOA in the form of a written application. Said application shall be filed with the Town Clerk upon forms provided by the BOA and shall be accompanied by:
[IMAGE: <OroValley22.13.png>]
    1. Plans and description sufficient to indicate the nature of the project involved and the proposed use with ground plans and elevations of all proposed buildings.
    2. Evidence satisfactory to the BOA of the ability and intention of the applicant to proceed with actual construction work in accordance with said plans within six (6) months after issuance of the variance.
    3. A filing fee according to the fee schedule adopted by the Town Council. The owner of a nonconforming sign shall not be required to pay a filing fee when applying for a variance from the ordinance that renders the sign nonconforming.
    4. From the time of filing the application until the time of such hearing, the application and all maps, plans and other accompanying data shall be available for public inspection during office hours at the office of the Town Clerk.
B. Hearings and Notice 
Upon receipt in proper form of any such application, the BOA shall proceed to hold a public hearing upon said application not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than fifteen (15) days, after such filing, at which time all persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Such BOA shall cause one (1) notice of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and one (1) notice to be posted on the subject property, giving at least fifteen (15) days’ notice of said hearing, and the time and place where said hearing will be held. Said notice, both as published and posted, shall also show the nature of the variance or exception requested and state that anyone wanting to protest may appear in person or by writing. All property owners within three hundred (300) feet must be notified.
C. Findings 
A variance from the provisions of this Code shall not be authorized unless the Board shall find upon sufficient evidence:
    1. That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the property referred to in the application including its size, shape, topography, location or surroundings which do not apply to other properties in the district; and
    2. That special circumstances were not created by the owner or applicant; and
    3. That the authorizing of the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; and
    4. That any variance granted imposes such conditions as will assure that the authorizing of the adjustment shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is located; and
    5. That the authorizing of the variance will not be materially detrimental to persons residing in the vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood or the public welfare in general.
D. Action 
The Board shall prescribe, in connection with any variance, such conditions as the Board may deem necessary in order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this Code. Such conditions may include, among other things, a limitation of the time for which such variance shall be valid. Violation of any such condition shall be a violation of this Code and such violation shall render the variance null and void.
E. Review 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board after hearing on application made by any taxpayer or municipal officer may petition for a writ of certiorari to review the Board’s decision pursuant to A.R.S. Section 9-465 (1956) as amended.

Section 22.14 Administrative Approval Required
A. Administrative Approval Required 
The Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve permits for special uses (see Chapter 31 for definition) for any temporary use of property, developed or undeveloped, within the Town of Oro Valley. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
B. Criteria for Approval 
Upon staff certification that all required information has been submitted, the materials will be disseminated to the Police Department, Building Codes Department, the Fire Protection/Emergency Service provider, the Town Clerk’s office and any other department requiring review of the plans, based on the special use requested. Each reviewer will be required to provide comment to the Planning and Zoning Administrator within five (5) working days of receipt. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall consider the responses from the reviewing departments and the potential negative impacts of the proposed special use on surrounding properties with respect to:
    1. Damage or nuisance arising from noise, smoke, odor, dust, vibration or illumination;
    2. Hazard to persons and property from possible explosion, contamination, fire or flood;
    3. Unusual volume or character of traffic not adequately addressed through traffic control measures; and
    4. Compatibility of said special use with the surrounding area. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
C. Approval and Issuance of Special Use Permit 
    1. If all four (4) findings are met and all Town concerns are or can be satisfied, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve and authorize issuance of the requested special use permit. A time limit, not to exceed sixty (60) days, and any other conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, may be imposed as conditions.
    2. At his/her discretion, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may grant temporary modifications to Zoning Code requirements specific to the needs of a special use on a case-by-case basis. Any such modification approved shall not be construed as precedent setting, nor shall it be deemed applicable to any other special or permitted use.
D. Other Permits Required 
Subsequent to approval, the applicant for the special use permit must obtain from the Town Clerk all necessary business and tax licenses required to operate within the Town. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
E. Revocation of Special Use Permit 
The violation of any condition imposed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator on special use permit approval shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and, subject to twenty-four (24) hours’ notice, said permit may be revoked. If revocation of a special use permit occurs, said special use must be curtailed at the end of the twenty-four (24) hour notification period. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)

Section 22.15 Public Participation
A. Purpose 
This section provides requirements for neighborhood meetings for proposed development projects. The purpose of promoting public participation in the development review process is to:
    1. Build trust through effective public outreach and communication.
    2. Promote fair and open dialogue between stakeholders, applicants, staff, board and commission members, and the Town Council.
    3. Inform and educate stakeholders regarding the development process, review criteria, and planning and zoning regulations.
    4. Provide stakeholders with opportunities to ask questions, identify issues, and forge solutions early in the development process.
    5. Promote transparent conveyance of agreed upon solutions to staff, boards and commissions, and Town Council.
    6. Promote consistent implementation of agreed upon solutions through the development review process. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
B. Applicability 
    1. General 
    Neighborhood meetings are required for the following development applications:
        a. Type 1 and Type 2 General Plan amendments.
        b. Rezonings.
        c. Conditional use permits.
        d. Repealed by (O)16-02.
        e. Conceptual site and landscape plans, excluding final site plans, final plats and landscape plans not associated with a conceptual site plan.
        f. Any other proposed action that results in significant change in the development intensity or compatibility with existing development as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    2. Exceptions 
    If a project entails more than one (1) of the aforementioned development applications, a single public participation process may be followed, unless substantial changes have occurred to the proposal or significant issues are identified. When the neighborhood meeting requirements are met for Type 1 and Type 2 General Plan amendments or a rezoning, further meetings may not be required if the following conditions are met:
        a. No substantial changes to the approved concept or tentative development plan.
        b. There are no unresolved issues related to the application, as defined in subsection B.3 of this section.
    3. Exemption from Neighborhood Meeting Requirements 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator may determine that a neighborhood meeting is not required in accordance with the following criteria:
        a. There are no residential uses or zones within six hundred (600) feet of the subject property, excluding areas designated as right-of-way, open space or drainage easement.
        b. If it is determined that the project/proposal is:
            i. Consistent with similarly situated property;
            ii. Not substantially affecting adjacent land use, streetscape, or views; or
            iii. Substantially conforms to an approved tentative development plan.
    Any project exempted under this section found to have unresolved neighborhood issues or concerns at any point in the development review process may be required to adhere to the neighborhood meeting requirements. ((O)17-01, Amended,  01/18/2017; (O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
C. Administration 
Neighborhood meetings shall be organized by Town Planning and Zoning Department staff in the manner specified in the public participation and notification policy. This policy is subject to review and periodic update by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
D. Public Outreach Plan (POP) 
    1. The applicant must submit a POP that meets the requirements established by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    2. The POP must be submitted after pre-application review and before neighborhood meetings are scheduled.
    3. The POP must include:
        a. A description of the project.
        b. Identification of interested stakeholders, including homeowners associations that are affected by the proposal.
        c. A proposed neighborhood meeting process.
    4. The POP must incorporate the neighborhood meeting requirements noted in subsection F of this section. The applicant may propose an alternative process if it is designed to include key stakeholders in a meaningful way, and is consistent with subsection A of this section, Purpose, and the public participation and notification policy. Any alternative proposal will be subject to Planning and Zoning Administrator approval. At a minimum, the POP must contain educational and issue identification and resolution elements, as defined in the public participation and notification policy. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
E. Public Outreach Report 
    1. The applicant must submit a public outreach report as part of the project application.
    2. The public outreach report must include:
        a. A list of neighborhood meetings, noting when and where they were held; the number of people that attended; and copies of sign-in sheets.
        b. A list of meeting notification methods used.
        c. Copies of comment letters, petitions, and other pertinent information received from residents and other interested parties.
        d. A summary of the issues and concerns that were raised.
        e. A list of solutions that were agreed upon.
        f. A list of issues that were not resolved, with an explanation of why solutions were not achieved. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
F. Neighborhood Meeting Requirements 
    1. Number of Meetings 
        a. A minimum of two (2) neighborhood meetings are required with the following exceptions:
            i. One (1) meeting may be sufficient if the project is of very limited scope and no relevant public concerns have been expressed, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
            ii. The Planning and Zoning Administrator will announce at the meeting if additional meeting(s) are required to provide more information or to allow for more discussion on the request.
            iii. If the project type, layout, or previously agreed upon mitigation solutions are substantially changed after meeting with neighbors, an additional meeting may be required as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    2. Meeting Location 
    Neighborhood meetings must be held in a facility that:
        a. Is accessible to the general public, such as a Town-owned facility, school, house of worship, or community recreation center; and
        b. Provides access for persons with disabilities.
    3. Scheduling 
        a. Neighborhood meetings should typically be scheduled on a weekday evening so that working residents may attend, but may be adapted to neighborhood needs, as appropriate.
        b. The first meeting must be scheduled prior to formal submittal of the application.
        c. The second meeting is required prior to a formal Town public meeting or hearing.
        d. Subsequent meetings may be held during the public hearing process to provide the opportunity to understand resident’s position relative to the request.
    4. Meeting Notification 
        a. Notice shall be provided to all persons and entities identified in the public outreach plan. At a minimum, public notice shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting, including:
            i. A description and the location, date and time of the meeting shall be mailed to property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet for General Plan amendments and to property owners within six hundred (600) feet for all other applications. The notification area may be expanded to include entire neighborhoods or subdivisions which may be impacted by the request, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
            ii. Sign(s) shall be posted on or near the property and shall be a minimum of three (3) feet by four (4) feet in area and use five (5) inch letters for the title.
            iii. Other additional methods identified in the public outreach plan, as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    5. Facilitation 
        a. A Town-approved facilitator may be utilized to assist with neighborhood meetings, as defined in the public participation and notification policy.
        b. If professional facilitation services are required as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, the applicant is responsible for the fees incurred for such services. ((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011; (O)09-17, Enacted,  11/04/2009)

CHAPTER 23 ZONING DISTRICTS

Sections:
Section 23.1 Districts and Boundaries Thereof
Section 23.2 Effect of Districts
Section 23.3 Table of Permitted Uses
Section 23.4 Table of Dimensional Requirements
Section 23.5 Measurements and Exceptions
Section 23.6 Property Development Standards for Single-Family Residential Districts
Section 23.7 Property Development Standards for Multi-Family Residential Districts
Section 23.8 Property Development Standards for Nonresidential Districts
Section 23.9 Property Development Standards for Planned Districts

Section 23.1 Districts and Boundaries Thereof
A. Division of Town into Districts; Enumeration 
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and separate the use of land, building and structures; and to regulate and to limit the type, height and bulk of buildings and structures; and to regulate the areas of yards and other open areas around and between building and structures; and to regulate the density of dwelling units, the Town is hereby divided into the following districts:
    1. Single-Family Residential Districts 
    R1-300    Single-Family Residential District - 300,000 sq. ft. per lot
    R1-144    Single-Family Residential District - 144,000 sq. ft. per lot
    R1-72    Single-Family Residential District - 72,000 sq. ft. per lot
    R1-43    Single-Family Residential District - 43,560 sq. ft. per lot
    R1-36    Single-Family Residential District - 36,000 sq. ft. per lot
    R1-20    Single-Family Residential District - 20,000 sq. ft. per lot
    R1-10    Single-Family Residential District - 10,000 sq. ft. per lot
    R1-7    Single-Family Residential District - 7,000 sq. ft. per lotTech Park (T-P) Zoning District Side and Rear setback requirements when adjacent to residentially zoned property
    2. Multi-Family Residential Districts 
    R-4    Townhouse Residential District
    R-4R    Resort District
    R-S    Residential Service District
    R-6    Multi-Family Residential District
    3. Commercial and Other Districts 
    C-N     Neighborhood Commercial District
    C-1    Commercial District
    C-2    Commercial District
    PS    Private Schools District
    T-P    Technological Park
    P-1    Parking District
    POS    Parks and Open Space
    4. Planned Area Districts 
    PRD    Planned Residential District
    PAD     Planned Area Development
    5. Supplementary Districts 
    HDZ    Hillside Development Zone
    ORSCOD    Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Overlay District ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
B. Purpose of Districts 
    1. R1-300 Single-Family Residential District 
    This district is intended to promote and preserve rural, single-family residential development. The district permits airparks and other uses that are compatible with the large single-family lots predominated by open space.
    2. R1-144 Single-Family Residential District 
    This district is intended to promote and preserve suburban-rural single-family residential development. The large lot size permits agricultural uses and promotes open space.
    3. R1-72 Single-Family Residential District 
    This district is intended to promote and preserve suburban-rural single-family residential development, with lots large enough to accommodate on-site sewer systems.
    4. R1-43 Single-Family Residential District 
    This district provides for low-density residential development with lots large enough to accommodate on-site sewer systems.
    5. R1-36 Single-Family Residential District 
    This district provides for low-density residential development.
    6. R1-20 Single-Family Residential District 
    This district provides for low-density detached single-family residential development.
    7. R1-10 Single-Family Residential District 
    This district provides for medium density detached single-family residential development.
    8. R1-7 Single-Family Residential District 
    This district provides for medium high-density detached single-family residential development.
    9. SDH-6 Site Delivered Housing District 
    The purpose of this zone is to provide for properly planned and orderly developed manufactured or site delivered housing subdivisions. The principal land use is single-family dwellings and uses incidental or accessory thereto.
    10. R-4 Townhouse Residential District 
    This district is intended to provide for relatively low-density development having individual ownership and built-in privacy, either in the form of party wall construction or enclosed courtyards.
    11. R-4R Resort District 
    The Resort District is intended primarily to provide for accommodations for seasonal visitors. The controlled access, deep setbacks, and landscaping requirements are intended to enhance the value, safety, and aesthetic quality of both the highway frontage and the adjacent property.
    12. R-S Residential Service District 
    This district is composed of certain land and structures used primarily to provide administrative, clerical and professional offices of a residential scale and character to serve nearby residential and commercial areas as well as the Town as a whole. These uses are characterized by low volume of direct daily customer contact. Secondarily, this district provides for medium density residential uses. This district is designed to be a transitional zone and should be used to buffer low density residential uses from more intense land uses, districts and heavily traveled transportation routes. The property development standards, while strict in order to protect adjacent low density residential uses, are designed to be flexible enough to allow experimentation in office and housing design and to allow housing constructed within this district to incorporate its own protection from more intense adjacent uses.
    13. R-6 Multi-Family Residential District 
    This district is intended to support multi-family residential development, to accommodate an increased density of population and to provide recreational and aesthetic amenities, which enhance the residential character of a multi-family project and produce a high quality environment.
    This district also furnishes employment opportunities, by providing for business and professional office complexes on a residential scale, with low silhouettes, a variety of separate building masses and landscaped open space, to be compatible with surrounding residential uses.
    14. C-N Neighborhood Commercial District 
    This district provides small office and service centers within walking/biking distance or a short drive from adjacent neighborhoods. The center shall be designed to fit into the adjacent neighborhoods, serve as a neighborhood activity center, and provide a combination of uses that offer basic goods and services that meet the needs of the nearby residents. A mixture of office, retail, and residential is enabled in the C-N zone and is anticipated to provide a physically and functionally integrated combination of uses.
    Sites should be designed to accommodate multiple, smaller uses rather than a single, large use. C-N zoning may be found along multi-use paths, near parks, immediately between or among higher density residential developments and municipal service sites. It is most appropriate at the intersection of collector streets or a collector street and an arterial road.
    15. C-1 Commercial District 
    This district provides for large scale office complexes and medium sized retail centers, located on a major arterial. Through buffering and other mitigation measures, C-1 centers must be compatible with adjoining residential neighborhoods, while satisfying commercial and service business needs of nearby neighborhoods.
    16. C-2 Commercial District 
    This district provides for commercial activities designed to serve a regional area with emphasis on shopping centers and group commercial developments. Uses must incorporate extensive mitigation measures to harmoniously co-exist with nearby neighborhoods. C-2 uses are substantial traffic generators and should be located near the intersection of two principal arterials.Senior Care Use and Commercial Zoning Districts
    17. PS Private Schools District 
    This district provides for religious facilities and private educational facilities.
    18. T-P Technological Park District 
    This district provides for administrative, research and specialized manufacturing activities at a low intensity. Uses include a mix of light industrial, professional office, office/showroom, office/warehouse, ancillary retail services and related uses. All uses shall be of a non-nuisance type and minimal scale having low silhouette, a variety of separate building masses and landscaped areas. This district is to provide employment near residential areas and the development standards are intended to be compatible to adjacent residential uses and provide a park-like setting for employment.
    19. Parks and Open Space District 
    This district is primarily for those areas of the Town where it is desirable and necessary to provide permanent park, public open space, and in general, areas to be preserved in their present or managed state. ((O)11-02, Amended,  02/02/2011; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
C. Boundaries of Districts – Rules Where Uncertainty May Arise 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the District Map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance, the following rules apply:
    1. The district boundaries are either street lines or alley lines unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street lines or alley lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
    2. Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the property has been, or may hereafter be, divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.
    3. In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.

Section 23.2 Effect of Districts
A. Effect of Establishment of Zoning Districts 
No building or land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which such building or land shall be located with the exception of the following:
    1. Uses lawfully established as of the effective date of this comprehensive amendment.
    2. Conditional uses when allowed by permit in accordance with the zoning district in which such building or land shall be located.
    3. Analogous uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Analogous uses shall not be any more deleterious, obnoxious, or harmful in terms of traffic generation, use impacts, and types of activities involved.
    4. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)

Section 23.3 Table of Permitted Uses
The Table of Permitted Uses in this Section sets forth the uses permitted within the base zone districts.
A. Uses Permitted by Right 
A “P” indicates that a use is permitted as a matter-of-right in the respective zone district, subject to compliance with all applicable regulations in this Code.
B. Conditional Special Uses 
A “C” indicates that a use category or specific use type is allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 22.5, Use Permits.
C. Ancillary Uses 
An “A” indicates that the use is permitted as ancillary to the primary uses within the district.
D. Uses Not Allowed 
A blank cell indicates that a use type is not allowed in the respective zone district, unless it is expressly allowed by other regulations of this Code.
E. Uses Subject to Specific Regulations 
Numbers in the final column of the Table of Permitted Uses indicate that the listed use is subject to use-specific regulations in one or more districts in which the use is allowed, which can be found within Section 25.1.B, unless otherwise indicated. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
|                 |                     |                  Single-Family                   |     Multi-Family      |   Commercial    |    Other     |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
|       USE       |      SPECIFIC       | R1- | R1- | R1- | R1- | R1- | R1- | R1- | R1 | S | R- | R-4R | R-S | R-6 | C-N | C-1 | C-2 | PS | T-P | P |   NOTES   |
|    CATEGORY     |         USE         | 300 | 144 | 72  | 43  | 36  | 20  | 10  | -7 | D | 4  |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 |        TYPE         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    | H |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     | O |           |
|                 |                     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    | 6 |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     | S |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| ACCESSORY USES                                                                                                                                                |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Accessory       | Accessory           | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P   | P | 23.6      |
| Uses            | Buildings           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.2.A    |
|                 | and                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Uses                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| AGRICULTURAL USES                                                                                                                                             |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Agriculture     | Commercial          | C   | C   | C   |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.4  |
|                 | Stables             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Farms               | C   | P   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C  |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.10 |
|                 | and                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Ranches             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Marketing           |     | P   |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.18 |
|                 | of                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Products            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Raised              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | on                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | the                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Premises            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Medical             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | P   | P   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.19 |
|                 | Marijuana           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Dispensary          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Off-site            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Cultivation         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Location,           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Designated          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Caregiver           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Cultivation         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Location,           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Designated          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Qualifying          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Patient             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Cultivation         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Location            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Plant               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | P   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Nursery             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| COMMERCIAL USES                                                                                                                                               |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Food            | Bars                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.3  |
| and             |                     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
| Beverage        |                     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Distillery          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    | C   |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Entertainment       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.9  |
|                 | at                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Bars                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | or                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Restaurants         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Food                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | P   | P   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.12 |
|                 | Processing,         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Artisanal           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Microbrewery        |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | A   | A   |    | C   |   | 25.1.B.20 |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Mobile              | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P   | P | 25.1.B.21 |
|                 | Food                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Units,              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Including           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Food                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Trucks              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Restaurant          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    | A    |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    | A   |   | 23.8.F    |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Restaurant          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.6  |
|                 | With                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.25 |
|                 | Drive-in/Drive-thru |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Manufacturing & | Food                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    | C   |   | 25.1.B.13 |
| Processing      | Processing,         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Large               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Scale               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Manufacturing       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    | C   |   |           |
|                 | Services,           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Heavy               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Manufacturing       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    | P   |   | 25.1.B.17 |
|                 | Services,           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Light               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Office &        | Communication       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | P   | P   |    | P   |   |           |
| Professional    | Studios             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Office              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   |    | P   |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Retail          | Convenience         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.6  |
| Sales           | Market              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Drive-thru          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.6  |
|                 | Uses                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.8  |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | General             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    | A   |   | 23.8      |
|                 | Retail              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Grocery             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    |     |   | 23.8      |
|                 | Store               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Medical             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | P   | P   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.20 |
|                 | Marijuana           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Dispensary          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Service         | Animal              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.2  |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Commercial          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | or                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Fine                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Arts                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Studio              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Daycare             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      | C   | C   | P   | P   | P   | P  | A   |   | 25.1.B.7  |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Drive-thru          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.6  |
|                 | Uses,               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.8  |
|                 | Not                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Including           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Banks               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Financial           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      | C   |     | P   | P   | P   |    | A   |   |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Funeral             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | P   | P   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Household           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | P   | P   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Medical             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     | C   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | -                   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Inpatient           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Medical             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | P   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | -                   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Outpatient          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Personal            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      | P   |     | P   | P   | P   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Private             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.23 |
|                 | Clubs               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Without             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Entertainment       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Private             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.9  |
|                 | Clubs               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | With                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Entertainment       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Self                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     | C   |    | C   |   |           |
|                 | Storage             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Senior              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.26 |
|                 | Care                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Facility            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Service         | Sexually            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.27 |
| (cont.)         | Oriented            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Businesses          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Technical           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | P   | P   |    | P   |   |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Theater             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | C   | P   |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Vehicle         | Gas                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.6  |
|                 | Stations            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.14 |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Parts               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | P   | P   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.29 |
|                 | Store               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Rental              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    | A    |     |     |     | P   | P   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.30 |
|                 | Establishments,     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Less                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Than                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | 10                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Vehicles            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Rental              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.30 |
|                 | Establishments,     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Over                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | 10                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Vehicles            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Rental              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.30 |
|                 | Establishments,     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Moving              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Repair              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.31 |
|                 | Facilities          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Sales               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | C   | C   |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Storage             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   | P  | P    |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Facility,           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Including           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Parking             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Garage              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Washes/detailing    |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     | C   | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.6  |
|                 |                     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.31 |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Visitor         | Boarding            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    | C    | C   | C   |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
| Accommodation   | House               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | or                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Lodging             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | House               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Guest               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    | P    |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Ranches             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Hotels/motels       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    | P    |     |     |     | C   | P   |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Resorts             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    | P    |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.33 |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Short-term          | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Rental              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Properties          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL AND CIVIC USES                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Public,         | Arts &              | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A  | A | A  | P    | P   | A   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P   |   |           |
| Institutional,  | Cultural            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
| Civic           | Use                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Cemetery            |     | C   |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Fire                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    | P   |   | 25.1.B.12 |
|                 | Stations            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | and                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Rescue              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Facilities,         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Private             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | General             | P   |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Aviation            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Golf                | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C  |   |    | C    |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 24.6      |
|                 | Course              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.15 |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Golf                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     | C   |    |     |   | 25.1.B.15 |
|                 | Driving             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Range               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | or                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Miniature           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Golf,               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Stand               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Alone               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Government          | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P   | P |           |
|                 | Services            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Religious           | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P   | P | 25.1.B.24 |
|                 | Institutions        |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Schools,            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      | C   |     | C   | P   | P   | P  | C   |   |           |
|                 | Private             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Schools,            | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P   | P |           |
|                 | Public              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Including           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Charter             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Schools             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Utilities,          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | C   |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Privately           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Owned               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Utility             | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C  | C | C  | C    | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C  | C   | C | 25.1.B.22 |
|                 | Poles               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | and                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Above               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Ground              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Wires,              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | New                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Recreation      | Buildings           | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C  | C | C  | C    | C   | C   | C   | P   | P   |    | P   | C |           |
|                 | and                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Facilities,         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Not-for-Profit      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Community           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Service             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Organizations,      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | such                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | as                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Boys &              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Girls               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Clubs               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | or                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | YMCA                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Buildings           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | P   | P   | P   |    | P   |   | 25.1.B.16 |
|                 | and                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Facilities,         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Private,            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Including           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Fitness             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Centers             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | or                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Health              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Spas                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Buildings           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     | C   | C   | C   |    | C   |   |           |
|                 | and                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Facilities          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | With                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Outdoor             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Activities,         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Private,            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Including           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Fitness             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Centers             |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | or                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Health              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Spas                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| RESIDENTIAL USES                                                                                                                                              |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Residential     | Apartments          |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      | P   | P   | P   |     |     |    |     |   | 26.5      |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Assisted            | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  |   | P  | P    |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.1  |
|                 | Living              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Home                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Dwelling            | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  |   |    |      | P   | P   |     |     |     | P* |     |   | *23.6.D.1 |
|                 | Units,              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 26.5      |
|                 | Single-Family       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Dwelling            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    | P |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Units,              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Site-Delivered,     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Single-Family       |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Dwelling            |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   | P  | P    | P   | P   |     |     |     |    |     |   | 26.5      |
|                 | Units,              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   | 23.7      |
|                 | Attached,           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Including           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Condominium,        |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Patio               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Home                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | or                  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Townhouse           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Home                | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.2.D    |
|                 | Occupations         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Model               | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   |     |     |     |    |     |   | 25.1.B.28 |
|                 | Homes,              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Including           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Temporary           |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Real                |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Estate              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Office              |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| OTHER USES                                                                                                                                                    |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| Other           | Antennas            | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P   |   | 25.1.B.5  |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Communication       | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C  | C | C  | C    | C   | C   | C   | C   | C   | C  | C   | C | 25.1.B.5  |
|                 | Facilities,         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Major               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+
| "               | Communication       | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P | P  | P    | P   | P   | P   | P   | P   | P  | P   | P | 25.1.B.5  |
|                 | Facilities,         |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
|                 | Minor               |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |    |   |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |    |     |   |           |
+-----------------+---------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+---+----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----+---+-----------+Senior Care Use and Commercial Zoning DistrictsOro Valley Town Center PAD Convenience Use requirementsFood TrucksNakoma Sky Public Art
((O)18-14, Amended,  10/03/2018; (O)18-12, Amended,  07/18/2018; (O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)15-16, Amended,  11/08/2015; (O)11-02, Amended,  02/02/2011; (O)10-13, Amended,  10/27/2010; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)

Section 23.4 Table of Dimensional Requirements
All primary and accessory structures shall be subject to the intensity and dimensional standards set forth in the following Tables 23-2. These intensity and dimensional standards may be further limited or modified by other applicable sections of this Code. Additional regulations and rules of measurement are set forth immediately following the table. A “*” indicates that these additional regulations and rules of measurement are applicable.
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
|  Zoning  |     Minimum      |   Minimum Lot   | Yard Setbacks (feet) | Building | Minimum  | Addl Regs |
| District |     Property     |  Area (square   |                      |  Height  | Distance |           |
|          |       Size       |      feet)      |                      |          | Between  |           |
|          |                  |                 |                      |          |  Bldgs   |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
|          |                  |  Area   | Width | Front | Side  | Rear |          |  (feet)  |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R1-300   | -                | 300,000 | 300   | 50    | 20    | 50   | 34       | 5        | 23.6.B    |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R1-144   | -                | 144,000 | 150   | 50    | 20    | 50   | 18       | 5*       | 23.6.C    |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R1-72    | -                | 72,000  | 150   | 50    | 35    | 50   | 22       | 5*       | 23.6.D    |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R1-43    | -                | 43,560  | 150   | 30    | 20    | 40   | 18       | 5*       | 23.6.E    |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R1-36    | -                | 36,000  | 120   | 30    | 15    | 40   | 18       | 5*       | 23.6.F    |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R1-20    | -                | 20,000  | 80    | 30    | 15    | 30   | 18 ft.   | 5*       | 23.6.G    |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | or 2     |          |           |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | stories  |          |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R1-10    | -                | 10,000  | 80    | 25    | 10    | 25   | 25 ft.   | 5*       | 23.6.H    |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | or 2     |          |           |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | stories  |          |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R1-7     | -                | 7,000   | 70    | 20    | 7.5   | 20   | 25 ft.   | 5*       | 23.6.I    |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | or 2     |          |           |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | stories  |          |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| SDH-6    | -                | 6,000   | 50    | 20*   | 15*   | 25*  | 18*      | 20*      | 23.6.J    |
|          |                  |         |       |       | (1st  |      |          |          |           |
|          |                  |         |       |       | side) |      |          |          |           |
|          |                  |         |       |       | 5*    |      |          |          |           |
|          |                  |         |       |       | (2nd  |      |          |          |           |
|          |                  |         |       |       | side) |      |          |          |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R-4      | 1 acre           | *       | -     | *     | *     | *    | 25 feet  | 10*      | 23.7.B    |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | or 2     |          |           |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | stories  |          |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R-4R     | 50 acres         | *       | -     | *     | *     | *    | 34 feet  | 10*      | 23.7.C    |
|          | prior to         |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
|          | street           |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
|          | dedications      |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R-S      | -                |         | -     | *     | *     | *    | 25 feet  | 10*      | 23.7.D    |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | or 2     |          | 23.7.E    |
|          |                  |         |       |       |       |      | stories* |          |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
| R-6      | 5 acres          | *       | -     | 30*   | 20*   | 20*  | 25 feet  | *        | 23.7.E    |
|          | (residential)    |         |       |       |       |      | or 2     |          |           |
|          | 1 acre (business |         |       |       |       |      | stories* |          |           |
|          | and professional |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
|          | offices          |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
|          | or other         |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
|          | permitted        |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
|          | or conditional   |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
|          | use)             |         |       |       |       |      |          |          |           |
+----------+------------------+---------+-------+-------+-------+------+----------+----------+-----------+
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
|  Zoning  | Minimum  | Yard Setbacks (feet)  |   Maximum    | Min. Open | Max. Floor | Addl Regs |
| District | Property |                       |   Building   |   Space   | Area Ratio |           |
|          |   Size   |                       |    Height    |           |            |           |
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
|          |          | Front | Side  | Rear  |              |           |            |           |
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
| CN       | 0 acres  | 20*   | 0-50* | 0-50* | 25 feet      | 25%       | .25        | 23.8.B    |
|          |          |       |       |       | or 2 stories |           |            |           |
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
| C-1      | 5 acres  | 20    | 0-50* | 0-50* | 25 feet      | 20%       | .30        | 23.8.C    |
|          |          |       |       |       | or 2 stories |           |            |           |
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
| C-2      | 10 acres | 20    | 0-50* | 0-50* | 30 feet      | 20%       | .40        | 23.8.D    |
|          |          |       |       |       | or 2 stories |           |            |           |
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
| PS       | 5 acres  | *     | *     | *     | 1 story      | 25%       |            | 23.8.E    |
|          | (schools |       |       |       | and 24-45    |           |            |           |
|          | only)    |       |       |       | feet*        |           |            |           |
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
| T-P      | 3 acres  | 3:1*  | 0-50* | 0-50* | 34 feet*     | 25%       | .50*       | 23.8.F    |
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
| POS      |          | 0-50* | 0-50* | 0-50* | 1 story      | *         | .15*       | 23.8.G    |
|          |          |       |       |       | and 25-45    |           |            |           |
|          |          |       |       |       | feet*        |           |            |           |
+----------+----------+-------+-------+-------+--------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
((O)18-15, Amended,  10/03/2018; (O)18-12, Amended,  07/18/2018; (O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)11-02, Amended,  02/02/2011; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007; (O)06-02, Amended,  01/04/2006)

Section 23.5 Measurements and Exceptions
A. Lots 
    1. Measurement 
        a. Lot Area 
        The same as “net lot area.”
        b. Net Lot Area 
        The area included within lot lines after all right-of-way dedications have been made as required by the Town.
        c. Lot Width 
        The width of the lot is determined as follows:
            i. If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these side lines,
            ii. If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot at a distance equal to the required front or rear building setback line whichever is the lesser. The axis of a lot shall be a line generally perpendicular to the fronting street, which divides the lot into two (2) equal parts.
        d. Minimum lot width 
            i. Cul-de-sac lots: minimum lot width shall be measured at the front lot line or the building setback line, whichever width is greater. Street frontage for cul-de-sac lots shall meet the minimum requirements.
            ii. “Flag” lots: the driveway, or “pole,” portion of any flag lot shall be excluded from minimum lot width measurement, using the flag portion of the lot to satisfy minimum lot width requirements.
    2. Corner Lots: Special Limitations 
    As an aid to freer, safe movement of vehicles at and near street intersections, and in order to promote more adequate protection for the safety of children, pedestrians, operators of vehicles and for proposed construction hereafter, there shall be limitations of the height of fences, walls, gateways, ornamental structures, hedges, shrubbery and other fixture construction and planting on corner lots in all districts where front yards are required.
        a. Such barriers to clear unobstructed vision at corners of intersecting streets shall be limited to a height of not over two feet above the established elevation of the nearest street line for a distance of 25 feet along both the front and side lot lines measured from the point of intersection of the said intersecting lot lines.
        b. Within the isosceles triangle formed as required in subsection a. of this Section, by connecting the ends of the respective 25 foot distances, all the fixtures, construction, hedges, shrubbery and other plantings shall be limited to a height not over two (2) feet above the elevation of the street line level at the said intersecting streets.
        c. Within the said triangle, and in cases where front yards are terraced, the ground elevation of such front yards shall not exceed two (2) feet above the established street line elevation at the said intersecting streets.
B. Height 
    1. Measurement 
        a. Building, Height 
        The vertical distance measured from the grade found along the outside walls of a building to the highest point of the building, excluding any chimney. This definition applies only to a building footprint where the natural cross-slope is less than six (6) percent.
        b. Building Height (Sloped Area) 
        The maximum vertical distance measured from natural grade to the highest point of the building directly above, excluding any chimney. This definition applies only to a building footprint where the natural cross-slope is six (6) percent or more.
        c. Building Height Contour Line 
        Located at the building height permitted by Oro Valley zoning above the existing pre-development grade and parallel to the contour of the existing pre-development grade.
    2. Exceptions 
        a. Flagpoles and Flags 
        Flagpoles shall have a maximum height no greater than 1.25 times the height of the nearest adjacent building. The length of a flag shall be no greater than º the height of the flagpole. National and state flags are permissible. Flags used for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention to advertising are regulated in accordance with Sections 28.3.C and 28.4.B of this Code. Flags shall be located in an area of the lot or parcel where it will not be a safety hazard to adjacent properties.
        b. Chimneys and Solar Equipment 
        Chimneys and solar equipment for heating or cooling are exempt from the height limitations of this Code.
        c. Architectural Elements 
        Within the nonresidential districts, architectural elements such as bell towers may exceed this limitation as specified within the district standards Section 23.8.
C. Setbacks 
    1. Measurement 
        a. The shortest straight line distance in feet from the nearest property or lot boundary to the nearest element, including roof overhangs, of a main or accessory building, structure, sign or the like located on the same property or lot, except as exempted by subsection C.2 of this section.Covered Porch in Front Setback
        b. For multiple frontage lots, a 20 foot setback must be maintained adjacent to any public or private street. The Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator may reduce this requirement for side setbacks, but in no case may the setback be less than that required by the zoning district.
        c. For “flag” lots, the driveway, or “pole,” portion of the lot shall not be used to satisfy front setback requirements. The front setback shall be measured within the area of the “flag” portion of the lot closest to any public or private street.
        d. The front setback of a commercial corner lot is measured from the property line along the major street as determined by the Town Engineer.
        e. For irregular, triangular or gore lots the rear setback is measured from the rear lot line, which as defined herein, is a line entirely within the lot at least ten (10) feet long and parallel and most distant from the front lot line.
    2. Residential Setback Uses 
    Yards, established by required setbacks, shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except for the following:
        a. Sills and lintels around doors or windows, bay windows and ornamental features attached to the building may extend two (2) feet into the required front, side and rear setbacks.
        b. Balconies and stairs may extend four (4) feet into the required front, side and rear setbacks provided a minimum distance of five (5) feet is maintained from the side lot line.
        c. Terraces, covered and uncovered porches and platforms which are not higher than three (3) feet above the adjacent natural ground level, that are attached to the house and open on three (3) sides, may extend into the required setbacks as follows:
            i. Front: fifty percent (50%).
            ii. Side: fifty percent (50%), provided a five (5) foot distance is maintained from the side lot line.
            iii. Rear: up to ten (10) feet from the rear lot line.
        d. Cornices, roof eaves and/or rafters, canopies, and awnings, not attached to porches, may extend five (5) feet into the required front, side and rear setbacks, provided three (3) feet is maintained from the side lot line.
        e. Chimneys may extend two (2) feet into the required front, side or rear setbacks.
        f. Mechanical equipment such as air conditioners and pool pumps may be placed in the required side and rear yard setbacks, provided a minimum three (3) foot access way is maintained along one side of the building to allow for maintenance and emergency purposes. Screening is required as referred to in Section 23.6.A.6.
        g. Setbacks for an attached feature of a main or accessory building, as provided in this section, may be further reduced by an additional twenty percent (20%) when all of the following applies:
            i. The nearest property line to the attached feature abuts a property where no building or occupancy could take place such as common areas, riparian or open spaces excluding areas of ingress/egress.
            ii. A minimum six (6) foot solid wall is added to obscure the view of the building.
            iii. A minimum of three (3) feet is maintained from the property line.
    In no case will an element of the main or accessory building be permitted to extend into, or be built above or over, an area intended to remain clear and unobstructed such as a designated environmentally sensitive area or ingress/egress. ((O)18-15, Amended,  10/03/2018)
D. Floor Area Ratio 
This is the maximum ratio of gross building floor area to the net lot area of the building site.
E. Open Space 
This is the minimum percentage of open space relative to the net lot area.

Section 23.6 Property Development Standards for Single-Family Residential Districts
A. Common Regulations of R-1 Districts 
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and buildings in single-family residential districts. Specific lot sizes, setbacks, and criteria which vary among individual single-family residential districts are identified in subsections A through H of this section. Alternative development standards in Section 27.10.B.3 (environmentally sensitive lands) may be applied at the request of the property owner upon satisfaction of applicable ESL review criteria.
    1. Multiple Dwelling Units 
    Within the R1-144, R1-72, R1-43, and R1-36 Districts, more than one (1) single-family dwelling may be erected upon any one (1) lot. The following provisions shall apply:
        a. An unobstructed access way for ingress/egress shall be provided for each dwelling.
            i. If such access way is intended to serve one (1) dwelling, the way shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide.
            ii. If such access way is intended to serve two (2) or more dwellings, the way shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide.
        b. Each dwelling shall be situated so that if the property were to be divided, each resulting lot with a dwelling would conform to the provisions of this section.
    2. Detached Accessory Buildings 
    Except as noted within the development standards for each district and within Section 25.2.A, the following provisions apply.
        a. Permitted coverage: Ten (10) percent of the total area of rear and side yard.
        b. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the main building nor be any closer to the front lot line than the main building.
    3. Walls and Fences 
    Walls and fences shall be located in accordance with the following standards:
        a. Setbacks 
            i. Front 
                a) Walls equal to or less than four (4) feet six (6) inches in height may be located on the property line. Walls taller than four (4) feet six (6) inches in height must meet the front setback of the applicable zoning district.
                b) The supporting columns, posts and door frames for pedestrian entry features associated with courtyard walls, that do not provide usable interior space, may be built in the same location as the front yard wall and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
                c) The supporting columns, posts and frames for vehicular entry gates located at the main access to the lot may be built up to five (5) feet from the front lot line and shall not exceed nine (9) feet in height.
            ii. Side: Walls equal to or less than six (6) feet in height may be located on the property line. Walls taller than six (6) feet must meet the side setback of the applicable zoning district.
            iii. Rear: Walls equal to or less than six (6) feet in height may be located on the property line. Walls taller than six (6) feet must meet the rear setbacks of the applicable zoning district.
        b. Walls abutting an arterial or collector street, either in the front, side or rear yard, may be up to two (2) feet taller than subsections A.3.a.i through iii of this section.
        c. Wall placement shall consider drainage, easements, topography and abutting properties.
        d. Refer to Section 23.5.A.2 for special requirements regarding corner lots.
    4. Swimming Pools 
    Swimming pools shall meet the screening requirements of the most current edition of the International Building Code.
    5. Access 
    All lots shall have vehicular access to a dedicated street unless a secondary means of permanent vehicular access has been approved.
    6. Mechanical Equipment Such as Air Conditioners and Pool Pumps 
    Mechanical equipment shall be screened by a minimum four (4) foot solid wall except when located:
        a. Inside a yard that is screened by a minimum four (4) foot solid wall and placed no further than ten (10) feet from the screen wall.
        b. Greater than forty (40) feet from the property line and indiscernible to an adjacent neighbor due to opaque vegetation or topography. ((O)18-15, Amended,  10/03/2018; (O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
B. R1-300 Single-Family District 
The provisions of subsection A of this section shall apply. The following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. General Aviation Airstrip requirements:
        a. Minimum site: twenty-five (25) acres.
        b. Minimum runway length: one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet.
    2. Setback of airport facilities: ten (10) feet from all property lines.
    3. Aircraft Hangar 
        a. If located with aircraft (taxiway) access to an airport, each lot may have one accessory building suitable for the storage of aircraft.
        b. Maximum height: thirty-four (34) feet.
        c. Setbacks: twenty (20) feet from property line or edge of street, whichever is most restrictive.
        d. Minimum distance between buildings: ten (10) feet
    4. Other Detached Accessory Buildings (Not Including Hangars). 
        a. Permitted coverage: ten percent (10%) of the total area of rear and side yard.Front Lot Line for Lindbergh Drive Property
        b. Minimum distance between buildings: ten (10) feet.
        c. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the main building.
        d. Accessory buildings are permitted in the front yard subject to the following:
            i. No individual structure may exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet in size. The permitted coverage for all structures shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total front yard area;
            ii. Barns and other livestock structures may be larger than two thousand (2,000) square feet if approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Only one accessory structure of this type is permitted;
            iii. No more than two (2) accessory structures are permitted (not including hangars).
        e. Setbacks:
            i. Fifty (50) feet front;
            ii. Ten (10) feet side and rear;
            iii. Twenty (20) feet side when located within the front yard.
    5. Buildings, Corrals or Other Livestock Structures must be placed one hundred (100) feet from all property lines. This setback may be reduced to fifty (50) feet if a solid wall a minimum of six (6) feet high is provided to restrict view and sound. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011; (O)10-10, Amended,  09/01/2010)
C. R1-144 Single-Family District 
The provisions of Section 23.6.A shall apply. The following additional requirements shall apply in this district:
    1. Detached Accessory Buildings Setbacks. 
    Twenty (20) feet from side and forty (40) feet from rear if building is not used for poultry or animals; one hundred (100) feet if building is used for poultry or animals, except that it may be reduced to fifty (50) feet if a solid wall a minimum of six (6) feet high is provided to restrict view and sound.
    2. Accessory buildings are permitted in the front yard, subject to the following:
        a. Front setback: fifty (50) feet.
        b. Side setback: twenty (20) feet.
        c. Lot coverage: twenty percent (20%) of front yard area.
        d. Buildings used for livestock or poultry shall maintain one hundred (100) foot setbacks from all property lines, except that it may be reduced to fifty (50) feet if a solid wall a minimum of six (6) feet high is provided to restrict view and sound.
        e. No more than two (2) accessory buildings are permitted in front yard.
        f. No individual accessory building may exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
        g. Accessory buildings shall not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the height of the main building, or eighteen (18) feet, whichever is lower.
        h. Section 25.2.A.3 shall not apply in this district. ((O)12-08, Amended,  06/06/2012)
D. R1-72 Single-Family Residential District 
The provisions of Sections 23.4 and 23.6.A shall apply. The following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. Detached Accessory Buildings Setbacks:
    Side and rear: thirty-five (35) feet.
    2. Grading Limits:
    Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
E. R1-43 Single-Family Residential District 
The provisions of Sections 23.4 and 23.6.A shall apply. The following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. Detached Accessory Buildings Setbacks 
    Side and rear: fifteen (15) feet.
F. R1-36 Single-Family Residential District 
The provisions of Sections 23.4 and 23.6.A.3 shall apply.
G. R1-20 Single-Family Residential District 
The provisions of Sections 23.4 and 23.6.A shall apply.
H. R1-10 Single-Family Residential District 
The provisions of Section 23.4 and 23.6.A.3 shall apply. The following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. Detached accessory buildings 
    Permitted coverage: fifteen (15) percent of total area of rear and side yard.
I. R1-7 Single-Family Residential District 
The provisions of Section 23.4 and 23.6.A shall apply. The following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. Detached accessory buildings 
    Permitted coverage: fifteen (15) percent of total area of rear and side yard.
J. SDH-6 Site Delivered Housing District 
The provisions of Section 23.4 shall apply. The following additional requirements shall apply in this district:
    1. Distance Between Dwellings 
    A minimum of twenty (20) feet shall be provided between all dwellings, including carport, patio, or porch overhangs.
    2. Detached Accessory Buildings 
        a. Permitted coverage: Fifteen percent (15%) of the total area of rear and side yard.
        b. Minimum distance to side and rear lot lines: five (5) feet
    3. Design Standards 
    Dwellings within this district shall comply with the following design standards for the purposes of providing adequate light and air, improving safety, and affording compatible community design.
        a. All dwellings shall have a minimum width of sixteen (16) feet and shall contain at least six hundred forty (640) square feet.
        b. All dwellings shall be attached to a permanent foundation.
        c. The roof shall have a minimum two to twelve (2:12) roof pitch and shall have a surface of asphalt composition, concrete or clay tile, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, or other materials of like appearance and color as approved by the Building Official and the Planning and Zoning Administrator (PZA). PZA decisions may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
        d. Exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or other materials of like appearance as approved by the Building Official, Planning and Zoning Administrator, and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
        e. All dwellings shall be constructed in accordance to standards established by the State, as amended from time to time, or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act for manufactured homes. Each of these codes shall be applicable to the specific structure as defined therein.
        f. As appropriate, skirting of a compatible material and color to the dwelling shall be installed to screen any area between the floor of the dwelling and the permanent foundation.
        g. Utility lines shall be buried, and utility related equipment, including air-cooling devices, shall be screened from view as observed from public or private thoroughfares.
        h. All towing devices, wheels, axles, and hitches must be removed.
    4. Exceptions 
    Any site delivered housing subdivision completed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, whether approved by Oro Valley or Pima County, retains the right to replace dwellings and accessory structures on existing lots, regardless of lot size. Replacement dwellings and accessory structures shall comply with the requirements of Section 23.1.B and subsection I of this section with the following exceptions:
        a. Replacement dwellings may be of a material and color similar to that of the home being replaced;
        b. Replacement dwellings shall be a similar building height to the existing home and shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet or one (1) story;
        c. The method of anchoring the replacement dwelling to the ground may be similar to that of the dwelling to be replaced;
        d. The replacement dwelling shall, at a minimum, comply with the following setbacks:
            i. Front: Ten (10) feet
            ii. Side: Five (5) feet on the right side and fifteen (15) feet on the left side, as viewed from the front of the lot.
            iii. Rear: Five (5) feet
            iv. A minimum spacing of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained between all dwellings.
            v. Replacement dwellings on corner lots shall not be located any closer to a public or private street than the home being replaced.
            vi. New accessory structures shall comply with the setbacks required in subsections J.4.d.i, ii, and iii of this section.
        e. As applicable, replacement dwellings shall provide skirting. Acceptable skirting materials include aluminum, wood, and masonry.
        f. Detached accessory structures not in conformance with this Code may be replaced and expanded so long as the replacement or expansion does not increase the degree of non-conformance with this Code.
        g. Replacement dwellings may utilize roof-mounted air-cooling devices.
    5. Architectural Review 
    All dwellings, except those provided for in Section 23.6.J.4, shall be required to obtain architectural approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 22.9. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)

Section 23.7 Property Development Standards for Multi-Family Residential Districts
A. Common Regulations of Multi-Family Districts 
Alternative development standards in Section 27.10.B.3 (environmentally sensitive lands) may be applied at the request of the property owner upon satisfaction of applicable ESL review criteria.
    1. Walls and Fences 
        a. Section 23.6.A.3 shall apply to individual townhome lots or properties built with a single-family home.
    2. Setback Exceptions 
        a. Section 23.5.C.2 shall apply to single-family home properties built in a multi-family residential district. ((O)18-15, Amended,  10/03/2018; (O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
B. R-4 Townhouse Residential District 
The provisions of Section 23.4 and the following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. Density 
    The minimum gross land area per dwelling unit shall be five thousand four hundred fifty (5,450) square feet.
    2. Open Space Requirements 
        a. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total gross land area of the development shall be set aside for recreation uses or other common landscaped areas unless the overall density of the development is less than five (5) units per acre. The Town Council may waive this requirement because of the relationship of the development to an existing public park or recreation area.
        b. All accessory buildings for recreational purposes shall not occupy more than fourteen percent (14%) of the total area reserved for recreation uses and other common landscaped areas.
    3. Setbacks 
        a. Wherever an R-4 development abuts an R-1 District or an alley abutting R-1 Districts, the following shall apply:
            i. A setback of not less than thirty (30) feet shall be maintained for single-story structures.
            ii. An additional depth of ten (10) feet shall be provided for each additional story.
        b. Wherever an R-4 development abuts any district other than R-1, or abuts an alley adjacent to such other district, a setback not less than ten (10) feet in depth shall be maintained.
        c. Repealed by (O)11-15.
        d. No building or part thereof shall be erected or altered in this district that is nearer a dedicated street or private street than twenty (20) feet, except that the average setback from any dedicated street shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet.
        e. Repealed by (O)11-15.
        f. A minimum distance of ten (10) feet shall be provided between all detached units. ((O)18-12, Amended,  07/18/2018; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
C. R-4R Resort District 
The provisions of Section 23.4 and the following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. Density 
        a. The minimum gross land area per guest room shall be four thousand two hundred fifty (4,250) square feet.
        b. The minimum gross land area per dwelling unit shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
        c. The total acreage required by subsections B.1.a and b of this section shall not exceed the gross acreage of the property.
    2. Open Space Requirements 
    Buildings may cover an aggregate area of twenty-five percent (25%), excluding parking areas.
    3. Site Perimeter Setbacks and Yards 
        a. From perimeter streets: One hundred (100) feet
        b. From the property line of any R-1 district: One hundred (100) feet
        c. From the property line of any district other than R-1: Fifty (50) feet
        d. Exceptions:
            i. The above setbacks do not apply to buildings which meet the following:
                a) Used only for guest rooms that are detached from central hotel facilities or for dwelling units.
                b) A maximum of one (1) story in height.
        e. All buildings shall meet the following minimum setbacks: Thirty (30) feet adjacent to all perimeter property lines, including property lines abutting perimeter streets, except that the minimum setback shall be only twenty (20) feet adjacent to those perimeter property lines that abut districts other than R-1.
        f. The yards adjacent to perimeter streets shall be maintained as open space except for pedestrian and vehicular access ways and buildings as allowed in the exceptions.
        g. Walls, Fences, and Screening 
            i. Walls, fences and walled driveway entrances shall not exceed three (3) feet in height in the required one hundred (100) foot yard along street frontages and in the ten (10) feet adjacent to the street where a thirty (30) foot setback is allowed along street frontages. Those yards must be maintained as landscaped open space and may be penetrated by pedestrian and vehicular access ways only. Walled driveway entrances not to exceed six (6) feet in height shall be permitted within the setback requirements if such entrance is compatible with the surrounding development.
            ii. Tennis courts shall have a fence a maximum height of twelve (12) feet and shall have a natural vegetated buffer or landscape screen a minimum of ten (10) feet wide provided and maintained on any abutting lot line. ((O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
D. R-S Residential Service District 
The provisions of Section 23.4 and the following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. Standards for Townhouses 
    Whenever dwelling units are to be built as townhouses, the development standards in Section 23.7.B shall apply.
    2. Density 
    The minimum gross land area per dwelling unit shall be five thousand four hundred fifty (5,450) square feet.
    3. Open Space Requirements 
        a. There shall be a minimum of thirty-six percent (36%) of the net lot area in open space.
        b. Open space shall be provided in the following proportions:
            i. A minimum of twelve percent (12%) of the net lot area shall be provided as frontage open space to provide a setting for the building, visual continuity within the community and a variety of spaces in the streetscape, except that the frontage open space shall not be required to exceed fifty (50) square feet per one (1) foot on public street frontage excluding drives.
            EXCEPTION: Where a lot has two (2) or more street frontages, there shall be no less than twenty (20) square feet of open space per one (1) foot of street frontage for one (1) street and no less than ten (10) square feet of open space per one (1) foot of street frontage excluding drives for other street(s). In no case shall a building be closer than twenty (20) feet to the front lot line.
            ii. A private outdoor living space shall be provided adjoining each dwelling unit equal to a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross size of the dwelling unit, except that dwelling units above the first story shall provide space equal to a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross size of the dwelling unit. Outdoor living space on the ground level may be included in the open space requirements.
            iii. The remainder of the required open space shall be provided in common open space.
    4. Building Height 
        a. If the R-S development abuts a single-family residential district or an alley abutting a single-family residential district, the Town Council may limit the building height to one (1) story. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide a recommendation to the Town Council regarding the building height limitation.
    5. Yards and Setbacks 
        a. Wherever an R-S development abuts an R-1 or R-4 District, or an alley abutting any of those districts, a setback of not less than forty (40) feet shall be maintained, except that covered parking may be constructed to within thirty (30) feet of the adjacent district boundary line.
        b. Wherever an R-S development abuts any district other than R-1 or R-4 or abuts an alley adjacent to such other district, a setback of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be maintained except that covered parking may be constructed to within ten (10) feet of the adjacent district boundary line.
        c. Larger setbacks may be required if the existing or future development of the area around the site warrants such larger setbacks.
        d. All areas between a building and a street frontage, except for access drives and walks, shall be open space. Where parking occurs between a building and street, an area thirty-five (35) feet in depth between the street and parking shall be maintained in a landscaped setting. This depth may be decreased to a minimum of twenty (20) feet if special circumstances warrant approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, such circumstances being:
            i. Depressed parking.
            ii. Wall and berming.
        e. Walls and Fences
            i. Walls and fences within the required frontage open space may not exceed three (3) feet in height or except as otherwise approved by the Building Official and the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Decisions may be appealed to the Town Council. ((O)18-12, Amended,  07/18/2018; (O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
E. R-6 Multi-Family Residential District 
The provisions of Section 23.4 and the following additional requirements shall apply in this district.
    1. Standards for Townhouses 
    Whenever dwelling units are to be built as townhouses, the development standards in Section 23.7.B shall apply with the exception of density (Section 23.7.E.2) and building height (Section 23.7.E.4).
    2. Density 
    The minimum gross land area per dwelling unit shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet, except that: the minimum gross land area per dwelling unit may be increased if based on conditions unique to the site as recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Town Council.
    3. Open Space Requirements 
    Development of all R-6 zoned property shall provide a minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the net lot area as open space in the following proportions:
        a. Each lot shall contain a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet of usable outdoor living space for each dwelling unit, exclusive of front yards.
        b. Not less than fifty percent (50%) of said required space shall be provided in a single common area, with a minimum dimension of twenty (20) feet at any point.
            i. Portions of yards (excluding the front yards) which are contiguous with and an integral part of the outdoor living space may be included in calculating the area and minimum dimensions of such space.
            ii. Pools and paved recreation areas may be developed in the required common space.
        c. A private outdoor living space shall be provided adjoining each dwelling unit equal to a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the gross size of the dwelling unit, except that dwelling units above the first story shall provide such space equal to a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross size of the dwelling unit. Outdoor living space on ground level may be included in the open space requirement.
        d. Outdoor living areas shall be reasonably accessible to dwelling units served.
        e. Driveways and landscaping within driveway areas shall not be included in calculations of outdoor space.
        f. The remainder of the required open space shall be provided in landscaped or natural open space.
    4. Building Height 
        a. If the R-6 development abuts an R1-144, R1-43, R1-36, or R1-20 Single-Family Residential District the building height shall be limited to single story with a maximum exterior height of eighteen (18) feet within one hundred (100) feet of these districts.
        b. If the R-6 development abuts an R1-10, R1-7, R-4, R-S, R-4R, or another R-6 Residential District, building height may be limited to single story, with a maximum exterior building height of eighteen (18) feet, within fifty (50) feet as may be recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by Town Council.
    5. Minimum Distance Between Buildings 
        a. Between two (2) single-story structures: Ten (10) feet;
        b. Between a single-story and a two (2) story structure: Fifteen (15) feet;
        c. Between two (2) two (2) story structures: Twenty (20) feet.
    6. Walls, Fences and Required Screening 
        a. Walls and fences within the required front setback are limited to three (3) feet, unless otherwise approved by the Building Official or Planning and Zoning Administrator. Decisions may be appealed to the Town Council.
        b. All areas between a building and a street frontage except for access drives and walks shall be open space. Where parking occurs between a building and the street, an area thirty-five (35) feet in depth between the street and parking shall be maintained in a landscaped setting. This depth may be decreased to a minimum of twenty (20) feet if special circumstances warrant approval by use permit or Planning and Zoning Commission approval, such circumstances being:
            i. Depressed parking;
            ii. Wall and berming.
    7. Recreational Facilities 
        a. Wherever there is constructed on a lot, or contiguous lots, multiple dwellings which have fifty (50) or more dwelling units, an active outdoor recreational facility shall be provided for the occupants of said units. In addition to the active outdoor recreation area, an indoor recreational facility shall also be provided for the occupants of said dwelling units. The recreational facility may be used as the leasing, sales, or manager’s office, but that use may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area. The balance of the facilities shall include group meeting facilities and facilities for exercise, table sports, and games.
        b. Wherever there is constructed a multiple dwelling which has twenty (20) or more dwelling units, there shall be provided on the lot site of said multiple dwellings a play area for children. Said play area shall be separated from any private access ways and public streets by a fence or wall. The tot lot requirement shall be excluded from a senior citizens development. ((O)18-12, Amended,  07/18/2018; (O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)15-16, Amended,  11/08/2015; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)

Section 23.8 Property Development Standards for Nonresidential Districts
A. Common Regulations of Nonresidential Districts 
Alternative development standards in Section 27.10.B.3 (environmentally sensitive lands) may be applied at the request of the property owner upon satisfaction of applicable ESL review criteria. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
B. C-N Neighborhood Commercial District 
    1. Floor Area Limits 
        a. Commercial uses shall be no greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area per individual business, except that drug stores, grocery stores and hardware stores shall be no greater than nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
        b. Expansions of commercial uses beyond these floor area limits may be allowed with a conditional use permit.
        c. The aforementioned square footage limits do not apply to buildings used for residential, public, institutional, civic, office, and senior care purposes.
        d. Residential units may comprise no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total gross floor area of the development nor occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the site by area.
        e. The minimum gross land area per residential dwelling unit shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
    2. Building Height 
        a. If a contiguous residential district has a more restrictive height standard, all buildings within eighty-five (85) feet of the property line of contiguous R-1 single-family residentially zoned property shall conform to that more restrictive standard of the contiguous zone.
        b. Architecturally appropriate elements such as bell towers or mechanical screening may exceed this limitation by no more than seven (7) feet, subject to approval by the Planning Division Manager. Additional height for architectural elements, up to thirty-five (35) feet, must be approved by the Town Council.
    3. Courtyards and Pedestrian Malls 
    [IMAGE: <23.8_3.png>]
        a. The design of the site shall include a landscaped courtyard(s) or pedestrian mall with buildings enclosing the courtyard and opening onto the courtyard from at least two (2) sides.
        b. The courtyard or mall should contain all or a portion of the required public art.
        c. The courtyard(s) or pedestrian mall shall be a minimum of two percent (2%) of the net lot area of the site in square feet, which shall be considered to be part of any required open space.
        d. The courtyard or pedestrian mall shall contain shaded seating areas for employees and patrons, and may include benches or seat walls, planters with specimen landscape trees, and potted plants to provide shade and visual interest.
        [IMAGE: <23.8_3d.png>]
    4. Yards and Setbacks 
        a. Front 
            i. Where adjacent to a residential district, the front setback regulations of the residential district shall apply.
        b. Side and Rear Setbacks 
            i. Fifty (50) feet or 3:1, whichever is greater (setback to building height), where the lot abuts a single-family residential district or abuts an alley that is adjacent to a single-family residential district.
            ii. Twenty-five (25) feet where the lot abuts a multi-family residential or nonresidential district.
    5. Service and Delivery Outdoor Activities Hours of Operation 
        a. Service and delivery operations are allowed only between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday and 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Sundays. These hours must be posted in all service and delivery areas. Hours may be extended with a Conditional Use Permit.
        b. Outdoor speakers are prohibited. Outdoor entertainment shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week.
    6. Commercial Site Design 
        a. Where feasible, buildings shall be placed to the front of the property to visually reinforce the streetscape and promote a human-scale, pedestrian and bicycle friendly design.
    [IMAGE: <OroValley23.8_6.png>]
        b. Buildings may only be set back beyond the setback line as necessary to accommodate shop entrances, arcades, plazas, sidewalk dining areas, or other approved amenities, parking areas, or landscaping.
        c. Parking in front of buildings is limited to fifteen percent (15%) of the total required off-street parking spaces.
        d. Well-defined pedestrian sidewalks, bicycle lanes, or shared-use paths shall connect to existing walks, lanes, or paths to adjacent developments.
    7. Parking 
        a. A minimum of eighty-five percent (85%) of the required parking shall be placed behind or to the side of buildings.
        [IMAGE: <OroValley23.8_7.png>]
        source: Casas Adobes Plaza
        b. Parking placed in front of the buildings shall be accessed from a single access lane or may be provided on-street in front of the building, subject to approval by the Engineering Division.
        c. Parking design shall minimize noise and light pollution impacts to adjacent residential properties.
    8. Residential Site Design 
        a. Residential uses, which include condominiums, townhomes, and apartments, shall be physically and functionally integrated with commercial uses by utilizing one (1) or more of the following design strategies:
            i. Attached Dwelling Units with First Floor Office or Retail 
            [IMAGE: <23.8_8a1.png>]
            source: www.rosecrestvillage.com
            ii. Nonresidential uses shall provide pedestrian paths linking them with multi-family residential uses on the property.
        [IMAGE: <23.8_8a2.png>]
        source: www.internest.com
        b. A shared or private outdoor living area of at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet shall be provided for each residential unit. Covered porches and patios may be provided to satisfy this requirement.
        c. Private outdoor living areas shall be screened from parking areas and adjacent uses with an architecturally compatible opaque fence or wall with a minimum height of five (5) feet.
        d. Underground parking or first floor garages are encouraged. For each two (2) square feet of underground or first floor garage, one (1) square foot of additional floor area is permitted.
    9. Architecture 
    The development shall reflect the architectural themes and colors of adjacent residential developments utilizing materials appropriate for commercial construction. The architecture shall comply with all design standards and guidelines.
    [IMAGE: <23.8_9.png>]
    source: amreit.com
((O)15-16, Amended,  11/08/2015; (O)11-02, Amended,  02/02/2011)
C. C-1 Commercial District 
    1. Floor Area Limits 
        a. Uses shall be no greater than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of gross floor area per individual business.
        b. Expansions of uses beyond sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of gross floor area per individual business may be allowed with a conditional use permit.
    2. Building Height 
    Architectural elements such as bell towers may exceed this limitation by no more than ten (10) feet, subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    3. Courtyards and Pedestrian Malls 
    C-N standards apply.
    4. Yards and Setbacks 
    C-N standards apply. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
D. C-2 Commercial District 
    1. Building Height 
    Architectural elements such as bell towers may exceed this limitation by no more than ten (10) feet, subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    2. Courtyards and Pedestrian Malls 
    C-N standards apply.
    3. Yards and Setbacks 
    C-N standards apply. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
E. PS Private Schools 
    1. Building Height 
    No building shall exceed one (1) story and the exterior height shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet. The following increased building heights are subject to Planning and Zoning Commission approval:
        a. Architectural elements, such as bell towers, may exceed this limitation by no more than ten (10) feet. The number of steeples, spires, towers or campaniles or similar structures is limited to one (1) unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
        b. Auditoriums up to forty-five (45) feet
        c. Gymnasiums up to thirty-six (36) feet
    2. Yards and Setbacks 
        a. Private School and College Facilities 
            i. Fifty (50) feet from any abutting residential district, R1-36, R1-43, R1-144, R-4, R-S or R-6.
            ii. Twenty (20) feet from any abutting commercial district, T-P, C-1, C-2, C-N or other PS properties.
        b. Residence 
        If the PS parcel is abutted by an R-1 District, the setback requirements of that abutting district shall apply to the PS residence. If the property abuts other than an R-1 District, the setbacks outlined in Section 23.6.C (R1-144 District) shall apply.
        c. All recreational facilities and related apparatus shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from all property lines. When adjacent to preserved open space or a recreational use, the Town Council may reduce the setback to ten (10) feet. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
F. T-P Technological Park District 
    1. Retail Sales Uses 
    Retail sales are allowed as an ancillary use directly related to and contained within the structure of the primary use.
    2. Floor Area Limits 
        a. Ancillary uses shall be no greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area per individual business, except that expansions may be allowed with a conditional use permit.
        b. The gross floor area of ancillary uses, not contained within a primary use facility, is limited to no more than twenty percent (20%) developed gross floor area.
        c. The gross floor area of any one (1) structure shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet on lots less than ten (10) gross acres, except that expansions may be allowed with a conditional use permit.
    3. Courtyards and Pedestrian Malls 
        a. A portion of the development shall be oriented towards a landscaped courtyard or mall with seating areas and all or a portion of the required public art.
        b. The courtyard or mall shall be a minimum of two percent (2%) of the net lot area of the site in square feet, which shall be considered to be part of the required open space.
        c. The courtyard/mall requirement may be waived by Town Council based on a suitable alternative design solution being presented to and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    4. Yards and Setbacks 
        a. Front Yard: A ratio of three to one (3:1) shall be used. For buildings less than a height of twenty-five (25) feet, a ratio of two to one (2:1) will be permitted.
        b. Side and Rear Setbacks 
        Fifty (50) feet or a three to one (3:1) ratio (setback to building height), whichever is greater, where the lot abuts a residential district or abuts an alley that is adjacent to a residential district.Tech Park (T-P) Zoning District Side and Rear setback requirements when adjacent to residentially zoned property
((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
G. Parks and Open Space District 
    1. Open Space Requirements 
    The aggregate area of the building(s) shall not occupy more than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot, excluding parking areas.
    2. Building Height 
    No building shall exceed one (1) story and the exterior height shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. The following increased building heights are subject to DRB approval.
        a. Gymnasiums up to thirty-six (36) feet.
        b. Community center auditoriums up to forty-five (45) feet.
    3. Setbacks 
    All recreational facilities (excluding trails, par courses, bikeways and similar amenities) and related apparatus shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines. When adjacent to preserved open space, the Town Council may reduce the setback to ten (10) feet. ((O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)

Section 23.9 Property Development Standards for Planned Districts
A. Common Regulations of Planned Districts 
Alternative development standards in Section 27.10.B.3 (environmentally sensitive lands) may be applied at the request of the property owner upon satisfaction of applicable ESL review criteria. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
B. PRD Planned Residential Developments 
((O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
C. PAD Regulations 
    1. General Provisions 
    The following standards and requirements apply to all PAD Districts:
        a. Minimum district size: Twenty (20) acres
        b. Minimum open space requirement: Twenty percent (20%) of gross acreage of the PAD district.
        c. Underlying zoning districts established:
            i. All PAD development plans shall include underlying zoning designations. The underlying or base zoning districts are to be derived from existing Oro Valley zones and reflect the most logical designation in consideration of the proposed land use for a particular parcel, tract, block or planning unit. The development standards of the underlying zoning districts will prevail where the PAD does not specifically modify said standards.
            ii. Underlying zoning districts shall be assessed by Town staff in determining adequacy for proposed land uses.
        d. Modifications to the development standards of the underlying district may be permitted if they are found to offer a desirable improvement over the conditions produced by conventional zoning standards. The following standards may be modified:
            i. Permitted and conditional uses,
            ii. Area/volume ratios,
            iii. Density,
            iv. Building height,
            v. Distance between buildings,
            vi. Landscaping,
            vii. Yards and setbacks,
            viii. Walls, fences and required screening,
            ix. Access.
        e. A tabular summary comparing all requested modifications to the normal underlying district standards shall be included in the PAD text. The summary will include rationale supporting the requested modifications.
        f. The applicant is required to meet with interested residents of adjacent neighborhoods prior to the Town scheduling the proposal for Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing. The purpose of preliminary neighborhood review shall be to provide direct information to area residents and land owners, resolve potential conflicts, assist in expediting Town review and provide for the preservation of the welfare of community residents. The applicant shall notify all residents’ participation groups and neighborhood associations on record with the Town and located within one (1) mile of the PAD boundary, the Oro Valley Planning and Zoning Department and all property owners within six hundred (600) feet of the rezoning. Notice of the application and meeting shall be by mail. A representative from the Planning and Zoning Department shall be invited to the neighborhood meeting. Notice of the neighborhood/applicant meeting shall be mailed no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting date. Documentation of the attendees and minutes of the meetings shall be provided by the applicant to Town staff and the Commission. ((O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)

CHAPTER 24 SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS

Sections:
Section 24.1 (Superseded by (O)11-01)
Section 24.2 (Recodified by (O)11-01)
Section 24.3 PRD Planned Residential Development Regulations
Section 24.4 Planned Area Development (PAD)
Section 24.5 (Superseded by (O)11-01)
Section 24.6 Golf Course Overlay Zone
Section 24.7 (Recodified by (O)11-01)
Section 24.8 Airport Environs Zone
Section 24.9 Economic Expansion Zone

Section 24.1 Tangerine Corridor Overlay District (TRCOD)
(Superseded by (O)11-01) ((O)11-01, Repealed,  02/16/2011)

Section 24.2 Hillside Development Zone
(Recodified by (O)11-01)

Section 24.3 PRD Planned Residential Development Regulations
A. Purpose 
The purpose of the Planned Residential Development District is to encourage imaginative and innovative planning of residential neighborhoods, to encourage the preservation of open space and significant natural features, to offer a wide variety of dwelling unit types, to permit greater flexibility in design of residential neighborhoods and to enable development of parcels of property that would be difficult to develop under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations.
B. Applicability 
These provisions apply to any application for a rezoning to the PRD District.
C. Property Development Standards 
    1. General 
    All land uses in a PRD District shall conform to the allowable uses and standards of the underlying zoning districts.
    Modification of the underlying district’s development standards may be allowed, as specifically permitted in this section, where that modification will produce a living environment, landscape quality, and lifestyle superior to that produced by the existing standards.
    2. Maximum Property Size 
    No Planned Residential Developments shall be established on any parcel in excess of one hundred sixty (160) acres of gross land area.
    3. Minimum Number of Units and Maximum Density Requirements 
        a. There shall not be less than six (6) dwelling units in any Planned Residential Development.
        b. The density regulations of the zone in which the Planned Residential Development is located are applied to the total area of the Planned Residential Development rather than separately to individual lots.
        c. A PRD development will have a maximum base density as follows:
        +-------+---------------------------------------+
        | Zone  | Maximum Dwelling Units per Gross Acre |
        +-------+---------------------------------------+
        | R1-36 | 1.0                                   |
        +-------+---------------------------------------+
        | R1-43 | 0.8                                   |
        +-------+---------------------------------------+
        d. The density of a PRD development may be increased from the base density as allowed by the criteria shown in the following table. Upon finding that one or more of the criteria set forth in the table is exceeded to an extraordinary degree, the Town Council may approve a density increase greater than that specified in any single criteria but in no case to exceed a combined total of 20%.
        +---------------------+---------------+--------------------------------------------------+
        |      Activity       | Increase from |                   Requirements                   |
        |                     | Base Density  |                                                  |
        +---------------------+---------------+--------------------------------------------------+
        | Preservation        | 5%            | Preservation of natural features shall include   |
        | of natural features |               | the preservation of major washes, significant    |
        |                     |               | stands of native vegetation or other topographic |
        |                     |               | or scenic natural features, provided such        |
        |                     |               | features are left in their undisturbed           |
        |                     |               | natural state.                                   |
        +---------------------+---------------+--------------------------------------------------+
        | Provision of        | 5%            | This shall mean the provision of common          |
        | common open         |               | open space which is distinguishable by           |
        | space               |               | its quantity or quality and which is readily     |
        |                     |               | accessible to the residents of the development.  |
        +---------------------+---------------+--------------------------------------------------+
        | Innovative site     | 5%            | An innovative site plan shall mean a site        |
        | plan                |               | plan which features a street pattern which       |
        |                     |               | discourages through traffic, ensures the         |
        |                     |               | privacy of the residents of the development      |
        |                     |               | and is in harmony with the topography and        |
        |                     |               | other natural features. An innovative site       |
        |                     |               | plan could also include a variety of lot         |
        |                     |               | sizes and dwelling unit types.                   |
        +---------------------+---------------+--------------------------------------------------+
        | Interior amenities  | 5%            | Interior amenities shall mean the provision      |
        |                     |               | of private recreational facilities such          |
        |                     |               | as tennis courts, recreation centers, bike       |
        |                     |               | paths and equestrian trails which are accessible |
        |                     |               | to the residents of the development.             |
        +---------------------+---------------+--------------------------------------------------+
        | Substantial public  | 5%            | Substantial public benefit shall mean the        |
        | benefit             |               | provision of public facilities that are          |
        |                     |               | both unusual in character and serve the          |
        |                     |               | needs of an area greater than the immediate      |
        |                     |               | development. No density increase for substantial |
        |                     |               | public benefit may be approved unless the        |
        |                     |               | public facilities provided are in excess         |
        |                     |               | of the typically required street improvements,   |
        |                     |               | sidewalks, bike paths, equestrian trails         |
        |                     |               | and drainage facilities.                         |
        +---------------------+---------------+--------------------------------------------------+
    4. Building Height 
    Building height shall not exceed 18 feet and shall not exceed 1 story within 50 feet of any R-1 district boundary line.
    5. Parking Requirements 
    Parking shall be provided as follows:
        a. Efficiency and 1 bedroom dwelling units shall provide a minimum of 1 on-site resident parking space plus 1 off-street guest parking space.
        b. Dwelling units with 2 bedrooms shall provide a minimum of 2 on-site resident parking spaces plus 1 off-street guest parking space.
        c. Dwelling units with 3 or more bedrooms shall provide a minimum of 2 on-site resident parking spaces plus 2 off-street guest parking spaces.
        d. The required on-site resident parking shall be covered parking.
        e. Adequate parking facilities for recreational vehicles shall be provided.
    6. Design Criteria 
    The Planned Residential Development shall observe the following design criteria:
        a. The overall plan shall be comprehensive, embracing land, buildings, landscaping and their interrelationships and shall conform in all respects to all adopted plans of all governmental agencies for the area in which the proposed development is located.
        b. Within the Planned Residential Development, units may be established of any size whatever but shall be logical in size and shape and shall function by themselves and in relationship to other development units within the district or adjacent property.
        c. The plan shall provide for adequate open space, circulations, off-street parking and pertinent amenities. Buildings, structures and facilities in the parcel shall be well integrated, oriented and related to the topographic and natural landscape features of the site.
        d. The proposed development shall be compatible with existing and planned land use and with circulations patterns on adjoining properties. It shall not constitute a disruptive element to the neighborhood and community.
        e. The internal street system shall not be a dominant feature in the overall design; rather it should be designed for the efficient and safe flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive influence on the activity and function of any common areas and facilities.
        f. Common areas and recreational facilities shall be so located so as to be readily accessible to the occupants of the dwelling units and shall be well related to any common open spaces provided.
        g. Architectural harmony within the development and within the neighborhood and community shall be obtained so far as practicable.
D. Application 
The rezoning application shall follow the requirements of Section 22.3 with the following additions to enable the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council to make the determination that the modification will produce a living environment, landscape quality, and lifestyle superior to that produced by the existing standards:
    1. A written narrative and graphic material to illustrate the conditions that the modified standards will produce.
    2. A general landscape plan.
E. Review and Required Findings 
The rezoning review shall follow the procedures of Section 22.3. Before approval of an application for a proposed PRD District, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council must find:
    1. That the development proposed is in substantial harmony with the General Plan of the Town of Oro Valley and can be coordinated with existing and planned development of surrounding areas.
    2. That the streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to serve the proposed uses and the anticipated traffic which will be generated thereby.
    3. The Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council shall further find that the facts submitted with the application and presented at the hearing will establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the Planned Residential Development will constitute a residential environment of sustained desirability and stability that will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding area; and that the sites proposed for public facilities such as schools, playgrounds and parks are adequate to serve the anticipated population.

Section 24.4 Planned Area Development (PAD)
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to improve and protect the public health, safety, and welfare by pursuing unified planning and development and provide for development proposals, which are superior to that which may occur under conventional zoning regulations and the following objectives:
    1. To ensure that future growth and development which occurs is in accord with the adopted goals and elements of the general plan and all planning policies of the Town.
    2. To encourage innovative site planning by providing:
        a. Variety in individual lot sizes,
        b. Variety in land uses,
        c. Open space,
        d. Preservation of natural topography,
        e. Integrated circulation systems which provide for safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic interaction.
        f. Solar design and water conservation features such as water harvesting, minimizing or eliminating use of turf in landscaping, incorporating design features which enhance and protect solar access and providing for solar orientation of structures.
    3. To foster the safe and efficient use of the land.
    4. To facilitate greater efficiency in design and provision of adequate public services and infrastructure.
    5. To avoid the inappropriate development of lands and provide for adequate drainage and reduction of flood damage.
    6. To encourage patterns of land use which decrease trip length of automobile travel and encourage trip consolidation.
    7. To increase public access to mass transit, bicycle routes and other alternative modes of transportation.
    8. To reduce energy consumption and demand.
    9. To minimize adverse environmental impacts of development.
    10. To foster a rational pattern or relationship between land uses for the mutual benefit of the community.
    11. To protect existing neighborhoods from harmful encroachment by intrusive or disruptive development.
B. Applicability 
These provisions apply to any application for a rezoning to the PAD District.
C. General Provisions 
The following standards and requirements apply to all PAD Districts:
    1. Minimum district size: 20 acres
    2. Minimum open space requirement: 20 percent of gross acreage of the PAD district.
    3. Underlying zoning districts established:
        a. All PAD development plans shall include underlying zoning designations. The underlying or base zoning districts are to be derived from existing Oro Valley zones and reflect the most logical designation in consideration of the proposed land use for a particular parcel, tract, block, or planning unit. The development standards of the underlying zoning districts will prevail where the PAD does not specifically modify said standards.
        b. Underlying zoning districts shall be assessed by Town staff in determining adequacy for proposed land uses.
    4. Modifications to the development standards of the underlying district may be permitted if they are found to offer a desirable improvement over the conditions produced by conventional zoning standards. The following standards may be modified:
        a. Permitted and conditional uses,
        b. Area/volume ratios,
        c. Density,
        d. Building height,
        e. Distance between buildings,
        f. Landscaping,
        g. Yards and setbacks,
        h. Walls, fences and required screening,
        i. Access.
D. Application 
The rezoning application shall follow the requirements of Section 22.3 with the following additions:
    1. A tabular summary comparing all requested modifications to the normal underlying district standards shall be included in the PAD text. The summary will include rationale supporting the requested modifications.
    2. A separate landscape concept plan shall be prepared which addresses the treatment of vehicular use, open space, pedestrian areas, and buffering of adjacent properties and uses including landscape buffer widths.
    3. A text furnishing additional information as needed, including background information, appropriate detailing of development concepts incorporating architecture, open space, support data, and market studies, shall be submitted. The text shall, for each underlying zoning district within the PAD, include a listing of the proposed permitted and prohibited land uses and a statement indicating the variance of those land uses to the underlying zoning district. Schedules of development shall be included in the PAD text. If development and construction of the entire PAD is not to occur simultaneously, a plan showing the boundaries of each development phase shall also be provided.
    4. Open space details, including allocation, dedication, floodplain preservation and percentages, by type. The amount of open space, both natural and landscaped, shall be specified, and treatments, purposes and ultimate ownership and maintenance of open space shall be described.
E. Review Process 
The rezoning review shall follow the procedures of Sections 22.3 and 22.15, with the following additions/modifications:
    1. Public Hearings 
    A minimum of two (2) public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be required in order to ensure adequate review time for Commissioners and interested members of the public. The final Commission public hearing shall not be scheduled prior to the submittal of the final PAD development plan.
    2. Repealed by (O)11-15.
((O)16-02, Amended,  01/20/2016)
F. General Plan Compatibility 
As a component of approval, all proposed PADs must be found to be consistent with the adopted Oro Valley General Plan and any other applicable, adopted area, neighborhood or specific plans. Compatibility is required for all applicable General Plan elements and shall be determined in accordance with subsection G of this section.
Lack of compliance with the General Plan or its subsets may, solely, form the basis for PAD denial. Any PAD applicant who recommends deviation from the General Plan or other adopted plans shall concurrently apply for, and process, a plan amendment. Only upon approval of such an amendment may a non-complying PAD be subsequently approved.
G. General Plan Criteria 
The following criteria are derived from the adopted Oro Valley General Plan. All PAD applications shall be evaluated utilizing these criteria. In order to approve a PAD, the Town Council must find eighty percent (80%) of the applicable criteria are adequately addressed in the PAD plan and text documents. All absolute criteria (shown in bold typeface) must be met by the proposed PAD.
    1. Land Use Element 
        a. Varied types and intensities of development have been incorporated.
        b. Site analysis information completely supports the land use proposals contained in the PAD.
        c. A mix of housing types, such as single-family attached and detached, single-family cluster homes, patio homes, townhouses and apartments, is incorporated in the PAD.
        d. The PAD promotes clustered (average density) developments to protect environmentally sensitive areas.
        e. Higher density or intensity developments abutting lower density or intensity areas include buffering and shall substantially mitigate any negative impacts.
        f. Residential neighborhoods are afforded multi-modal access to, and are in close proximity to, activity centers to minimize travel times.
        g. Activity centers provide a wide range of appropriate services.
        h. The PAD protects natural features through transfer of development densities and similar strategies.
        i. Office, technical and corporate employment facilities are scaled to the surrounding area.
        j. Campus-type employment is incorporated.
        k. Multi-family residential development, at moderate to higher unit densities, has access to arterial or collector roadways.
        l. Multi-family (apartment or condominium) developments have planned-in recreational facilities and other amenities.
        m. Recreational facilities and appropriate links to open space amenities are provided.
    2. Transportation Element 
        a. The Oracle Road Corridor is de-emphasized for high intensity development.
        b. Bike lanes are included in all planned arterial improvements and on collectors deemed appropriate in the development review process.
        c. Homeowners associations are required to maintain pedestrian-bicycle paths, within approved master-planned communities.
        d. Bicycle parking facilities are provided.
        e. Safe pedestrian/bicycle access to schools and parks is provided within the boundaries of the PAD.
        f. Curvilinear residential streets patterns are incorporated.
        g. Sidewalks or related pedestrian facilities are incorporated within neighborhoods.
        h. All new roadway and future pedestrian-bicycle improvements meet public design standards.
        i. Park-and-ride lots are incorporated with planned facilities.
        j. Projects larger than 100 acres in size provide direct access to an arterial.
    3. Economic Development Element 
        a. A favorable fiscal impact analysis.
    4. Public Services and Facilities Element 
        a. School site planning has been addressed in large-scale planned communities.
        b. One elementary school site of at least ten (10) acres has been reserved within developments for every 500 elementary school level students forecasted to live within the development.
        c. Park/school combination site dedications are incorporated.
    5. Community Design Element 
        a. Building height and bulk are moderate to low intensity, in harmony with individual site attributes.
        b. Parking lots with greater than 20 car capacity are screened from adjacent uses and public thoroughfares.
    6. Open Space/Recreation Element 
        a. Pedestrian, equestrian and bicycle trails are designated including picnic/rest areas.
        b. Handicapped accessible facilities are provided to users.
        c. Recreation and open space facilities are linked to the community open space network where appropriate.
        d. Gateway treatments are incorporated at appropriate locations along the open space network.
        e. Neighborhood scale recreation (at a suggested standard of three (3) acres per 1000 population) and appropriate linkages to existing and planned trail systems are provided.
    7. Natural Resources Conservation Element 
        a. The floodplains of washes with a discharge greater than 1000 cubic feet per second (cfs) during the 100 year flood event and associated riparian habitats are preserved as natural open space except as stipulated in number 7.b.
        b. Washes with a discharge greater than 100 cfs during the 100 year flood event and associated riparian habitats are preserved if vegetation and habitat quality are found to be unique by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council.
        c. Hydrologic studies of washes greater than 100 cfs discharge during the 100 year flood event are provided which include effects on riparian habitats.
        d. Only native plant materials and approved Southern Arizona Water Resources Association plants are utilized.
        e. Only floodplain compatible uses are proposed in flood prone areas.
        f. When erosion protection is required, environmentally sensitive alternatives including geotextiles or gunite containing integral desert colors are utilized as opposed to concrete lining of water courses.
        g. Indigenous (native desert) vegetation and riparian habitats are maintained and enhanced where possible.
        h. Select native plant material, which is to be transplanted within the development or to approved sites outside the project limits.
        i. Mass grading techniques are minimized for project development.
    8. Safety Element 
        a. Bike paths are constructed, where feasible and appropriate, to separate pedestrian and bike traffic from motorized vehicles in order to provide safe access to schools and parks.
        b. The PAD adheres to the “Suggested Policies for Fire Management in the Wildland Urban Interface,” published by the National Forest Service, May 1990.
    9. Cultural/Historic Element 
        a. A cultural resource survey has been performed where cultural/archaeological resources are determined likely to occur according to the Arizona State Museum.
        b. The PAD provides for protection of cultural resources discovered during construction.
        c. Cultural resources sites are left generally undisturbed and not identified to the public. ((O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
H. Findings – Specific and Required 
As a basis of approval or conditional approval for a PAD District, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council shall make the following required findings. Any or all of the specific findings are optional and shall be applied on a case-by-case basis.
    1. Required Findings 
    The required findings function to assure that the purposes of the PAD zoning have been accomplished through a given PAD proposal. In order to approve a PAD, the Town shall find that:
        a. The PAD development is in accordance with the adopted Oro Valley General Plan and a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the applicable General Plan criteria, as outlined in subsection G of this section, are satisfied.
        b. The PAD demonstrates innovative design in site planning.
        c. The PAD fosters safe and efficient use of the land.
        d. The development facilitates efficient design of public services and all infrastructure.
        e. The development provides for adequate drainage and reduction of flood damage.
        f. The PAD encourages reduction in automobile trip lengths and trip consolidation as measured against development under conventional zoning.
        g. Public access to mass transit, pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems is provided and designed to assure that pedestrians can move safely and easily to properties and activities in the site and in the neighborhood.
        h. The design and arrangement of elements of the site plan (e.g., building construction, orientation, and placement; selection and placement of landscape materials, and/or use of renewable energy sources, etc.) contribute to the overall reduction of energy use by the project as measured against development under conventional zoning.
        i. The design and arrangement of elements of the site plan minimize adverse impacts to the existing natural topography, natural water courses, existing desirable vegetation, and views.
        j. The elements of the site plan display a rational relationship (e.g., buildings, circulation, open space, and landscaping) between land uses for the mutual benefit of the community and neighborhood.
        k. The PAD protects, in a manner equal or superior to existing zoning, existing neighborhoods from harmful encroachment by intrusive or disruptive development.
        l. Overall, the entire PAD represents an improvement to living, work, and recreational conditions superior to that which would be produced by development under conventional zoning districts.
    2. Specific Findings 
    In addition to required findings, the Town may wish to make supplementary specific findings relevant to individual PAD applications. Specific findings may include, but are not limited to, the following:
        a. The development is compatible with, and sensitive to, the immediate environment of the site and neighborhood relative to density, scale, bulk, and building height.
        b. Conflicts that exist between the proposed development and the surrounding land uses have been effectively mitigated in the planned area development.
        c. The project is designed so that the additional traffic generated does not have significant adverse impact on surrounding development, or the development has detailed plans to mitigate the adverse conditions.
        d. The project contains known areas of natural or geological hazard (e.g., unstable or potentially unstable slopes, flood, etc.) or soil conditions unfavorable to urban development, and special precautions have been taken to overcome those limitations or these areas have been set aside from development.
        e. The project will conform to applicable local, State, and Federal water quality standards including, but not limited to, erosion and sedimentation, runoff control and prohibited solid wastes and hazardous substances.
        f. The proposed land uses and activities will be conducted so that noise generated shall not exceed the minimum performance levels established herein. Detailed plans for the elimination of objectionable noises may be required before the issuance of a building permit.
        g. All developments will be connected to the public sewer system unless otherwise stipulated in the PAD document.
        h. The street and parking system provides for the smooth, safe, and convenient movement of vehicles both on and off the site.
        i. Each active recreational area is suitably located and accessible to the area it is intended to serve and adequate screening is provided to ensure privacy and quiet for neighboring uses.
        j. The development is adjacent to an existing or approved public park or public open space area, and provision has been made in the site plan to avoid interfering with public access to that area.
        k. All signs in the project are in compliance with the provisions of Section 28.1.
        l. Solar orientation and design concepts are incorporated in the PAD.
        m. The PAD provides for safe pedestrian and bicycle access to schools and parks.
I. Records 
    1. Prior to a zoning ordinance for a PAD District becoming effective, recordation of primary open space commitments shall be required. The instrument for open space recordation shall be a subdivision plat or block plat, which shall include a complete legal description.
    2. If construction of the PAD does not occur according to the approved schedule of development, the PAD zoning shall lapse for all phases not complying with the schedule of development and all subsequent phases. Such schedule may be amended upon application to the Planning and Zoning Administrator thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the PAD schedule of development. The amendment will be processed in accordance with the procedures outlined for all PAD rezonings.
J. Approvals Required 
No structure or building shall be built or remodeled upon land in the PAD District until Planning and Zoning Commission approval for plats and development plans has been obtained as outlined in Section 22.9, including the posting of all required bonds and assurances, particularly site restoration assurances. Residential development in a PAD District which utilizes underlying single-family residential (R-1) zoning districts shall not be subject to Planning and Zoning Commission approval.Land Use for a Distribution Center
((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)

Section 24.5 Oracle Road Scenic Corridor District Regulations and Guidelines
(Superseded by (O)11-01) ((O)11-01, Repealed,  02/16/2011)

Section 24.6 Golf Course Overlay Zone
A. Purpose and Use 
    1. Purpose 
    The purpose of this zone is to permit the development of golf courses in the Town of Oro Valley while preserving and enhancing water resources, scenic vistas, neighborhoods, property uses, and values. All public and private parties acknowledge this section as an instrument to address the paramount concern for safety and the need to design, landscape, and re-landscape, as necessary, to reduce the incidence of golf balls striking homes or persons.
    2. Applicability 
        a. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, the requirements of this overlay district shall apply to any new golf course development permitted by base zoning, approved via conditional use permit (see Section 22.5 and Section 25.1.B.15), and to any new golf course within an existing, or subsequently approved, planned area development.
        b. The overlay district regulations shall apply to expansion of any golf course existing, or under construction, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.
        c. The overlay district shall include all properties/parcels, whether vacant or developed, which are adjacent to a golf course fairway, tee box, green or driving range. Properties which do not lie immediately adjacent to golf course fairways or driving ranges are exempt from these requirements.
        d. All other permitted uses, provisions, and requirements of the underlying zone and/or Planned Area Development shall apply.
B. Related Uses 
Golf course related uses shall be allowed only as permitted by underlying zoning or an adopted Planned Area Development. Any such use must be approved with the golf course development plan or by a subsequent approval of a development plan for the related use by the Town Council. Such uses must be consistent and compatible with the golf course overlay zone.
C. Standards for Golf Course Design and Irrigation 
    1. Purpose 
    These requirements and standards must be met in order to obtain the approval of a development plan and associated Town issued permits for any golf course in the Town of Oro Valley, subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. These standards shall act to control the design and irrigation method of golf courses in the Town of Oro Valley.
        a. Irrigation Design Standards 
        As groundwater is recognized as a precious natural resource and the conservation of this resource is deemed crucial to the long-term sustainability of the greater Oro Valley community, the following irrigation standards are intended to provide for the efficient use of potable ground water supplies. These standards shall also provide for the timely implementation of the use of renewable water supplies, including non-potable and/or Central Arizona Project water, for golf course irrigation purposes.
            i. Maximize use of irrigation supply sources other than potable groundwater for irrigation.
                a) All golf courses which begin construction after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section must be irrigated with an alternate renewable water supply.
                b) If such a source is not available, the applicant will provide an irrigation supply plan, per Section 24.6.D of this section.
                c) In the interim, groundwater use for golf course irrigation is permitted, provided the golf course water provider meets the A.D.W.R. assured water supply requirements and is a member in good standing of the Central Arizona Groundwater Replenishment District through which the groundwater consumption by the golf course can be offset by replenishment or recharge.
            ii. Landscaping shall be consistent in water use with the desert environment:
                a) Trees, shrubs, and groundcovers shall be desert hardy, low pollen dispersing, and low in water requirement.
                b) The landscape plan must utilize only drought-tolerant planting materials, requiring minimal irrigation in ancillary re-vegetation areas.
                c) Use of inorganic groundcovers in non-playing areas, rather than turf, is encouraged.
            iii. All water used upon the golf course shall be separately metered.
            iv. Provision shall be made for on-site storage of the irrigation supply. Any surface impoundment used for on-site storage of the irrigation supply shall have a sealed bottom.
            v. Irrigation system(s) that are considered efficient in conserving the irrigation supply by generally accepted irrigation industry standards and golf course irrigation practices in comparable desert locations shall be installed and maintained in good working condition.
    2. Water Analysis and Irrigation Supply Plan 
        a. All golf courses to which this section applies shall prepare a water analysis (see subsection D.2.d of this section) which details the type of water source, and a long-term supply analysis, including conservation methods, measures, and facilities.
        b. Unless an alternate renewable water source will be used for irrigation, an irrigation supply plan will be required per subsection D.2.d of this section.
    3. Golf Course Design Standards 
    The following standards shall act to control the design, maintenance and operation of golf courses in the Town of Oro Valley:
        a. Fringe and/or transition areas shall be provided to assure minimum setbacks from adjacent existing and future residential property lines. Golf hole “envelopes” or boundaries and driving range boundaries shall be created and clearly indicated on the final site plan. Envelopes shall observe the following distances to adjoining existing and future residential properties:
            i. Adjacent to landing areas (one hundred fifty (150) to two hundred fifty (250) yards from the tee boxes) and all turning points: Two hundred (200) feet from the centerline of the fairway,
            ii. Adjacent to tees: one hundred (100) feet minimum from the center tee box of the tee area or fifty (50) feet from the edge of nearest tee box, whichever is greater,
            iii. Adjacent to greens: Two hundred (200) feet minimum from the center of greens, or one hundred fifty (150) feet from the edge of greens, whichever is greater. When the center tee box of the tee area is one hundred fifty (150) yards or less from the green, setbacks from center of green will be one hundred (100) feet.
            iv. Adjacent to driving range boundaries: Two hundred (200) feet from landing areas and one hundred (100) feet from tee areas.
            v. The Town Council, upon the recommendation of the golf course architect, hired by the Town to review plans (see subsection E of this section), and the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve smaller setbacks, where deemed appropriate for any golf course type, including executive and pitch-and-putt golf courses. Criteria to be considered when permitting setback reductions include, but are not limited to, significant stands of existing vegetation to be preserved in place, grade separation between fairway and properties to be developed and prevailing winds.
        b. Berms, linear hazards, trees, and tall shrubs shall be utilized to assist in defending adjacent property from errant golf balls.
        c. Preservation in place and salvage of native vegetation, including trees, shrubs and cacti, are strongly encouraged. The preparation and approval of a native plant salvage plan is required in accordance with Section 27.6. Salvage and removal of vegetation may be field adjusted to meet the needs of line-of-sight and golf playability.
        d. Natural drainageways shall be retained to the maximum extent.
        e. Golf course design shall respect the natural topography and drainageways of the site, and employ minimal grading and clearing of native vegetation. Minimal grading shall be limited to fairways, rough areas immediately adjacent to fairways, green areas, driving ranges, tee boxes, and areas immediately adjacent to tee boxes, surface impoundments and cart paths. Substantial grading, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, shall not be permitted in other areas of the golf course. Golf course elements, including tee boxes, landing areas, greens, and fairways, may be placed within the one hundred (100) year floodplain; provided, that appropriate engineering and drainage control are provided.
        f. Landscape buffers will be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Town Council, if it is determined that a need exists to mitigate the hazard caused by errant golf balls and/or the adverse impacts of sound, visibility and/or traffic on areas abutting the golf course. Buffers may include drainage ways, natural features, existing vegetation, open space, and up to thirty (30) feet on either side of the four hundred (400) foot wide fairway envelope adjacent to the areas for which mitigation is needed. Buffers may not include tee boxes, greens or other areas of normal play.
        g. All maintenance buildings or yards, storage or refuse areas shall be shown on the development plans and shall be appropriately screened, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council at the time of golf course development plan review.
        h. Golf cart path design dependent upon access to public streets shall not be permitted, except for street crossings, as required for golf course play.
    4. Off-Street Parking 
        a. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided, in accordance with all requirements of Section 27.7, and shall be adequate in number to serve persons employed, residing, or visiting on the premises so as to prevent congestion of surrounding streets and promote the safety of the public.
        b. Devices used to screen parking from public view shall not impede the flow of floodwater.
    5. Residential Design Standards 
    The following standard acts to provide additional public safety and protection of private property from errant golf balls:
        a. Walls and/or vegetation are encouraged, and may be required, by recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval of the Town Council, in order to afford additional protection from errant golf balls. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
D. Golf Course Development Plan Submittal 
Applications required under this Chapter shall be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the application.
E. Plan Review 
Upon receipt of a complete development plan submittal for any new, or expanding, golf course development, to include all requirements of subsection D of this section. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall select, and retain, a golf course architect, who shall serve as a professional consultant to the Town in its review of the project. Consultant fees incurred by the Town shall be reimbursed by the golf course developer/applicant.
    1. Recommendations of Golf Course Architect 
        a. The recommendations of the golf course architect shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator in writing. Said recommendations shall be reviewed by staff and forwarded to the applicant. A resubmittal of the development plan, which responds to the Town’s golf course consultant and staff comments, must be received prior to scheduling the plan for the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing.
        b. In review of golf course development plans, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council shall consider public safety and protection of property paramount over preservation. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
F. Procedures and Limitations 
No application for a development plan/golf course overlay district will be accepted unless the zoning district or adopted Planned Area Development permits the use or a conditional use permit has been granted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 22.4.
    1. Effective Date and Phasing 
        a. The golf course overlay zone shall be effective on the property at such time as the Town Council reviews the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission deems that the development plan submitted therefor meets the provisions of this section, and approves it.
        b. If a golf course is constructed in phases, a construction schedule must be submitted and approved with the development plan.
    2. Grading Permits 
        a. No clearing, brushing, or grubbing, grading or development shall be allowed in the proposed golf course zone prior to approval of a grading plan and the issuance of a grading permit.
        b. Salvage of vegetation may commence upon the approval of the development plan and native plant salvage plan.
        c. A golf course grading plan will be accepted and approved only as an element of the required golf course development plan.
        d. Grading permits will be issued only after the grading plan review and approval by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator and all necessary revegetation bonds have been posted.
        e. Prior to any site disturbance, all areas to remain natural, in accordance with the approved landscape plan, shall be fenced off with temporary fencing. The Town’s Zoning Inspector shall be contacted to assure that the fencing provided is adequate and that the operation has been completed.
        f. All plant materials to be saved in place or relocated on site must be tagged, and the necessary inspections of same must be performed, in accordance with Section 27.6.
    3. Conflict 
    In the event a conflict arises between the provisions of this Chapter and other requirements of the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised, the more restrictive shall apply. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
G. Variance 
Per the Section 21.6, any requests for variance to the provisions of this Section must be granted by the Board of Adjustment. In addition to the findings required in Section 21.6, the Board of Adjustment must find that:
    1. Approval of the variance will not increase the apparent probability or frequency of errant golf balls intruding upon adjacent private properties.
    2. Public safety is equally provided for with the granting of said variance. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)

Section 24.7 Riparian Habitat Protection Overlay District
(Recodified by (O)11-01)

Section 24.8 Airport Environs Zone
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this overlay zone is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons and property in the vicinity of the La Cholla Airpark. To this end the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ) restrictions:
    1. Control noise and safety hazards associated with aircraft operations.
    2. Recognize the role of La Cholla Airpark as a facility which may be used by government agencies in emergencies and may provide secure and convenient access for important visitors.
    3. Ensure the continued viability and operation of the Airpark by limiting the encroachment of incompatible land uses.
    4. Promote the compatibility of uses with aircraft operations through the establishment of criteria for the regulation of building height and density.
    5. Address potentially life-threatening situations in areas exposed to aircraft accident potential through restrictions on the congregation of large numbers of people or high concentrations of people and by restrictions on concentrations of people who are unable to respond to emergency situations, such as children, the elderly, the handicapped, and persons undergoing medical treatment.
    6. Increase the protection of persons exposed to high levels of aircraft noise by requiring acoustical treatment in buildings located within these areas and regulating those uses which are sensitive to such noise.
    7. Prohibit uses which create potential hazards to the safe approach and departure of aircraft.
B. Scope 
The AEZ is made up of the following five (5) zones as established by the Compatible Use Zone (CUZ) map (Figure 1) and the Conical Zone (Figure 2).
+--------------+----------------------------------+
| CUZ A        | Runway and Runway Protection CUZ |
+--------------+----------------------------------+
| CUZ B        | Outer Runway Protection CUZ      |
+--------------+----------------------------------+
| CUZ C        | Outer Approach CUZs              |
+--------------+----------------------------------+
| CUZ D        | Overflight Area                  |
+--------------+----------------------------------+
| Conical Zone | No Obstruction of Avigation Area |
+--------------+----------------------------------+
The AEZ is not intended to have jurisdiction over the operation of the airport uses, including accessory uses, within the Airpark.
C. Applicability 
    1. The provisions of the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ) apply to the following on all property located within the AEZ boundaries.
        a. Rezonings.
        b. New development including subdivisions, development plans and new construction on individual lots.
        c. Use changes, expansions, or additions to and existing structures as follows.
            i. A proposed change to any use restricted within the applicable zone of the AEZ.
            ii. A proposed change to building occupancy.
            iii. For any proposed expansion of the gross floor area of a structure or the gross floor area of a project site by over twenty-five (25) percent, the provisions of the Airport Environs Zone (AEZ) apply to the areas of expansion. Expansions are cumulated over time from the date of this ordinance.
        d. Existing development in regards to Section 24.8.D, Permitted Uses and Prohibited Activities.
    2. For property partially within the AEZ, the provisions apply to only those portions within the boundaries of the AEZ. For areas outside the Town limits, which have not been annexed by the Town, the AEZ overlay provisions apply upon annexation.
    3. Nothing contained in this Section affects existing, developed property or the right to its continued use for the purpose legally used at the time these regulations become effective, nor do these regulations affect any reasonable repairs to, or alterations of, buildings or property used for such existing purposes.
D. General Provisions 
    1. Permitted Uses 
    The land uses permitted are those permitted by the underlying zone, except as modified by this Section.
    2. Posting of Occupancy Limitations 
    Any restriction of occupancy required under this section as a condition of building permit issuance or certificate of occupancy will be posted on the premises. The owner/manager(s) of the premises may not permit the limitation to be exceeded.
    3. Conflicts 
    Where the requirements of this district conflict with other applicable districts, the most restrictive applies.
    4. Rezoning Approval 
    All zoning district changes in the AEZ, shall include a requirement for dedication of an avigation easement, to the Town of Oro Valley, providing the following:
        a. Right-of way for free and unobstructed passage of aircraft though the airspace over the property.
        b. A right to subject the property to noise and vibrations associated with normal aircraft operations.
        c. A right to prohibit electrical interference, glare and other hazards to aircraft flight
    5. Plats and Development Plans 
    All new or revised plats or development plans within the AEZ shall require recorded deed notices to run with each property, and any subsequent subdivisions of the property, that states:
    This property is within the La Cholla Airpark Environs and is subject to the requirements of that zone, including height limitations. Uses within this zone may experience noise and vibrations from aircraft operations.
    6. Prohibited Activities 
    Communications nuisance; dangerous activity, hazard or obstruction; illumination nuisance; and visibility nuisance.
E. Compatible Use Zone Provisions 
The compatible use zones are shown in the following Figure 1.
[IMAGE: <OroValley24.8E.png>]
The following table shows applicable standards and the broad categories of uses allowed within each zone:
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| CUZ A | Permitted Uses: General Aviation Airstrip, including accessory |
|       | uses and helicopter, sailplane, hot air balloon and ultralight |
|       | aircraft facilities                                            |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| CUZ B | Permitted Uses:                                                |
|       | Accessory facilities to those in CUZ A                         |
|       | Single-family Residential and others per Chapter 23 with       |
|       | the exception of group homes and temporary real estate         |
|       | offices.                                                       |
|       | Conditional Uses:                                              |
|       | Those provided in Chapter 23 with the exception of utility     |
|       | poles and wires.                                               |
|       | Utility, office, and industrial uses.                          |
|       | Uses may not provide highly reflective surfaces, have large    |
|       | areas of standing water or generate smoke, steam or other      |
|       | visual obstructions.                                           |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| CUZ C | Permitted Uses: Single-family Residential and others per       |
|       | Chapter 23 with the exception of group homes and temporary     |
|       | real estate offices.                                           |
|       | Conditional Uses:                                              |
|       | Those provided in Chapter 23 with the addition of group        |
|       | homes and temporary real estate offices.                       |
|       | Utility, office, and industrial uses.                          |
|       | Uses may not provide highly reflective surfaces, have large    |
|       | areas of standing water or generate smoke, steam or other      |
|       | visual obstructions.                                           |
|       | All uses must provide 30% open space in a corridor generally   |
|       | along, or parallel to, the alignment of the runway.            |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| CUZ D | Permitted Uses: Per underlying zoning district.                |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
F. AEZ Noise Provisions 
All uses within the AEZ must provide insulation, fenestration and related building techniques to reduce the interior noise level to 45 decibels or less, as specified by the International Residential Code, Section 324, the International Building Code Section 1207, and the Arizona Revised Statues Section 28-8461.
G. AEZ Height Provisions 
No structure, use of land, or tree may penetrate the AEZ Height Surface established as the Conical Zone Figure 2. The surface is based on the elevation at each end of the runway.Conical Zone Figure 2
[IMAGE: <OroValley24.8G.png>]
H. AEZ Amendments 
    1. An application for an amendment of the AEZ shall clearly establish that the amendment is not contrary to the purposes of the AEZ as established by Section 10-601. This shall be considered as a finding in the approval or denial of the application.
    2. The above requirement does not apply to applications initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town Council.

Section 24.9 Economic Expansion Zone
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this overlay district is to provide a streamlined review process for development in the innovation park area as well as other business and technology park areas, thereby supporting Town economic development initiatives while preserving and protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the community. ((O)18-05, Amended,  03/21/2018)
B. Applicability 
The Economic Expansion Zone (EEZ) review process is available to all property located within the EEZ Overlay District boundaries, which include: all Rancho Vistoso areas depicted in the overlay map, attached to the ordinance codified in this section, and all technology park zoned land in the Town with the exception of any property with residential uses.
    1. The EEZ process is available to new development, additions, expansions, or changes to existing development proposing permitted uses and otherwise consistent with existing zoning and development standards.
    2. The provisions of this section do not apply to applications for amendments to the zoning or planned area development standards, or applications for conditional use permits. ((O)18-05, Amended,  03/21/2018)
C. General Provisions 
    1. Exemption from Conceptual Design Review and Approval Process 
    Development applications complying with the requirements of subsection B of this section shall be exempted from the following requirements:
        a. The submittal of conceptual design review applications and associated Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council review.
        b. Public outreach requirements of Section 22.15.
    2. Approvals Required 
    Development applications complying with the requirements of subsection B of this section shall comply with the following review and approval process:
        a. Final design review as provided in Section 22.9.
            i. The form and content of all submittals shall comply with Section 22.9.D.2.
            ii. The application shall be distributed for agency review consistent with Section 22.9.D.3.
            iii. The review time frames shall be consistent with established review periods.
        b. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall evaluate conformance of final design review submittals to the Zoning Code, with specific emphasis on:
            i. Conformance with conceptual design review principles (Sections 22.9.D.5 and 27.3.H).
            ii. Conformance with Addendum A design standards.
        c. Upon review of final design applications, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall make specific findings of compliance with applicable conceptual design principles, Addendum A design standards, and other provisions of the Zoning Code and shall generate a report of said findings.
        d. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the final design submittal based on specific findings as outlined in the report.
        e. Conditions may be imposed in order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of the Zoning Code.
        f. Upon written request by the applicant, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve an alternative parking ratio, subject to the review criteria outlined in Section 27.7.C.2. An alternative parking ratio shall not be deemed inconsistent with the Zoning Code as referenced in subsection B.1 of this section.
    3. Applicant Appeal of Administrative Decision 
        a. The approval, with or without conditions, or denial of an application shall be final unless, within twenty (20) days from the date of the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s decision, the applicant files an appeal in writing to the Town Clerk.
        b. Such appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Town Clerk and shall indicate where, in the opinion of the appellant, the Planning and Zoning Administrator was in error.
        c. The Town Clerk shall schedule the appeal for Town Council review and the Town Council, at its meeting, shall uphold, modify or overrule the decision.
        d. The decision of the Town Council shall be final.
    4. Town Council Review of Administrative Decision 
        a. The approval, with or without conditions, or denial of an application shall be final unless, within twenty (20) days from the date of the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s decision, a majority of the Town Council requests review of the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s decision.
        b. The Town Council shall have the right and prerogative to initiate its own review of any decision of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        c. The Town Council shall uphold, modify, or overrule the decision or may refer the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their recommendation prior to taking action.
        d. Notice of Town Council-initiated review of an administrative decision shall be given to the applicant by the Town Clerk within ten (10) days of Town Council action.
        e. The decision of the Town Council shall be final. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)15-05, Amended,  02/04/2015; (O)12-15, Enacted,  10/03/2012)

CHAPTER 25 USE REGULATIONS

Sections:
Section 25.1 Requirements for Specific Uses
Section 25.2 Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 25.3 Temporary Uses and Structures

Section 25.1 Requirements for Specific Uses
This section applies to all non-residential uses, excluding parks. The requirements specified herein are in addition to those in the corresponding zoning district.
A. General Requirements for All Non-Residential Uses 
    1. Fire Access 
    At least two (2) driveways should be provided for circulation and emergency vehicle access, subject to Fire Marshal review.
    2. Conceptual Architecture; Subject to Planning and Zoning Commission Approval 
        a. Accessory structures (structures other than the primary building(s) such as screen walls, gas station canopies, carports, signage structures) shall be coordinated with the primary building(s) in terms of materials, colors and style.
        b. Exterior finishes of a building shall not exceed a reflectivity of sixty percent (60%).
    3. Noise 
        a. Noise from internal loudspeakers, paging systems, live entertainment or stereo speakers shall not exceed forty (40) decibels at the property line of any adjacent property used or intended for residential purposes.
        b. No external speakers, except for drive-through order purposes, piped-in ambiance music that is not discernible (less than forty (40) decibels) from on-site property lines, special events and/or approved outdoor entertainment venues, shall be permitted on the premises.
    4. Outdoor Storage and Activities 
        a. All operations and storage, except as provided in subsection A.4.d of this section, outdoor displays, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building or within an opaque barrier designed to match the main building on the site. Items stored, excluding live vegetation, may not be visible from private or public streets or any adjacent property used or intended for residential purposes.
        b. Outdoor storage containers are not permitted.
        c. Temporary outdoor storage is not permitted except by Special Use Permit.
        d. Outdoor display of merchandise shall meet the following standards:
            i. Location:
                a) The display area shall be located directly adjacent to the primary building where the merchandise is sold.
                b) The display area shall not be placed in a manner that will constitute a public hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or interfere with bicycle parking areas and other egress/ingress accesses (Figure 25.1). People standing in driveways or blocking doorways while viewing outdoor displays are considered a hazard.
                    1) Repealed by (O)17-07.
                    2) A minimum of four (4) feet shall be maintained from any adjacent road curb.
                    3) The display area shall not interfere with sidewalk function.
                    4) A four (4) foot clear path shall be maintained.
                    5) Access to all doors shall be kept clear at all times.
                    6) The display area shall not be located in parking areas, drive aisles or landscape areas.
            ii. Size:
                a) Repealed by (O)17-07.
                b) The display area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the linear building frontage where the display is located, up to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) linear feet.
            iii. Quantity:
                a) Display areas are limited to one (1) facade of the building.
            iv. Signs:
                a) Price tags shall be no larger than one (1) square foot.Figure 25.1. Outdoor Display Locations
                [IMAGE: <25-1-A-4.png>]
        e. Dispensing machines are prohibited except for newspapers.
        f. Outdoor eating areas for restaurants using disposable dinnerware, wrappings or napkins shall be enclosed with a minimum three (3) foot barrier in order to prevent the blowing and scattering of litter. Such areas shall be maintained in a litter free condition.
    5. Pedestrian Circulation 
        a. An on-site pedestrian circulation system must be provided.
        b. Connections 
            i. Where possible, interconnect all buildings, parking areas, bicycle parking, recreational areas, common outdoor areas and amenities.
            ii. Connect to trail networks, paths and public amenities and adjacent land uses.
        c. Materials 
            i. The circulation system must be hard surfaced and be a minimum of five (5) feet wide.
            ii. Where the system crosses driveways, parking areas and loading areas, the system must be made clearly identifiable by incorporating the following mechanisms: use of traffic calming methods, a different paving material, or other similar method. Striping does not meet this requirement. Elevation changes and speed tables must be at least four (4) inches high.
            iii. Where the system is parallel and adjacent to an auto lane, it must be separated from the auto travel way by a raised path, curb, bollards, landscaping or other physical barrier. If a raised path is used, it must be at least four (4) inches high and the ends of the raised portion must be equipped with curb ramps. Bollard spacing must be no further apart than five (5) feet on center.
    6. Odors 
        a. All restaurants, manufacturing and senior care uses shall provide an odor abatement plan at the time of Final Design submittal. The plan is subject to Planning and Zoning Administrator approval. Decisions may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
        b. The odor abatement plan must contain the following elements:
            i. An inventory of potential or identified odor emission point sources associated with the industry or land use.
            ii. A plan detailing best available control technologies and appurtenances designed to eliminate or achieve the maximum reduction of odor emission from an emission point source inclusive of, but not necessarily limited to certain processes, procedures or operating methods intended to mitigate or control odor.
            iii. A specification of the documentation that will be made available for Town review which will verify the data produced by the monitoring equipment, and which will verify that processes and procedures are conducted consistent with the specifications in the facility’s odor control study and plan.
            iv. A schedule for the implementation and installation of the control technologies, appurtenances and monitoring instrumentation.
            v. An acknowledgment of the authority of the Town and/or County and its agents to enter into the facility and its property to investigate complaints and to verify the facility’s adherence to the compliance plan.
    7. Repealed by (O)16-16.
((O)17-07, Amended,  10/18/2017; (O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)16-10, Amended,  09/07/2016; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
B. Requirements for Specific Non-Residential Uses 
    1. Assisted Living Home 
        a. No assisted living home shall be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to another assisted living home. The minimum one thousand (1,000) foot separation shall be maintained between property lines, measured on a straight line.
        b. No assisted living home shall contain more than ten (10) residents and an appropriate number of support staff.
    2. Animal Services 
        a. All ancillary short-term boarding and lodging activities shall be conducted within entirely enclosed, soundproof buildings.
    3. Bars 
        a. All outdoor patios or similar facilities shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any property used or intended for residential purposes.
        b. The above distance shall be measured from the abutting edge of the residential district to the closest property line or lease line of the bar use. The limit of the property line or lease line shall include all required parking, landscaping, and setbacks of the specific bar use.
    4. Commercial Stables 
        a. The minimum property size shall be ten (10) acres.
        b. The proposed site shall not be adjacent to subdivided single-family residential property unless that residential property contains an equestrian easement along the contiguous boundary.
        c. The stable property shall contain a buffer strip one hundred (100) feet wide maintained in a natural state, adjacent to all surrounding privately owned property. This strip shall be used only for occasional riding and not for keeping, pasturing or storing of animals, and not for training or other regular or intensified activities.
        d. There shall be a buffer strip forty (40) feet wide maintained and used as described above adjacent to any street.
        e. There shall be no shows or other activities that would generate more traffic than is normal to a residential area unless the proposed site has direct access from a major arterial road. Permission for such shows and activities may be obtained via a Special Use Permit.
        f. All pasture and animal storage areas shall be enclosed with fences or walls a minimum of four (4) feet six (6) inches in height.
        g. All laws applicable to the public health must be complied with for the entire period of operation of the stable.
        h. All stable, activity and pasture areas that are not grassed shall be treated for dust control as approved by the Town Council.
        i. Adequate parking shall be shown on the site plan.
    5. Communication Structures and Facilities 
        a. Antenna 
            i. Residential Antenna Standards 
            Antennas are permitted in all residential zoning districts, subject to the following conditions:
                a) Ground-Mounted 
                    1) A ground-mounted satellite dish that is one (1) meter (3.28 feet) or less in diameter, with a maximum height of five (5) feet.
                    2) Free standing pole antennas are limited to the building height allowed in the applicable zone.
                    3) Location 
                    All ground-mounted antennas are to be located in the rear yard, unless rear yard location provides an indirect line of site to the satellite, in which case may be located in the side yard. All applicable setbacks for accessory buildings shall apply.
                    4) Screening 
                    All ground-mounted satellite dishes shall be screened up to five (5) feet with a solid wall or landscaping, so as not to be visible from adjacent properties.
                    5) Color 
                    Antennas that are not fully screened by a wall or landscaping are prohibited from being either white or iridescent in color, and are encouraged to be a neutral color. Fully screened antenna may be of any color.
                b) Building-Mounted 
                    1) A building-mounted satellite dish that is one (1) meter (3.28 feet) or less in diameter and building-mounted antenna shall be permitted in any zoning district. Such antenna shall be fully screened.
                    2) Color 
                    Fully screened antenna may be of any color.
                    3) Height 
                    The maximum height of the antenna shall be the minimum height necessary for reception of radio waves.
                c) Amateur Radio Equipment 
                    1) The maximum height of the equipment, whether a fixed or “crank-up” style structure, including antenna, shall be fifty (50) feet, measured from the ground to the fully operational extent of the equipment.
                    2) The tower and equipment shall only be located in the rear yard.
                    3) There shall be a setback ratio of one to one (1:1) (one (1) foot of setback for each foot in height from all buildings, property lines and overhead wires).
                    4) The equipment shall be operated only by a Federally licensed amateur radio operator.
                    5) The base of the equipment shall not exceed a size greater than four (4) feet by four (4) feet.
                d) Satellite dishes exceeding one (1) meter diameter
                Planning and Zoning Administrator approval is required for all ground- or building-mounted satellite dish antennas over one (1) meter in diameter. All satellite dish antennas over one (1) meter in diameter shall adhere to the following standards:
                    1) A maximum diameter of fifteen (15) feet will be permitted.
                    2) Ground-mounted satellite dishes exceeding one (1) meter in diameter are permitted only in the rear yard, unless rear yard location provides an indirect line of sight to the satellite, in which case may be located in the side yard.
                    3) A minimum two-thirds (2/3) of the satellite dish must be screened with either landscaping or a solid wall.
                    4) The maximum elevation of the foundation for a ground-mounted antenna is not to exceed one (1) foot.
                    5) Height 
                    The maximum height of a building-mounted antenna that is over one (1) meter in diameter shall be the minimum height that is necessary for reception of radio waves.
            ii. Commercial Antenna Standards 
            Antennas which are building mounted or ground mounted are permitted in all commercial or industrial zoning districts, subject to the following conditions:
                a) Ground-Mounted 
                    1) Satellite dishes are limited to two (2) meters (6.56 feet) or less in diameter, and up to five (5) feet in height.
                    2) Freestanding pole antennas are limited to the building height allowed in the applicable zone.
                    3) Location 
                    All ground-mounted antennas are to be located in the rear yard, unless rear yard location provides an indirect line of sight to the satellite, in which case may be located in the side yard. All applicable setbacks for accessory buildings shall apply.
                    4) Screening 
                    All ground-mounted satellite dishes shall be screened five (5) feet up from the ground with a solid wall or landscaping, so as not to be visible from adjacent properties.
                    5) Color 
                    Antennas that are not screened by a wall or landscaping are prohibited from being either white or iridescent in color, and are to be a neutral color. Fully screened antennas may be of any color.
                b) Building-Mounted 
                    1) A building-mounted antenna that is two (2) meters (6.56 feet) or less in diameter shall be allowed to be mounted on the roof. Such antenna shall be fully screened from the road and adjacent property.
                    2) Color 
                    Fully screened antennas may be of any color.
                c) Satellite dishes exceeding two (2) meters in diameter:
                    1) Approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission is required subject to the following standards:
                    2) Maximum diameter: fifteen (15) feet.
                    3) Ground-mounted satellite dishes are permitted only in the rear yard, unless rear yard location provides an indirect line of sight to the satellite, in which case may be located in the side yard.
                    4) A minimum two-thirds (2/3) of the satellite dish must be screened with either landscaping or a solid wall.
                    5) The maximum elevation of the foundation for ground-mounted antenna is not to exceed one (1) foot.
                    6) Height 
                    The maximum height of building-mounted antenna that is over two (2) meters in diameter shall be the minimum height that is necessary for reception of radio waves.
        b. Communication Facilities 
            i. Applicability 
            This section applies to all new communication facilities or new appurtenances to existing facilities except:
                a) Facilities used for police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency dispatch functions.
                b) Small cell wireless facilities located in the public rights-of-way which shall adhere to the standards, processes and fees established in the small cell wireless code.
                c) Requirements preventing installation of a facility may be waived by the Planning and Zoning Administrator when there is a conflict with Federal law.
            ii. General Requirements for All Communications Facilities
                a) Stealth Applications 
                    1) All facilities, including modifications to existing facilities, shall be constructed using stealth applications. A stealth application entails the camouflaging of an antenna, appurtenance, fixture, and/or structure with a building or the landscape in terms of design, colors, materials, height, and width.
                    2) Site location and development shall preserve the existing character of the surrounding community, buildings, land uses and zoning district. Facilities shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized.
                    3) Antennas mounted on buildings, utility poles, or structures shall be covered by appropriate casings that are designed to match existing structural or architectural features.
                    4) The camouflaging of antennas shall include architectural integration, painting and texturing to match the existing structure, or if groundmounted, of such design to be compatibly integrated with the surrounding landscape. Where feasible, antennas can be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging.
                b) No communication facilities shall be permitted on developed or undeveloped lots where the primary use or purpose is for a dwelling.
                c) Setback Requirements for All Ground-Mounted Facilities, Excluding Joint-Use Installations on Street Lights, Traffic Lights, Electric Utility Poles and/or other Utility Structures and Collocations on Existing Facilities 
                    1) Structures are subject to the underlying zoning district building setbacks and must be set back two (2) feet for every one (1) foot in height from the boundary of any property where the primary use or purpose is for a dwelling, whichever is more restrictive.
                    2) All new facilities within the Tangerine Road Corridor Overlay District and Oracle Road Scenic Overlay District must be set back from the right-of-way edge by a distance of three (3) feet for every one (1) foot in height.
                d) Equipment Buildings and Cabinets 
                    1) Equipment buildings or cabinets shall be concealed from public view and made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding buildings and consistent with the general character of the area.
                    2) Above-ground equipment shall be completely screened from view by a compatible solid wall or opaque fence except when a ground-mounted cabinet, or combination of all cabinets, is smaller than one hundred eighty (180) cubic feet. Units that are smaller than one hundred eighty (180) cubic feet may, at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Administrator, not be required to be screened from view if they have been designed with a structure, materials, colors or detailing that emulates the character of the area. All gates shall be opaque.
                    3) Equipment buildings must be placed in compliance with the underlying zoning setbacks for accessory buildings.
                    4) The equipment building or cabinet must be regularly maintained.
                    5) The maximum building height shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet.
                    6) All above-ground equipment with air conditioning units shall be enclosed by walls, if located within three hundred (300) feet of developed or undeveloped lots where the primary use is or is platted for single-family dwellings.
                    7) Any exterior lighting, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration, shall be positioned within the walled area and shall be mounted below the height of the screening fence or wall.
                e) Additional Standards for Development in Parks and Open Space Zoning 
                For areas not utilized as a developed public or private park, golf course, or similar use, the following standards shall apply:
                    1) All facilities must be collocated on an existing manmade structure or ground-mounted and disguised as a natural feature such as rock or saguaro.
                    2) All accessory and equipment buildings shall be located underground unless they can be entirely camouflaged as a natural feature.
                    3) New roads shall not be constructed to specifically access the site.
                    4) Significant resources, as defined in Section 27.6, may not be disturbed.
                f) Discontinuance of Use 
                    1) Any antenna or tower for which the use is discontinued for six (6) months or more shall be removed, and the property shall be restored to its condition prior to the location of the antenna or tower, all at the expense of the provider. The Town may require financial assurances to ensure compliance with this provision.
                g) Noninterference with Public Safety 
                    1) No wireless communication transmitter, receptor, or other facility shall interfere with police, fire, and emergency public safety communications.
                h) Technical Evaluation 
                    1) The Town may engage the services of a third party consultant, at the applicant’s sole expense, to evaluate the accuracy of the application, Federal Communications Commission compliance, and other technical issues as needed.
                i) Monopole and Tower Site Standards 
                    1) Any new monopole shall be separated from the nearest monopole –regardless of ownership and jurisdictional boundaries – by a distance of one-quarter (1/4) mile, unless it is adjacent to an existing monopole or tower within a common screened wall.
                    2) New towers require a minimum separation of one (1) mile from any existing tower – regardless of ownership and jurisdictional boundaries – unless one can verify that no reasonable alternative exists.
                    3) All new monopoles or towers that are forty (40) feet or higher shall allow for collocation by other wireless communication providers.
                    4) Use of guy wires is prohibited.
                j) Collocations or Modifications to Existing Towers or Structures 
                    1) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall not deny any eligible collocations or modifications to existing structures, except when the collocation or modification is a substantial change to the physical dimensions of the structure, as defined below.
                        A) Substantial changes are those which meet any of the following criteria:
                i) An increase in height of the utility poles that adds more than ten percent (10%) to the original height or more than the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest antenna array not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, up to a maximum of eighty (80) feet.
                ii) An increase in height of the existing structures that adds more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater, and not to exceed the regulated height of the existing structure.
                iii) The addition of an appurtenance that:
                    A) Protrudes from the edge of the structure more than six (6) feet; or
                    B) More than the width of the structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; or
                    C) Is more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing number of appurtenances.
                iv) The installation of new equipment cabinets:
                    A) When there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure; or
                    B) More than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or
                    C) More than ten (10%) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure.
                v) Entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site.
                vi) Defeats existing concealment elements of the structure.
                vii) Does not comply with conditions associated with prior approvals of the structure, unless noncompliance is due to an increase in height, width, or addition of cabinets or excavation that does not exceed the substantial change threshold.
                    2) Collocations or modifications that are substantial changes shall comply with the Tier I, Tier II or major communication facility requirements of this code.
                    3) All collocations or modifications shall be constructed using stealth applications.
                k) Access and Signage 
                    1) All facilities, especially roof-mounted antennas, must be designed in a manner to clearly prevent and/or deter access by the public.
                    2) All facilities shall be identified by a permanently installed plaque or marker, no larger than four (4) inches by six (6) inches, clearly identifying the provider’s name, address and emergency phone number. The sign shall be placed in a location visible to passersby.
                l) Provider’s Communication Plan 
                    1) The Provider Communication Plans shall be utilized to require collocation and/or clustering of new facilities where technically feasible.
            iii. Minor Communication Facilities 
                a) General Standards for Minor Facilities 
                    1) Minor facilities may not exceed forty (40) feet in height unless otherwise specified herein.
                    2) Minor facilities are exempt from parking requirements specified in Chapter 11, unless required by Planning and Zoning Administrator or Planning and Zoning Commission.
                b) Tier I Minor Facilities 
                    1) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall make a determination on a Tier I application.
                    2) All Tier I minor facilities shall be constructed using stealth applications that result in the communication facility being entirely indiscernible as a facility because it appears as a functional component of a building, structure, or the landscape.
                    3) All Tier I minor facilities shall meet the following criteria:
                        A) They shall be located on existing buildings, utility poles, communication facilities, or other existing structures.
                i) A replacement utility pole or structure may be utilized only if it closely resembles the original utility pole or structure.
                ii) The height of the utility poles, communication facilities, or other existing structures shall not add more than twenty percent (20%) to the original height up to a maximum of eighty (80) feet or the regulated height of the existing utility poles, communication facilities, or other structures, whichever is less.
                iii) For utility poles or other similar structures the diameter of the pole may be increased up to sixty percent (60%).
                    B) Or they shall be located within concealment structures such as flag-poles, cacti, or desert trees that are entirely camouflaged.
                    C) Unlimited collocations on all existing facilities.
                    D) Flagpoles utilized as an alternative concealment structure shall not exceed one and one-quarter (1.25) times the height of the nearest structure and a total diameter of thirteen (13) inches.
                c) Tier II Minor Facilities 
                    1) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a final determination on all Tier II applications, except when a proposed new facility exceeds the building height restrictions of the underlying zoning district. In this case, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide a recommendation prior to Town Council determination.
                    2) All property owners and HOAs within six hundred (600) feet of the facility will be notified by mail and provided with fifteen (15) days to respond. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may require a neighborhood meeting.
                    3) All Tier II minor facilities shall be constructed using stealth applications that result in the communication facility being incorporated into a building, structure, or the landscape to the greatest extent feasible; however, it remains discernible as a facility.
                    4) All Tier II minor facilities shall meet the following criteria:
                        A) New monopoles or towers that are forty (40) feet or less in height. The overall height may be increased to fifty (50) feet only if the site will be immediately utilized for collocation. The increase in height will be the minimum required to support collocation.
                        B) Collocation on existing structures is subject to the following requirements:
                    1) The height of the utility poles, communication facilities, or other existing structures shall not add more than thirty percent (30%) to the original height up to a maximum of eighty (80) feet or the regulated height of the existing utility poles, communication facilities, or other structures, whichever is less.
                    2) For utility poles or other similar structures the diameter of the pole may be increased up to sixty percent (60%).
            iv. Major Communication Facilities 
                a) Major communication facilities are those facilities that do not meet the minor communications facilities criteria.
                b) They are subject to a conditional use permit and requirements of Section 22.5.
                c) Tier II stealth criteria apply to all major communication facilities.
                d) All major communication facilities shall meet the following criteria:
                    1) The height of a facility shall not exceed the height established in the criteria for minor facilities, except that they are allowed up to one hundred fifty (150) feet in C-1, C-2, and T-P Zoning Districts.
                    2) A minimum of one (1) parking space must be provided unless specifically waived by Town Council. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
    6. Convenience Uses 
        a. Standards for All Convenience Uses 
            i. Locational Requirements 
                a) Convenience uses shall be a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet from any property used or intended for residential purposes.
                b) Convenience uses shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any public park or school.
                c) The above distances shall be measured from the abutting edge of the residential district to the closest property line or lease line of the convenience use. The limit of the property line or lease line shall include all required parking, landscaping, and setbacks of the specific convenience use.
                d) Convenience uses shall be ancillary to and located in shopping centers, office parks, or a combination of a shopping center and office park. Convenience uses shall not be permitted in office parks in an R-6 district.
            ii. Number of Convenience Uses per Center 
                a) The total number of convenience uses shall not exceed one (1) pad per four and one-half (4.5) acres of shopping center or office park. No more than one (1) drive-in, drive-through, gas station, or convenience use shall be permitted for every nine (9) acres of office park.
            iii. Access 
                a) No convenience use shall have direct vehicular access onto any street which provides a lower level of service than a collector street.
                b) All convenience uses shall be accessed through a common driveway serving the center or office park. If traffic safety warrants, one (1) direct access per arterial frontage may be approved by the Town Engineer for an individual convenience use.
                c) All convenience uses shall provide access points to the internal circulation driveways and parking areas of the center unless otherwise approved by the Town Council.
            iv. Timing of Development 
                a) Convenience uses shall not be open for business until a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the net floor area for the non-convenience use structures within the shopping center have been constructed. ((O)07-43, Amended,  12/21/2007)
    7. Daycare or Preschool 
        a. All daycare uses shall provide child drop-off areas with direct pedestrian access to the building entrance.
        b. Drop-off areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet away from any property used or intended for residential purposes.
    8. Drive-Thru Uses, Not Including Banks 
        a. All drive-thru uses are subject to the requirements of subsections A.3 and B.6 of this section.
        b. No drive-thru use may be visible from any public roadway or any property used or intended for residential purposes.
        c. Any associated vehicle queuing is prohibited in roadways, drive aisles or other parking area access lanes (PAAL).
    9. Entertainment at a Bar, Restaurant or Private Club 
        a. Any entertainment at bars, restaurants or private clubs is subject to the noise requirements of subsection A.3 of this section.
        b. The facility must be located a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet from any property used or intended for residential purposes.
        c. The above distance shall be measured from the abutting edge of the residential district to the closest property line or lease line of the bar, restaurant or private club use. The limit of the property line or lease line shall include all required parking, landscaping, and setbacks of the specific bar, restaurant or private club use.
    10. Farms and Ranches 
        a. Farm uses shall require a minimum of one hundred forty-four thousand (144,000) contiguous square feet.
        b. Farm uses may include, but are not limited to, the following:
            i. Field crops, truck gardening, berry or bush crops, tree crops, flower gardening, nurseries, and orchards.
            ii. Grazing and raising of horses and livestock other than swine with no more than one (1) head of livestock more than six (6) months of age per thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area.
            iii. Raising of poultry, rabbits and similar small animals.
        c. Ranch uses shall require a minimum of ten (10) contiguous acres.
    11. Fire and Police Stations and Emergency Rescue Facilities, Private
        a. A minimum property size of one (1) acre is required.
        b. Buildings and associated parking may cover a maximum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the gross site area.
        c. Vehicular Storage Areas 
            i. All fire, police and emergency vehicles shall be stored/serviced within a building or in an area enclosed by a six (6)-foot masonry wall. Said wall shall be finished to match the main building(s) on the site and shall be screened by plantings at least four (4) feet in height and spaced no more than four (4) feet apart.
        d. Access 
            i. At least two (2) driveways shall be provided to assure safe ingress/egress. The location and number of points of access to the site, the interior circulation patterns, and the separation between pedestrians and vehicles should all be designed to maximize safety and convenience of those using the site. The design should be harmonious with proposed and neighboring buildings. A circulation assessment shall be prepared which addresses parking requirements, site access and vehicle turning and backing requirements.
        e. Noise 
            i. When abutting a residential district, sirens on vehicles shall not be activated until emergency vehicles reach the nearest arterial street unless required to clear traffic.
    12. Food Processing, Artisanal 
        a. Artisanal food processing uses shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in gross floor area.
    13. Food Processing, Large Scale 
        a. Food processing uses greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of gross floor area.
        b. No slaughterhouses, meat processing and/or packing plants, or any other facilities used in the reduction of animal matter, or rendering of fats or oils are permitted.
    14. Gas Stations 
        a. All gas stations are subject to the requirements of subsection B.6 of this section.
        b. A minimum building site of thirty-six thousand (36,000) square feet is required and lot frontage is to be not less than two hundred (200) feet, except that kiosk gas stations may be located on an existing or proposed pad within a shopping center.
        c. Any associated vehicle queuing is prohibited in the required setbacks.
        d. All on-site activities, except those to be performed at the fuel pumps, are to be performed at a kiosk window or within a completely enclosed building.
        e. All restroom entrances shall be screened from view of adjacent properties or street rights-of-way by a decorative wall.
        f. No outside storage of and no sale, lease or rental of trailers, trucks or similar equipment shall be permitted, except as may be specifically allowed in that zone.
        g. All entrances to service bays shall be screened or face away from street frontage.
        h. Canopies shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from property line of the project. Design of the canopy shall architecturally match the design of the main building. The maximum height of the canopy shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet or the height of the nearest structure, whichever is more restrictive.
    15. Golf Safety Nets 
    Golf safety nets may be permitted in all districts provided approval is given, in writing, by the local Homeowners’ Association and/or sub-association, if active, and staff makes a determination that the design standards below have been met.
        a. Design Standards 
            i. Nets and poles may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height from grade.
            ii. A driving range barrier-type nylon netting material shall be used, which shall have a three-quarter (3/4)-inch weave and be black in color.
            iii. Net structures shall be consistent, in all details, with existing safety nets located in the immediate area.
            iv. The preferred method of support for the netting material is via a cable connecting the top of the two (2) poles, as opposed to multiple horizontal rails.
            v. Poles shall be painted to match the color of the primary structure on the property.
            vi. Structural design calculations must be in accordance with those adopted by the Town Building Official or, otherwise, must be prepared by a qualified registrant and approved by the Town Building Official.
            vii. No flags, signs, banners or other appurtenances may be attached to the supporting poles or netting material of such nets.
            viii. The safety net and supporting structure shall be located and designed to minimize the potential for damage to adjoining properties resulting from deflection of golf balls directly off of the safety net and supporting structure.
        b. Building Permit Required 
        A building permit must be obtained prior to construction of golf safety nets. A building permit will be withheld if:
            i. Written Homeowners’ Association approval is not presented, or
            ii. The design standards set forth in subsection a of this subsection have not been met.
    16. Health Studio or Fitness Center 
        a. All activities must be indoor within an entirely enclosed building.
    17. Manufacturing Services, Light 
        a. All activities must be conducted within an entirely enclosed building, including the storage of all materials.
        b. Loading areas shall not be visible from any property used or intended for residential purposes.
        c. None of the following shall be discernible at the property line:
            i. Noise
            ii. Odor
            iii. Vibration
            iv. Glare/heat
    18. Marketing of Products Raised on the Premises 
        a. A stand of not more than two hundred (200) square feet in area shall be permitted provided said stand is no closer than ten (10) feet to any street line and no closer than twenty (20) feet to any other lot line.
    19. Medical Marijuana Uses 
        a. Medical Marijuana Dispensary 
        A permitted use subject to the standards below:
            i. Supplemental Application 
            In addition to the standard required permit application, an applicant applying for a medical marijuana dispensary must complete a supplemental application that includes all of the following information:
                a) If the application is by an agent for the owner, the authorization must include an explicit acknowledgment from the owner that the owner knows that the proposed use of the property is as a medical marijuana dispensary.
                b) The legal name of the medical marijuana dispensary.
                c) The name and address of each principal officer and board member of the nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary.
                d) A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. Section 36-2804(B)(1)(c).
                e) A floor plan showing the location, dimensions and type of security measures demonstrating that the medical marijuana dispensary will meet the definition of “enclosed, locked facility” contained in A.R.S. Section 36-2801(6).
            ii. Development Standards 
                a) A medical marijuana dispensary must be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, modular building, cargo container or motor vehicle.
                b) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be set back a minimum of two thousand (2,000) feet from all other medical marijuana dispensaries measured from the parcel boundaries.
                c) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from a public, private, parochial, charter, dramatic, dancing, music, or other similar school or educational or activity facility where children may be enrolled, measured from the parcel boundaries.
                d) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from a child care center, measured from the parcel boundaries.
                e) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from a library or public park.
                f) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from a church.
                g) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
                h) A medical marijuana dispensary may not have a drive-through service.
                i) The maximum floor area of a medical marijuana dispensary is two thousand (2,000) square feet.
                j) The secure storage area for the medical marijuana stored at the medical marijuana dispensary shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
                k) The permitted hours of operation of a medical marijuana dispensary are between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
            iii. Permit Conditions 
            The Town may include any conditions it finds necessary to conserve and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. The Town must include the following permit conditions for issuance of the medical marijuana dispensary permit:
                a) An expiration date that requires reapplication or renewal of the permit after a specified period of time.
                b) A requirement that the medical marijuana dispensary meets security requirements adopted by the Arizona Department of Health Services.
                c) A requirement that the storage facilities for the medical marijuana stored or grown on site prevent the emission of dust, fumes, vapors or odors into the environment.
                d) A requirement that the medical marijuana dispensary is prohibited from permitting anyone to consume marijuana on the premises.
                e) A requirement that the medical marijuana dispensary comply with applicable sections of Title 10 (Offenses) of the Oro Valley Town Code.
        b. Medical Marijuana Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Location 
        A permitted use subject to the standards below:
            i. Supplemental Application 
            In addition to the standard required application, an applicant applying for a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall complete a supplemental application that includes all of the following information:
                a) If the application is by an agent for the owner, the authorization must include an explicit acknowledgment from the owner that the owner knows that the proposed use of the property is as a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location.
                b) The legal name and address of the affiliated medical marijuana dispensary.
                c) The name and address of each principal officer and board member of the medical marijuana dispensary affiliated with the off-site cultivation location and the name and address of each medical marijuana dispensary agent.
                d) A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. Section 36-2804(B)(1)(c).
                e) A floor plan showing the location, dimensions of and type of security measures demonstrating that the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location will meet the definition of “enclosed, locked facility” contained in A.R.S. Section 36-2801(6).
            ii. Development Standards 
                a) Medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location must be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle.
                b) A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be set back a minimum of two thousand (2,000) feet from all other medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation locations measured from the parcel boundaries.
                c) A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from a public, private, parochial, charter, dramatic, dancing, music, or other similar school or educational or activity facility where children may be enrolled.
                d) A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from a child care center.
                e) The maximum floor area of a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location is two thousand (2,000) square feet.
                f) The secure storage area for the medical marijuana stored at the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.
                g) A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location must be contained indoors.
            iii. Permit Conditions 
            The Town may include any conditions it finds necessary to conserve and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. The Town must include the following conditions for issuance of the permit for a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location:
                a) An expiration date for the permit that requires reapplication or renewal of the permit after a specified period of time.
                b) A requirement that the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location meets security requirements adopted by the Arizona Department of Health Services.
                c) A requirement that the storage facilities for the medical marijuana stored or grown on site prevent the emission of dust, fumes, vapors or odors into the environment.
                d) A requirement that the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location is prohibited from permitting anyone to consume marijuana on the premises.
                e) A requirement that the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location comply with applicable sections of Title 10 (Offenses) of the Oro Valley Town Code.
        c. Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location. 
        A permitted use subject to the standards below:
            i. Development Standards 
                a) All conditions and restrictions for medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation locations except that the designated caregiver cultivation location cultivation area is limited to two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
                b) More than one (1) designated caregiver may co-locate cultivation locations as long as the total cultivation area does not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
                c) The designated caregiver location must comply with the security requirements of A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.
        d. Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location 
        A permitted use subject to the standards below:
            i. Development Standards 
                a) The qualifying patient cultivation location must be located in the C-1 or C-2 Commercial District as a permitted use or as an ancillary use to the qualifying patient’s primary residence.
                b) Medical marijuana cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying patient’s primary residence must not be detectable from the exterior of the building in which the cultivation takes place.
                c) The qualifying patient cultivation location must comply with the security requirements of A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28. ((O)16-08, Amended,  06/01/2016; (O)10-13, Amended,  10/27/2010)
    20. Microbrewery 
        a. No microbrewery may produce more than three hundred thousand (300,000) gallons annually.
        b. A microbrewery may be permitted as an ancillary use to a restaurant not to exceed forty percent (40%) of the gross floor area.
    21. Mobile Food Units or Food Trucks 
        a. Mobile food units may be permitted as a service to specific clientele on private property as follows:
            i. As an invited service to employees or guests of a temporary private function, not to exceed four (4) hours.
            ii. As an invited service to employees or customers of a single commercial establishment, for a period not to exceed four (4) hours.
        b. Mobile food units may be permitted as a service to the general public as a unit participating in an organized event through a special use permit or special event permit.
        c. Location Requirements 
            i. Mobile food units may not operate at a public transit facility including bus stops and public “park and ride” areas.
            ii. Mobile food units must be located outside of any required setbacks.
            iii. Mobile food units must not present a traffic safety hazard as determined by the Town Engineer.
        d. All external lighting must be affixed to the exterior of the mobile food unit. All lighting is subject to the requirements of Section 27.5.C, Prohibitions, but shall otherwise be exempt from the requirements of Section 27.5, Outdoor Lighting.
        e. No drive-thru components are permitted.
        f. Signage must be affixed to the exterior of the mobile food unit. All signage is subject to the requirements of Section 28.10, Prohibited Signs, but shall otherwise be exempt from the requirements of Chapter 28, signs.
    22. New Utility Poles and Wires 
        a. Applicability 
            i. It is unlawful to erect, possess or maintain any utility poles or wires above the surface of the ground except after obtaining a conditional use permit therefor, unless as otherwise provided in subsection B.22.a.ii of this section.
            ii. Exceptions 
                a) Utility poles and wires erected prior to December 31, 1983.
                b) New utility poles and wires erected for temporary use for periods not in excess of four (4) months for purely temporary purposes such as for providing temporary building construction power or for emergency power or telephone service, or for the furnishing of power to temporary outdoor activities. This four (4) month period may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and Town Engineer if good cause is shown.
                c) Erection on the ground surface and flush to the ground of transformers, pullboxes, service terminals, pedestal type telephone facilities normally used with and as a part of an underground distribution system. The size, type and design of these are to be approved by the Town Engineer.
                d) Erection on the ground surface and flush to the ground of wires in encased concrete or conduit where underground wire installation is not feasible due to special features of the terrain.
                e) Replacements, relocations and new installations involving one (1) or more of the following improvements:
                    1) Poles 
                        A) Fifty percent (50%) or less increase to a pole height and/or diameter, provided the new pole has a tapered design.
                        B) Structural support pole(s) used for a change in line direction or line termination only.
                    2) Wires and Pole-Mounted Equipment 
                        A) Changes to wire diameter not to exceed two (2) inches in thickness.
                        B) Twenty-five percent (25%) or less increase to the total number of wires, not to exceed ten (10) wires.
                        C) Pole-mounted equipment, excluding wires, insulators, and attachment devices, with a size of one hundred sixty (160) cubic feet or less on major or minor arterial roads as depicted in the Your Voice, Our Future, General Plan Circulation Map.
                        D) Pole-mounted equipment excluding wires, insulators, and attachment devices, with a size of sixty-four (64) cubic feet or less on major collector, minor collector or local roads as depicted in the Your Voice, Our Future, General Plan Circulation Map.
                    3) Other 
                    All replacement projects involving five thousand (5,000) feet or less of continuous poles and wires within a twelve (12) month period.
        b. Approval Criteria for Conditional Use Permits 
            i. Applicable additions, modifications or new utility poles where none previously existed may have a significant visual impact and require consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council as a conditional use permit.
            ii. A conditional use permit for any request shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 22.5.
            iii. The primary consideration shall be aesthetics with the following factors also considered:
                a) The location and height of such poles and wires and the relation to the present or potential roads;
                b) The crossing of such lines over much traveled highways and streets;
                c) Proximity of such lines to schools, religious institutions and other places where people may congregate;
                d) Fire or other accidental hazards from the presence of such poles and wires and the effect, if any, of the same upon the effectiveness of fire-fighting equipment;
                e) The availability of a suitable right-of-way for the installation;
                f) Future conditions which may be reasonably anticipated in the area in view of a normal course of development;
                g) The type of terrain;
                h) The practicality and feasibility of underground installation of such poles and wires with due regard for the comparative costs between underground and overground installations (provided, however, that a mere showing that an underground installation shall cost more than an overground installation shall not, in itself, necessarily require issuance of a permit).
            The applicant must provide a viewshed analysis that contrasts existing and proposed conditions and address each of the factors above.
            iv. In the event such poles and wires are for the sole purpose of carrying electricity or power or for transmitting of telephone, telegraph, or television communication through or beyond the Town’s boundaries or from one (1) major facility to another, the practicality or feasibility of alternative or other routes shall also be considered. ((O)18-10, Amended,  06/06/2018; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
    23. Private Clubs 
        a. Outdoor patios or similar facilities shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any property used or intended for residential purposes.
        b. The above distance shall be measured from the abutting edge of the residential district to the closest property line or lease line of the private club use. The limit of the property line or lease line shall include all required parking, landscaping, and setbacks of the specific private club use.
    24. Religious Institutions 
        a. One (1) single-family residence shall be permitted for each religious institution facility for the purpose of providing housing for a minister, pastor, priest, rabbi or caretaker and his/her family.
    25. Restaurants, Drive-Through/Drive-In 
        a. All drive-in/drive-thru uses are subject to the requirements of subsections A.3 and B.6 of this section.
        b. All drive-thrus must be fully screened from any public roadway or any property used or intended for residential purposes.
        c. Any associated vehicle queuing is prohibited in roadways, drive aisles or other parking area access lanes (PAAL).
        d. Outdoor eating areas for restaurants using disposable dinnerware, wrappings or napkins shall be enclosed with a minimum three (3)-foot wall in order to prevent the blowing and scattering of litter. Such areas shall be patrolled by an employee(s) of the restaurant at least once an hour during hours of operation to collect improperly disposed dinnerware, wrappings or napkins.
        e. Landscaped areas and parking areas shall be patrolled at least once an hour to collect improperly disposed dinnerware, wrappings, and napkins.
        f. All loading zones shall be screened from public view by plantings, walls, or a combination thereof. Such screening should conform architecturally or otherwise to the overall design of the restaurant and the larger commercial development within which it is located.
        g. Accumulated food waste materials on the premises shall be disposed of at least once every twenty-four (24) hours or as restaurant volume dictates. Spilled grease, oils, or fats located near refuse areas or any other area shall be promptly removed with a biodegradable solution.
        h. Smoke and odor filtering devices shall be installed on all restaurants. An odor abatement plan must be provided in conformance with subsection A.6 of this section. Electrostatic incinerators shall be installed in all restaurants in order to control noxious emissions. The filter requirement may be waived at restaurants where no cooking takes place, i.e., sandwich shops.
        i. Grease traps shall be installed in all drive-through/drive-in restaurants. All grease traps shall conform to the standards contained in the 2003 International Plumbing Code.
    26. Senior Care Facility 
        a. Recreational Area: Senior care facilities shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.5.
            i. The term “dwelling unit” shall include beds, bedrooms and living units for the purposes of calculating the amount of recreational area.
            ii. The recreational area shall provide amenities to meet the recreational needs of residents and guests of the facility. The minimum recreational area may be divided between multiple areas throughout the development.
            iii. Senior care facilities are exempt from private outdoor living space requirements of the applicable zoning district.
            iv. Recreational area may count toward the requirement for open space in subsection 26.b of this section.
        b. Open Space: All senior care facilities shall provide a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the net site area as open space, which shall supersede the open space requirement of the underlying zoning district.
            i. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the open space required by this section shall be provided in a contiguous area or areas with the intended purpose of creating a campus-like environment and providing for meaningful and usable open spaces for the passive use and enjoyment of residents of the facility.
            ii. Open space area(s) shall be improved with walking paths and other passive amenities.
            iii. Appropriate areas designated as environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS) that serve the intended purposes may also be credited to the open space calculation.
        c. Resident Access Plan: All senior care facilities shall submit a resident access plan delineating the location of all residential units in a relationship to parking areas, recreation areas, indoor and outdoor amenities and support uses. The Town Council may approve the resident access plan when:
            i. The plan demonstrates a convenient and proximate relationship between all units, services and recreational areas for the population served and building areas have been concentrated to the greatest extent practical.
            ii. Separated pedestrian accessways must be provided to all rows of parking.
                a) Pedestrian accessways crossing drive aisles shall contain different surfacing than parking areas to define the pedestrian crossing.
                b) This requirement may be reduced or waived by Town Council when the applicant can demonstrate that the accessways are not necessary to serve the expected needs of the residents.
        d. All senior care facilities shall provide covered parking areas and protected passenger drop-off areas as required by Sections 27.7.D. and 27.7.G.4.e. ((O)15-16, Added,  11/08/2015)
    27. Sexually Oriented Businesses 
        a. Design Requirements 
            i. No drive-through shall be permitted.
            ii. All entrances and windows shall be designed in such a manner as to not allow persons outside the building to observe into the building. No display windows are permitted.
            iii. All canopies are to be connected to the roof of the main structure unless otherwise approved. Signage of any type is prohibited on canopies.
        b. Location Requirements 
            i. No use shall be located less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any existing sexually oriented use, or within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, public park or recreation area, any school or day care facility.
            ii. Uses shall be ancillary to and located in shopping centers. Use shall not be permitted in office parks.
            iii. Total floor area shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the maximum allowable floor area ratio of the zoning district in which a shopping center is located. The total number of proposed uses shall not exceed one (1) pad per seventeen (17) acres of shopping center.
            iv. Parking lots for this use shall be accessible through one (1) point of ingress and egress.
        c. Architecture 
            i. The architectural character of the buildings shall be integrated with the design theme of the center through the use of the same predominant building materials, shapes, details and colors. All parking, circulation, driveways, setbacks and signage shall be integrated with the entire design theme of the project.
        d. Timing of Development 
            i. The conceptual design submittal for a shopping center shall be reviewed by Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council prior to submitting or simultaneously with the approval of a conceptual design submittal for any sexually oriented business.
            ii. Businesses shall not be open until a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the net floor area of all other structures within the shopping center have been constructed.
        e. Other 
            i. Permitted hours of operation shall be from noon to 10 p.m. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)06-06, Added,  04/19/2006)
    28. Temporary Real Estate Sales Office 
        a. The office shall be located within a model home built in accordance with the zoning where such office is located.
        b. The office shall be limited to the sale of homes within the neighborhood or subdivision in which it is located.
        c. Temporary real estate sales offices shall be permitted for a period not to exceed two (2) years from the date of initial home sales.
        d. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may grant extensions of time at the termination of the initial two (2)-year period.
        e. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may grant permission for a temporary real estate sales office to be located in a portable structure. All such structures must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator prior to installation.
    29. Vehicle Parts Store 
        a. On-site repair, rebuilding or machining is prohibited.
    30. Vehicle Rental Establishments 
        a. Parking lots used for the storage of rental vehicles, including moving services vehicles, shall meet the screening requirements of Section 27.6 Landscape Conservation.
        b. In multi-tenant developments, vehicles shall not occupy parking spaces required for other uses.
        c. There shall be no car washing, cleaning or repair activities of rental vehicles permitted on site.
    31. Vehicle Repair Facilities 
        a. Vehicle repair establishments shall be located a minimum of two-hundred fifty (250) feet from any property used or intended for residential purposes, measured from the abutting edge of the residential district or property to the nearest property or lease line of the vehicle repair use.
        b. All repair activities must take place within an entirely enclosed structure and must not be visible from any adjacent roadway or any property used or intended for residential purposes.
        c. Vehicles awaiting service shall not be parked or stored in any vehicle PAAL or parking spaces required to meet off-street parking requirements of this code.
        d. No outside storage, sale, lease or rental of trailers, trucks or similar equipment.
    32. Vehicle Washes/Detailing 
        a. All vehicle washes/detailing uses must meet the requirements of subsection B.6 of this section.
        b. All vehicle washes shall achieve a minimum of seventy percent (70%) water recycling.
        c. Drying awnings shall be attached to the building or permanently affixed to the ground and all work shall be carried out within the setbacks of the property.
    Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
    33. Visitor Accommodations 
        a. In the R-4R District, commercial uses are permitted appurtenant to visitor accommodation use types, such as restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through types, cocktail lounges, and small retail shops; provided, that the entrance to any such appurtenant use shall be from the lobby, arcade, or interior patio, unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. ((O)15-16, Amended,  11/08/2015)
((O)18-14, Amended,  10/03/2018; (O)18-11, Amended,  07/18/2018; (O)18-02, Amended,  01/17/2018; (O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)15-16, Enacted,  11/08/2015)

Section 25.2 Accessory Uses and Structures
A. Accessory Buildings – General 
    1. Accessory buildings shall not alter the principal use of the subject lot or adversely affect other properties in the district.
    2. Accessory buildings shall not be constructed upon a lot unless the construction of the main building has actually commenced.
    3. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted in a front yard, unless specifically permitted within the applicable zoning district.
    4. If setbacks for accessory buildings are not specifically called out within the applicable zoning district, accessory buildings must meet all side setbacks and shall not be constructed closer than five (5) feet to any rear lot line.
    5. Accessory buildings used as a garage or carport having access from an alley shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to the center line of said alley. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)16-11, Amended,  09/07/2016)
B. Abandoned or Junk Vehicles 
    1. All abandoned or junk vehicles undergoing major repairs or being restored shall be stored in an enclosed area by the owner or occupant of the property upon which such vehicle is located in such a manner as to not be visible from any point lying outside the property upon which abandoned or junk vehicle is stored or parked.
    2. For the purposes of this section:
        a. Abandoned or junk vehicle means a vehicle or any major portion thereof that is incapable of movement under its own power and will remain so without major repair or reconstruction.
        b. Major repair means the removal from any vehicle of a major portion thereof including, but not limited to, the differential, transmission, head, engine block or oil pan.
        c. Vehicle means any self-propelled device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a public highway excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. ((O)16-11, Amended,  09/07/2016)
C. Prohibited Uses 
    1. Ongoing garage sales, excluding private homeowners’ garage sales not exceeding one (1) garage sale per quarter for a maximum of three (3) consecutive days.
    2. Motorized outdoor sports activities such as radio controlled miniature airplanes, drones, motorcycle track and go-cart racing. ((O)16-11, Enacted,  09/07/2016)
D. Home Occupations 
    1. Purpose 
        a. Permit residents of the community a broad choice in the use of their homes as a place of livelihood and the production or supplementing of personal and family income.
        b. Establish criteria and standards for home occupations conducted in dwelling units in residential zones to ensure activities are incidental to, and compatible with, the residential character of the neighborhood in which it is located.
    2. Home occupations are allowed through a business license and zoning approval as either a Type I or Type II use.
        a. Type I home occupations shall not have a discernible impact on the residential character of the neighborhood. Type I uses are allowed as regulated by subsection D.3 of this section with the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s approval without a public hearing.
        b. Type II home occupations may have the potential for a minor or adverse impact to the neighborhood and are regulated by subsection D.3 of this section. Type II businesses include one (1) or more of the following:
            i. The primary business activity is outdoors.
            ii. More than one (1) but not more than two (2) nonresident employees report to work at the home.
            iii. Care is offered for five (5) to ten (10) children, age twelve (12) and under. Arizona Department of Health Services (ADHS) state approval is required.
            iv. Home occupations resulting in visitors, customers, or deliveries with a potential for creating vehicular traffic in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) above that normally and reasonably occurring in a residential area as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, are to be reviewed by the Town as a Type II home occupation. Type II home occupations may be authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission only after a public hearing, per subsection D.4.b of this section.
    3. Home Occupation Standards 
    All home occupations, whether authorized and regulated as a Type I or Type II use, shall conform to the following standards unless otherwise specified within this chapter:
        a. General:
            i. Hours of operations for external business activities, such as customer parking or deliveries, shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
            ii. The home occupation use shall not produce sustained or obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, dust, heat, or electric interference which are detectable to normal sensory perception beyond the perimeter of the property.
            iii. A home occupation must be primarily operated by person(s) dwelling in the home.
            iv. When a dwelling is rented, the property owner must authorize, in writing, use of the home as a place of business.
            v. The following uses are prohibited due to the potential to have a negative or adverse impact on the neighborhood:
                a) The keeping, caring and/or sale of animals on the property.
                b) Automobile, motorcycle, boat or any vehicle repair, parts sales, upholstery, detailing, washing or painting on the property.
        b. Employees:
            i. Type I uses shall employ only those who reside in the home and may allow no more than one (1) nonresident employee to work in the home at any given time.
            ii. Type II uses may employ no more than two (2) nonresident employees to work at the home at any given time.
            iii. Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the home occupation, provided they do not report to the home for any purpose.
        c. Accessory Building:
            i. No more than one (1) detached accessory building shall be used for the home occupation.
            ii. The business shall not occupy more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area of the detached accessory building.
        d. Noise:
            i. The home occupation shall not exceed noise levels in accordance with the town code, Article 10-1-4, Noise.
        e. Parking:
            i. The existing parking provided on the property shall be used to accommodate vehicles related to the home business.
            ii. Vehicles owned and/or used by the business that are parked at the home shall meet the following standards:
                a) No more than one (1) vehicle related to the home occupation shall be allowed on the residential property.
                b) The vehicle shall be limited to a passenger car, van or pickup truck.
                c) The overall length of the vehicle shall not be more than twenty-five (25) feet and overall height shall not be more than eight (8) feet.
                d) Parking shall be on private property in a carport, garage or shielded from view from adjoining properties by landscaping, fencing or screening material.
                e) These standards will not apply to the personal vehicle of nonresident employees for Type II occupations.
            iii. Utility trailers used for the business shall be parked inside an enclosed building or screened from view using opaque landscaping, fencing or other screening material.
            iv. Deliveries for the business shall be limited to delivery trucks (SU-30, single unit truck) who customarily deliver items to residential areas.
            v. There shall be no deliveries during the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
        f. Property:
            i. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the property.
            ii. A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the primary dwelling unit or within a detached accessory building. See subsection D.3.c of this section for accessory building standards.
            iii. There shall be no outdoor activities related to the home occupation on the premises with the exception of playground equipment for child care or as allowed by subsection D.2.b of this section.
            iv. The business shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the entire primary dwelling unit’s floor area.
            v. There shall be no alteration of the residential floor plan which creates a solid barrier between the home occupation area and the remaining floor area of the residence.
            vi. There shall be no alteration of the property’s exterior residential appearance.
            vii. Commercial dumpsters are prohibited.
        g. Signs:
            i. No signs shall be allowed for any home occupation pursuant to Section 28.9, Prohibited Signs.
        h. Storage and Equipment:
            i. Storage of toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, etiologic, radioactive, or other hazardous materials must comply with the current International Building Code and/or the International Fire Code and shall not create an unsafe condition.
            ii. There shall be no process or materials used which are hazardous to public health, safety or welfare.
            iii. There shall be no display of products or inventory at the home.
            iv. There shall not be on-site storage of or use of tractor trailers, semi-trucks or heavy equipment associated with the business.
    4. Review Procedure 
        a. Type I Home Occupation 
            i. Application shall be made to the Town Clerk’s Office for review by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        b. Type II Home Occupation 
            i. Application shall be made to the Planning Department for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Upon receipt of a complete submittal, the Town will notify the adjacent property owners within three hundred (300) feet by mail and post the subject property with a sign notifying the public of the application and meeting date.
        c. Type II home occupation permits, which may be revocable, conditional, or valid for a term period, may be granted or denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission after a public hearing and a finding that the use meets the home occupation standards herein.
            i. Decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the Town Council.
    5. Validity of Type II Home Occupation Permit 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator may cite any home occupation use for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this chapter and/or conditions set by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Revocation may take place at any time it is determined the home occupation is in noncompliance. If the permit is revoked, it becomes null and void, and said use shall be terminated immediately.
    6. Inspections 
    A home occupation property owner shall permit inspections of the premises by the Planning and Zoning Department to determine compliance with this chapter. ((O)16-11, Amended,  09/07/2016)
E. Swimming Pools and Spas 
    1. No swimming pool or in-ground spa shall be located closer than five (5) feet to any rear property line.
    2. No aboveground spa shall be located closer than three (3) feet to any rear property line.
    3. Swimming pools and spas shall be subject to the front and side setbacks of the zone in which they are permitted.
    4. Any portion of a pool wall constructed with a distance from a property line less than the depth of the pool may be subject to special structural requirements. ((O)18-15, Amended,  10/03/2018)

Section 25.3 Temporary Uses and Structures
A. Special Uses 
    1. Special Use Permits 
        a. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve permits for special uses (see Chapter 31, Definitions) for any temporary use of property, developed or undeveloped, within the Town of Oro Valley.Food Trucks
        b. Approval shall account for the potential negative impacts of the proposed special use on surrounding properties with respect to:
            i. Damage or nuisance arising from noise, smoke, odor, dust, vibration or illumination;
            ii. Hazard to persons and property from possible explosion, contamination, fire or flood;
            iii. Unusual volume or character of traffic not adequately addressed through traffic control measures; and,
            iv. Compatibility of said special use with the surrounding area.
        c. If potential negative impacts are not extant or can be mitigated, and all Town concerns are or can be satisfied, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve and authorize issuance of the requested special use permit. A time limit, not to exceed 60 days, and any other conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, may be imposed as conditions.
        d. At his/her discretion, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may grant temporary modifications to Zoning Code requirements specific to the needs of a special use on a case-by-case basis. Any such modification approved shall not be construed as precedent setting, nor shall it be deemed applicable to any other special or permitted use.
    2. Other permits required 
    Subsequent to approval, the applicant for the special use permit must obtain from the Town Clerk all necessary business and tax licenses required to operate within the Town and any other required permits, such as those for signs.
    3. Revocation of Special Use Permit 
    The violation of any condition imposed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator on special use permit approval shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and, subject to 24 hours’ notice, said permit may be revoked. If revocation of a special use permit occurs, said special use must be curtailed at the end of the 24 hour notification period.
B. Basement or Cellar Occupancies 
No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the remainder of the building has been substantially completed, and in no event shall the basement or cellar be occupied for longer than two (2) years from the time of completion of the basement or cellar.
C. Temporary Buildings 
Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period that the building is being constructed, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. Absence of work on a project for 60 days will constitute abandonment. Temporary buildings and trailers must be removed within 30 days of project completions.
D. Temporary Mobile Home Occupancies 
Upon issuance of a building permit, a mobile home/trailer may be used for dwelling purposes for not more than 180 days during construction of a residence on the same premises, which period may be extended for an additional 90 days upon application to the Planning and Zoning Administrator if there is evidence of special circumstances.

CHAPTER 26 SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLANS

Sections:
Section 26.1 Purpose and Intent
Section 26.2 Design Standards
Section 26.3 Required Improvements
Section 26.4 Modifications of Subdivision Regulations
Section 26.5 Provision of Recreational Area
Section 26.6 Assurances

Section 26.1 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the Town; to ensure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of reason- able utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage, sanitary sewerage and other health requirements; to ensure consideration for adequate sites for schools, recreation areas and other public facilities; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal description; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of this purpose.
In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter are intended to provide a common ground of understanding and equitable working relationship between public and private interests to the end that both independent and mutual objectives can be achieved in the subdivision of land. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)

Section 26.2 Design Standards
A. Conformity with Existing Plans, Ordinances and Laws 
Every subdivision shall conform to the objectives of any related plan adopted by the Town Council. Every subdivision shall also conform to the Zoning Code and to other ordinances and regulations of the Town and to the Arizona Revised Statutes. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
B. Dedications for Public Purposes 
Where the tract to be subdivided contains all or any part of the site of a park, school, flood control facility or other public area as shown on a plan approved by the Town Council, such site shall be dedicated to the public or reserved for acquisition by the public within a specified period of time. An agreement shall be reached between the subdivider and the appropriate public agency regarding time, method and cost of such acquisition. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
C. Subdivision of Unsuitable Land 
Land which is subject to periodic flooding, land which cannot be properly drained or other land which, in the opinion of the Town Council, is unsuitable for subdivision use shall not be subdivided; except that the Town Council may approve subdivision of such land upon receipt of evidence from the Town Engineer that the construction of specific improvements can be expected to render the land suitable; thereafter, construction upon such land shall be prohibited until the specified improvements have been planned and construction guaranteed. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
D. Subdivision of Land within the Hillside Development Zone 
Where the tract to be subdivided is located in whole or in part within the Hillside Development Zone, design and development shall follow the standards and requirements of Addendum I or Section 27.10, as applicable. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
E. Naming and Signage of Streets 
    1. All naming and signage of streets shall conform to Pima County’s Addressing Ordinance and Policies, Sections 18.83.060 through 18.83.080.
    2. Street names shall be so arranged as to be clearly visible from intersecting street directions.
    3. The subdivider shall propose the street names subject to the approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission at the preliminary plat stage or development plan stage. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; 6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
F. Street Location and Arrangement 
Street location and arrangement shall conform to the following general principles:
    1. Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a street designated in an adopted Town transportation plan, such street shall be platted in conformance therewith.
    2. Street layout shall provide for the continuation of such streets as the Development Committee may designate.
    3. Certain proposed streets within the tract shall be extended to the tract boundaries to enable connection to existing streets or to future streets in the unplatted areas. Additionally, paved access shall be provided to the development from existing vehicular streets as specified by the Town Engineer and approved by the Town Council.
    4. Local streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic.
    5. Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial route, the Development Committee may require frontage streets or reverse frontage with no-access easements along the arterial route or such other treatment as may be justified for protection of residential properties from nuisance and hazard of high-volume traffic and to preserve the traffic function of the arterial route.
    6. Where a subdivision abuts or contains the right-of-way of a railroad, a limited access highway or an irrigation canal, or abuts a commercial or industrial land use, the Development Commit- tee may recommend location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distance shall be determined with due regard for approach grades, drainage, bridges or future grade separations.
    7. Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to produce desirable lots of maximum utility and streets of reasonable gradient and to facilitate adequate drainage.
    8. Half-streets shall be discouraged except where necessary to provide right-of-way required by the Town streets and highway plans, to complete a street pattern already begun or to ensure reasonable development of a number of adjoining parcels. Where there exists a platted half- street abutting the tract to be subdivided and said half-street furnishes the sole access to residential lots, the remaining half shall be platted within the street. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
G. Street Design Standards 
All streets shall be designed in accordance with the Oro Valley Subdivision Street Standards, except for cross-sections applicable to any approved Planned Area Development. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
H. Block Design Principles 
Block design shall conform to the following general principles:
    1. Maximum length of blocks measured along the centerline of the street and between intersecting street centerlines shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet; except that in development with lot areas averaging one-half (1/2) acre or more, where conditions warrant, the maximum length may be two thousand (2,000) feet. Blocks shall be as long as reasonably possible under the circumstances within the above maximums in order to achieve depth and possible street economy and to reduce the expense and safety hazard arising from excessive street intersections.
    2. Maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be six hundred (600) feet measured from the inter- section of right-of-way lines to extreme depth of the turning circle along the street centerline. Exceptions may be made where topography, adjacent platting or other unusual conditions justify such. No exception shall be made merely because the tract has restrictive boundary dimensions wherein provisions should be made for extension of street patterns to the adjoining unplatted parcel and a temporary turnaround installed.
    3. Pedestrian and bikeways with rights-of-way of eight (8) feet or greater may be required where essential for circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. Pedestrian and bikeways may be used for utility purposes. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
I. Lot Planning Procedures 
    1. Lot width, depth, and area shall comply with the minimum requirements of the zoning regulations and shall be appropriate for the location and character of development proposed and for the type and extent of street and utility improvements being installed.
    2. Where unusual topography, unusual soil conditions, drainage problems, abrupt changes in land use or heavy traffic on adjacent streets prevail, the Development Committee may make special lot width, depth and area requirements which exceed the minimum requirements of the particular zoning district.
    3. Proposed streets shall be arranged in close relation to existing topography. Where steep topography prevails, as in the platting of Hillside Development Zone subdivisions, and where street grades must, of necessity, reach or exceed the standard requirement, the requirements of the Town of Oro Valley Subdivision Street Standards shall be followed.
    4. The depth-width ratio of the usable area of the lot shall not be greater than three to one (3:1).
    5. Minimum front building lines shall conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning regulations.
    6. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines except where other treatment may be justified in the opinion of the Development Committee.
    7. Every lot shall abut upon a public street furnishing satisfactory access thereto.
    8. Single-family residential lots extending through the block and having frontage on two (2) parallel streets shall not be permitted; backing of lots to thoroughfares shall be prohibited except where expressly permitted in accordance with subsection I.7 of this section or where justified in the opinion of the Development Committee. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
J. Landscaping in Subdivisions 
All open areas shall be landscaped by the subdivider at his expense. All landscaping shall be supplied and installed according to the approved landscape plan. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
K. Utility Easements 
    1. Easements for utilities shall be provided as necessary to adequately construct and maintain the utilities.
    2. For lots facing on curvilinear streets, utility easements or alleys may consist of a series of straight lines with point of deflection not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet apart. Points of deflection should always occur at the junction of side and rear lot lines on the side of the exterior angle. Curvilinear easements or alleys may be provided, providing that the minimum radius for the alley or easement shall be not less than eight hundred (800) feet, except that four hundred fifty (450) foot radius curves may be allowed where there are adequate provisions for utilities.
    3. Where a stream or important surface drainage course abuts or crosses the tract, dedication of a public drainage easement of a width sufficient to permit widening, deepening, relocating or protecting the water course shall be required.
    4. Land within a public street or drainage easement or land within a utility easement for major power transmission lines or pipelines shall not be considered a part of the minimum required lot area except where lots exceed one (1) acre in area. This shall not be construed as applicable to land involved in utility easements for distribution or service purposes.
L. Address Standards 
    1. It is the purpose of this section to provide for, through joint Town-County action (Town Resolution No. 267), uniformity in street naming and numerical addressing, facilitating emergency vehicle response, elimination of inconsistencies and duplication of street names, and other practices resulting in addressing difficulties and establishing the authority for the creation of addresses to property and improvements within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Town through the adoption and enforcement of Pima County’s Addressing Ordinance and Policies, Chapter 18.83 and all future amendments thereto, along with the following additional provisions:
    2. All of the signage in this Code shall be placed so that mature landscape will not obscure it.

Section 26.3 Required Improvements
A. Purpose 
It is the purpose of this section to establish, in outline, the minimum acceptable standards for improvement of public streets and utilities, to define the responsibility of the subdivider in the planning, constructing and financing of public improvements and to establish procedures for, and approval of, engineering plans.
B. Improvements: Subdivider’s Responsibility 
All improvements required in streets, alleys or easements that are required as a condition to plat approval are the responsibility of the subdivider provided, however, that he may be allowed to meet the requirements by participation in an improvement district approved by the Town.
C. Engineering Plans 
    1. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to have prepared by a registered civil engineer, registered in the State of Arizona, a complete set of engineering plans, satisfactory to the Town Engineer, for construction of required improvements. Such plans shall be based on the approved preliminary plat and be prepared in conjunction with the final plat.
    2. Engineering plans shall be approved by the Town Engineer prior to Town Council approval of the final plat.
D. Construction and Inspection 
    1. All relocation, filing, and reconstruction of facilities shall be constructed to standards of the owning utility and Town Engineer.
    2. All improvements in the public right-of-way shall be constructed under the inspection and approval of the Town Engineer.
    3. All underground utilities to be installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such street. Service stubs for underground utilities to platted lots within the subdivision shall be placed in such manner that will not require road cuts or tunneling beneath existing street improvements when service connections are made.
E. Improvements: Plan Review Fees 
    1. The purpose of the plan review is to insure that all plans conform to sound engineering concepts as well as conforming to the general development of the Town of Oro Valley.
    2. Plan review shall not remove any engineering responsibility from the developing engineer.
F. Street and Alley Improvements 
All streets and alleys adjacent and within subdivisions shall be graded and surfaced to cross-sections, grades and standards according to the “Standard Specifications, Standard Details and Design Standards” of the Town of Oro Valley and approved by the Town Engineer. Dead end streets serving more than 4 lots shall be provided with a graded and surfaced temporary turning circle.
G. Street Name Signs 
Signs shall be placed at all street intersections and be in place by the time the street pavement is ready for use. Specifications for design, construction, location and installation shall be in accordance with approved Town of Oro Valley standards. If the intersection contains a public street, fabrication and installation of the completed sign unit shall be by the Town. The total cost of installation shall be on record with the Town Engineer and this cost shall be borne by the subdivider. The subdivider may elect to have the Oro Valley Streets and Roads Department install street name signs at intersections containing only private streets at the current Town cost on file with the Town Engineer. The total cost of said installation shall be borne by the subdivider.
H. Storm Drainage 
Proper and adequate provisions shall be made for disposal of storm waters. The requirements of this Section shall apply equally to grading of private property and public streets. Existing major watercourses shall be dedicated as drainageways or easements. The type, extent, location and capacity of the drainage channels shall meet the approval of the Town Engineer and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Town Engineer.
I. Sanitary Sewage Disposal 
Sewage disposal facilities shall be installed to serve each lot and be subject to Pima County Health Department and/or Pima County Wastewater Management standards.
J. Water Supply 
Each lot shall be supplied with safe, pure and potable water in sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection in accordance with Town standards. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with current Town standards at locations designated by the Fire Department and approved by the Town Engineer at the expense of the subdivider.
K. Survey Monuments 
Permanent monuments shall be installed in accordance with current Town standards at all corners, angle points and point of curves and all street intersections. After all improvements have been installed, a registered land surveyor or civil engineer shall check the location of monuments and certify their accuracy.
L. Lot Corners 
Iron pipe or round reinforced steel bars not less than 1/2 inch in diameter shall be set at all corners, angle points and points of curve for each lot within the subdivision prior to the recording of the plat except that the Development Committee may approve delay where topographic or construction conditions make it necessary.
M. Street Lights 
Street lights shall be installed, if required, as designated by the Town Engineer, in accordance with the Town standards. All lights shall be installed on metal standards with fixtures and standards and layout approved by the Town Engineer. All of the above improvements shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider.
N. Utilities: Electric and Telephone 
    1. All electric lines and all telephone lines necessary to serve the subdivision shall be installed underground unless, upon recommendation of the Town Engineer, the Town Council finds it is impractical to do so.
    2. The subdivider shall be responsible for the requirements of this Section and shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the public utility companies involved for the installation of underground facilities. Letters from each of the public utility companies indicating that the arrangements have been made shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator at the time the final subdivision plat is filed.

Section 26.4 Modifications of Subdivision Regulations
A. Extraordinary Conditions 
When, in the opinion of the Town Council, there exist extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership or adjacent development or other circumstances not provided for in these regulations, the Town Council may, upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, modify these regulations in such manner and to such extent as it may deem appropriate to the public interest. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
B. Subdivisions as Complete Community or Neighborhood 
In the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a complete neighborhood, the Town Council may, upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, modify these regulations in such a manner as appears necessary and desirable to provide adequate space and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, including dedication of property to the Town for sites for schools, parks and other necessary public facilities and which also provides such protective covenants, deed restrictions or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to, and achievement of, the plan. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
C. Additional Requirements for Modification 
In modifying the standards or requirements of these regulations, as outlined above, the Town Council may make such additional requirements as appear necessary, in its judgment, to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.

Section 26.5 Provision of Recreational Area
A. Applicability 
The provision of recreational facilities shall be required of all residential subdivisions, except those located within the R1-36, R1-43, R1-144, and R1-300 Zoning Districts.
B. Recreational Area Plan Submittal and Approval 
    1. The developer shall submit a recreational area plan as part of the preliminary plat. This recreational plan shall include minimum improvements for recreational purposes as required by subsection D of this section.
    2. The recreational area plan shall be submitted at the time of preliminary plat submittal and shall be reviewed by the Town Council concurrent with the preliminary plat.
    3. Approval of the plan by the Town Council, after review and recommendations by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board (for public recreational areas) and the Planning and Zoning Commission (for private recreational areas), shall be a prerequisite to approval of the final plat.
    4. All recreational area plans shall be reviewed by the Oro Valley Police Department (OVPD) for conformance to Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) design elements contained in subsection D.5 of this section.
    5. Modification of Facilities and Amenities Depicted on the Approved Recreational Area Plan 
        a. Modifications deemed necessary and beneficial to provide for the recreational needs of residents are subject to approval by the Parks, Recreation, Library and Cultural Resources (PRLCR) Director and Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        b. All modifications shall conform to the provisions of this code. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)
C. Minimum Recreation Area Standards 
    1. An area shall be devoted to and designated as “recreational area” on the conceptual site plan which equals a ratio of one (1) acre to every eighty-five (85) dwelling units.
    2. The recreational area shall be usable and accessible by all subdivision residents and shall provide amenities that best serve the needs of the development.
    3. Upon review and recommendations from the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, the Town Council may allow environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS) to be credited toward the recreation requirements of this section, subject to the provisions of the environmentally sensitive lands ordinance (ESLO). The applicant may receive a credit for this property at a one to one (1:1) ratio for a maximum of one hundred percent (100%) of the required recreational area.
    Credit may be obtained only when the following criteria are met:
        a. The area shall be determined to contain significant, unique and desirable environmental, scenic or cultural features.
        b. The area shall be delineated as common area, designated with a conservation easement, with ownership to be held in common by the homeowners’ association or the town.
        c. The area shall be accessible via sidewalk, walking path, trail, and/or bicycle or shared use path by all residents within the project.
D. Recreational Area Plan Standards 
    1. Site Location 
        a. Recreational areas shall be a focal point for passive and active recreational activities, and provide a meaningful place for neighborhood gatherings and activities. Recreation areas shall be placed in a highly visible area of the subdivision that is accessible via sidewalk, walking path, trail, and/or bicycle or shared use path by all residents within the project.
        b. Linear parks, as defined by this code and described in subsection D.2.h of this section, are acceptable when they serve to improve access to recreational amenities and open space networks.
        c. Passive recreation areas should be located in proximity to natural open space areas and conserved, environmentally sensitive lands.
        d. Recreational areas shall not include land, such as peaks, ridges, land fragments, land restricted by Town policy, condition or ordinance, and land determined unusable for recreational purposes by the Mayor and Town Council. Shallow retention basins (flood prone areas) may be approved for use as recreational areas subject to recommendations by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator. Decisions may be appealed to the Town Council.
        e. In cases where a recreational area lies adjacent to a trail identified within the Eastern Pima County Trails System Master Plan and/or the Oro Valley Trails Task Force Report and their subsequent updates, a connection shall be provided between the recreational area and said trail.
    2. Recreational Facilities Improvement Standards 
        a. Recreational area improvements shall be appropriate to the anticipated needs of the development.
        b. Equipment installed within the recreational areas shall comply with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
        c. Provision of one (1) active and one (1) passive amenity for the first half (1/2) acre or portion thereof. For every additional half (1/2) acre (not fractions), an additional passive and active use shall be provided up to the maximum provided by the following subsections:
            i. A single park area may contain up to five (5) passive amenities. Examples of passive amenities include turf areas, benches, picnic tables, shade structures, barbecue grills, pathways, etc.
            ii. A single park area may contain up to three (3) active amenities. Examples of active amenities include basketball courts, volleyball courts, bocce courts, horseshoe pits, par courses, etc.
        d. Detailed schematics shall be provided for each proposed amenity with the final plat.
        e. Credit for Enhanced Amenities 
        Credit for the additional cost of enhanced recreational amenities, including community swimming pools, splash pads, skate/BMX parks, fully improved sports fields, and other amenities approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, may be obtained against the recreation area requirement in subsection C.1 of this section based on the following criteria:
            i. The applicant shall submit a cost estimate summarizing the following:
                a) Value of the land and cost of the improvements and amenities that would be required by this code.
                b) Value of the land and cost of the improvements and enhanced amenities proposed as alternative means of compliance.
            ii. Credit for the additional cost of the enhanced amenities may be received in the form of a reduction to the required recreation land area.
            iii. The extent of the credit shall be determined by the value of the enhanced amenity as determined by the Town. The maximum reduction of recreation area requirement is one-half (1/2) acre.
        f. Credit for improved indoor recreational space may be obtained subject to the following criteria:
            i. Improved community recreation rooms, community centers, gymnasiums, performance space, or other recreation space accessible to all residents of a development shall receive credit at a ratio of three to one (3:1) against the area requirement contained in subsection B.1 of this section.
            ii. Each active and passive amenity contained within an indoor recreational space shall receive a credit to the recreational amenity requirements contained in subsections D.2.b, D.2.c, and D.2.d of this section at a one to one (1:1) ratio.
        g. When appropriate to the needs of the residents, tot lot amenities shall be required. Tot lots shall include, at a minimum:
            i. Play equipment area.
            ii. Drinking fountain.
            iii. Seating area (may include benches or seat walls) oriented towards the play equipment.
            iv. Trash receptacle(s).
            v. Bicycle parking with a four (4) bicycle minimum capacity.
            vi. Picnic table.
            vii. Limited turf area for activity areas only (less than fifteen percent (15%) of total recreational area) may be provided.
        h. Linear parks may be utilized to satisfy the recreational requirements of this section. Required amenities include, at a minimum:
            i. A shared use path for pedestrians and bicyclists.
            ii. Seating area.
            iii. Landscaping.
            iv. Drinking fountain, if located within one hundred (100) feet of a potable water line.
            v. Trash receptacle(s).
            vi. Pet waste removal station(s).
            vii. Exercise stations may be located within linear parks.
        i. The location of the amenities along a linear park is subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Administrator and PRLCR Director.
    3. Play Equipment Standards 
        a. Applicant shall submit evidence that play equipment complies with the current American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) safety standards for playground equipment.
        b. Playground surface materials, including certified wood fiber, shredded rubber, poured-in-place surfacing, or other acceptable material approved by the PRLCR Director, shall be placed at a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches under the equipment.
        c. No play equipment shall be located within thirty (30) feet of any road right-of-way, driveway or alleyway, parking area, or single-family residential lot or single-family residential zone unless an acceptable barrier is provided.
        d. Play equipment or apparatus with a footprint of two hundred fifty (250) square feet or less must be fully shaded with a UV-resistant sun shade or other appropriate shading material or structure as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and Permitting Division.
        e. At least fifty percent (50%) of play equipment or apparatus must be fully shaded with a UV-resistant sun shade or other appropriate shading material or structure as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and Permitting Division. This requirement shall be applied only to play equipment or apparatus with a footprint of two hundred fifty (250) square feet or greater.
        f. To maximize the safety of children, play spaces shall be located as to provide maximum visibility from surrounding homes.
        g. Play equipment shall not be located on a slope greater than four percent (4%).
    4. Paved on-site or on-street parking adjacent to the recreation area shall be provided as follows:
        a. For developments of one hundred (100) dwelling units or less: one (1) parking space for every twenty (20) dwelling units or portion thereof.
        b. For developments with more than one hundred (100) units: one (1) additional parking space for every forty (40) dwelling units or portion thereof over one hundred (100).
        c. Mobility-impaired accessible spaces shall be provided as required in Section 27.7.E.
    5. Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) Elements 
        a. Recreational area design shall consider the following CPTED elements:
            i. Natural Surveillance 
            Emphasis on visibility of the recreational facilities, also known as “eyes on the street,” to deter unauthorized users and activities.
            ii. Access Control 
            Use of design elements to deny entrance to recreational facilities to unauthorized users and activities.
    6. All recreational areas shall post at least one (1) sign at the primary entrance(s) stating:
        a. Hours of operation.
        b. Park/recreational area rules.
        c. Trespassing notice for unauthorized users, including citation of applicable ordinances/statutes.
        d. Notice that all dogs must be kept on a leash (unless an approved off-leash area has been designated).
        e. Emergency (911) contact information to report suspicious or criminal activity.
        f. If recreational area is privately operated, homeowners association contact information to report maintenance or safety issues.
    7. If a neighborhood watch exists, a sign shall be posted at the primary entrance(s) to the recreational area.
    8. If the recreational area abuts an environmentally sensitive lands (ESL) area, a sign shall be posted every one hundred (100) feet at the border of the ESL area. The sign shall conform to the ESL sign requirements per the environmentally sensitive lands ordinance (ESLO).
    9. If provided, restroom facilities shall be located in a highly visible area and shall be free of shrubs that reach a mature height greater than three (3) feet.
    10. All lighting shall be consistent with the standards of Section 27.5 and must be turned off by 10:00 p.m.
    11. If no lighting is provided, recreation area hours shall be limited to daylight hours only and shall be posted on the informational sign(s) at the park entrance(s) required by subsection D.6 of this section. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
E. Facilities Installation, Ownership and Maintenance 
    1. Private Recreational Facilities 
        a. In cases where the recreational facility is to be privately owned, recreational facilities and parking improvements shall be completed and in place by the time thirty-five percent (35%) of the building permits are issued. Prior to release of the required bond or assurance, the developer shall provide written documentation to the Town that all mechanisms are in place to protect the rights of the homeowners (i.e., liability insurance).
        b. Private recreational areas and improvements shall be owned and maintained by a mandatory membership homeowners association (HOA) created by covenants. If the HOA fails to adequately maintain the required recreational facilities, the Town may cause the property to be maintained and may cause a lien to be placed on the property, subject to and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record.
    2. Public Park Facilities 
        a. In cases where the required recreational area is at least three (3) acres in size and is located adjacent to a public thoroughfare, dedication to the Town may be accepted. In this case, the park land shall be owned and maintained by the Town. The subdivider shall, without credit:
            i. Provide full street improvements and utility connections including, but not limited to, curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic control devices, lighting, street trees, and sidewalks to land which is dedicated pursuant to this section;
            ii. Provide solid masonry fencing along the property line of that portion of the subdivided lots contiguous to the dedicated land;
            iii. Provide improved drainage through the site; and
            iv. Provide other improvements and amenities that the Town Council determines to be essential to the acceptance of the land for recreational purposes. Subsequent improvements, if any, shall be developed and maintained by the Town.
        b. When park land is dedicated to and accepted by the Town, the provisions of subsection B.1 of this section shall not apply.
F. In-Lieu Fee Option 
    1. In lieu of the required private recreational area or public park land dedication and required recreational facilities, the Town Council may approve an alternative proposal for an in-lieu fee that aids in the development or improvement of Town parks or recreational facilities. All sub- divisions containing forty-three (43) lots or less may utilize the in-lieu fee option.
    2. Subdivisions of eighty-five (85) lots or more may elect to utilize the in-lieu fee option for up to fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of recreation area improvements as determined by the recreation area in-lieu fee calculation definition. The remaining portion of the recreation improvement obligation shall be applied to on-site recreation area(s) and amenities per the provisions of this code.
    3. In-lieu fee proposals shall meet all of the following conditions:
        a. The subdivision has or can provide legal and physically constructed access to an existing Oro Valley public park, a park location identified in the Town Parks, Open Space and Trails Master Plan, or other location approved by the PRLCR Director.
        b. The total amount of the in-lieu fee determined by the recreation area in-lieu fee calculation is, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Administrator (PZA) and PRLCR Director, sufficient to fund a specific park development or improvement project for an existing facility.
    4. The recreation area in-lieu fee shall be determined by the town, with a written appraisal report prepared by an appraiser acceptable to the town. The determination of the recreation area in-lieu fee shall consider, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
        a. Approval and any conditions of the conceptual site plan.
        b. The general plan
        c. Conditional zoning
        d. Property location
        e. Off-site improvements facilitating use of the property
        f. Site characteristics of the property
    5. The recreation area in-lieu fee calculation shall be based on the improved value of the land, including structures and facilities required by Section 26.5, design, construction costs, and having the necessary infrastructure (i.e., roadways, drainage water, electric, telephone and sewer) installed to serve the park areas.
    6. The proposal shall be prepared by the applicant and submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator and PRLCR Director who shall forward their recommendations to the Town Council for its action after an advertised public hearing.
    7. The terms of the agreement shall be made a matter of public record and a condition of approval of any final plat or issuance of any permits for the subdivision.
    8. In evaluating a proposal under this section, the Town Council shall consider the impact on the property resulting from a change in the standard requirements for recreational space, the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed alternatives, the benefits afforded to the subdivision from the alternative proposal and the relative values to the community afforded by the alternative proposal as compared with the standard requirements.
    9. The agreement shall provide for the funding of equivalent of park land and/or recreational facilities to the Town as would have been provided by a recreational area in the subdivision.
    10. If the subdivider objects to the determined in-lieu fee, he/she may appeal to the Town Council, with the burden of proof lying with the subdivider.
    11. The Town Council may waive requirements for an appraisal when the subdivider provides acceptable alternative information to the Planning and Zoning Administrator (PZA), PRLCR Director, and the Finance Director as a means of determining the improved value that is presented and accepted at a Town Council public hearing. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)11-05, Amended,  04/20/2011)

Section 26.6 Assurances
Purpose: To provide procedures for approving and posting the assurances for the completion of subdivision/development improvements in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 9-463.01(C)(8).
A. Assurances for Construction 
    1. These assurances guarantee the construction of required on-site and off-site street, water, sewer, utilities, drainage, flood control measures, the hardscape for recreation facilities and landscaping, and all other required improvements. They may also be used to stabilize soil and replace vegetation on sites where development has been abandoned, in accordance with Section 26.6.J.1.
    2. For all developments where there is a subdivision, minor subdivision or other division of property that requires improvements, the property owner, subdivider or developer shall provide the required assurances as specified in Section 26.6.F.1. As a substitute for all or a portion of the assurance, the Planning and Zoning Administrator or the Town Engineer or their designee may approve an assurance as specified in Section 26.6.F.
    3. For all developments where division of land is not involved, assurances shall be provided for public off-site and on-site improvements and for such private improvements as are necessary for the operation of the development as deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and Town Engineer. These assurances shall be provided in one of the forms specified in Section 26.6.F.
    4. For projects constructed in phases, the developer shall provide cost estimates itemized separately for each phase of construction to facilitate the release of assurances upon the completion of individual phases.
    5. Phased construction shall include assurances that provide for the installation of public safety-related improvements including drainage, traffic movement and other services appropriate to each phase as determined by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
B. Assurances for Site Stabilization 
For sites that require stabilization in accordance with Section 27.9, the property owner or their agent shall post assurances in one of the types specified in Sections 26.6.F to guarantee, in the event the project is abandoned, the property can be stabilized, through the removal of all construction material and the stabilization of soil on the site. Acceptable forms of soil stabilization include, but are not limited to, inorganic ground cover, hydroseeding and revegetation, as determined by the Town Engineer and the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Other methods may be approved by the Town
Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator if they are equally effective. These stabilization assurances shall be in an amount sufficient to stabilize the property from its development-altered condition. The assurances for landscape may be used to satisfy the landscape installation portion of the stabilization requirements. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
C. Assurances for Landscape 
The property owner or their agent shall post assurances as specified in Section 26.6.F to assure the installation of all landscape improvements, and recreation areas where required, in accordance with the approved final landscape and irrigation plans. These assurances may be used to complete the required landscape improvements and/or recreation areas or may be used to stabilize the site in the event the approved development is abandoned.
D. Assurances for Water Service 
    1. Assurances for water infrastructure are required and are included with construction assurances as specified in Section 26.6.A.
    2. Water service to any individual lot or any lot within a development or subdivision will be contingent upon the completion of all required water infrastructure along with the receipt of all required meter fees by the utility.
The only exception is prior to the completion of all required water infrastructure but after approval of construction from the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality, the property owner or their agent may receive meters for ten percent (10%) of the lots, not to exceed six (6) lots, for the purpose of model home construction.
E. Assurances for Other Improvements 
To assure the completion of other required improvements, the Town may require additional assurances in the forms as specified in Sections 26.6.F. These assurances are typically utilized to allow development to proceed when other required obligations have not been met on time.
F. Amount and Type of Assurances 
    1. Assurances for construction, site stabilization, landscaping, water infrastructure or other improvements shall be in an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the costs as estimated in accordance with this Section 26.6.F.
    2. For residential subdivisions a third party trust type of assurance is required in addition to monetary assurances for site stabilization, landscape, and water infrastructure.
        a. Assurances shall be provided by the placement of the title to the subdivided property in trust with a third party escrow agency or trust company authorized and licensed to do business in the State of Arizona.
        b. This type of assurance shall include an agreement between the trustee and the Town of Oro Valley that title to any lot or parcel within the subdivision will not be transferred until the trustee receives authorization in writing from the Town. The agreement shall also include special conditions authorizing the Town of Oro Valley to abandon and re-subdivide the property should the required improvements fail to be installed in compliance with the Town of Oro Valley’s specifications.
        c. The designated escrow agency or trust company holding the property in trust may sell and convey all of the unreleased lots within the subject property or within an approved phase in one transaction to a single purchaser; provided, that such purchaser shall be bound by the terms of the agreement between the Town of Oro Valley, the subdivider and the designated escrow agency or trust.
        d. The assurances and deeds required pursuant to this Section shall be recorded in the office of the Pima County Recorder. The changes to the third party trust due to the aforementioned sales, if they meet all of the above stipulations, will not require Town Council approval.
        e. Third party trusts may not be used to guarantee the improvement of required recreation areas, the installation of required landscaping, site stabilization or water infrastructure.
    3. Residential subdivisions utilizing a third party trust are required to post an alternative type of assurance for public safety-related subdivision improvements including flood and traffic control as determined by the Town Engineer.
    4. Alternative types for assurances can be approved by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator. Development, other than subdivisions, shall use one of the following forms of assurance.
        a. Cash or certified check.
        b. Surety (performance) bonds executed by a company duly authorized and licensed to do business in the State of Arizona insuring the performance of the principal (subdivider/developer) as required by these regulations. The applicant may use the Town’s template form for bonds, or may submit a different bond form, provided the following items are included: name of the party being bound, development case number, forfeiture recital, corporate acknowledgments, notarized signatures, and descriptions and cost estimates of the required improvements. Applicant-submitted forms are subject to Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator approval.
        c. Certificates of Deposit, United States Treasury Bills or any security guaranteed by the United States Government, State of Arizona or any political subdivision thereof acceptable to the Town.
        d. A deposit of money with a responsible escrow agent or trust company authorized and licensed to do business in the State of Arizona. This money may not be used or pledged by the depositor for any purpose during the period the escrow account is in effect.
        e. A current letter of credit. Letters of credit shall be renewed prior to their expiration.
        f. Any other type of assurance, which guarantees the required improvements to the same or better degree than the above forms. This form, which may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, must have no expiration date and may not be released or converted to any other form without the agreement of the Town. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
G. Terms of Assurances 
All assurances shall remain in effect until release is authorized per Section 26.6.I.
H. Securing and Approval of Assurances 
The assurances shall be submitted to and approved by the Town as follows:
    1. Assurances for construction shall be posted with the Town’s Development Coordinator prior to recordation of the final plat or certification of the development plan. The assurances shall be listed on the development plan and/or final plat, and shall have been approved by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator. For multifamily and commercial projects that will be graded in phases, only the first phase of the assurance is required with the development plan or final plat. A general note shall be added to the development plan or final plat stating that grading permits will not be issued for subsequent phases without approved assurances.
    2. Site stabilization and landscape assurances shall be posted, as required, prior to the issuance of a Type 2 or Type 3 grading permit or the commencement of work.
    3. Other assurances as noted in Section 26.6.E will be posted as needed to allow a project to temporarily continue without all required improvements in place.
    4. Changes in assurances under Section 26.6.F due to changes in ownership shall be reviewed, and approved as appropriate, by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or the Town Engineer.
    5. For private development, cost estimates for all construction, site stabilization and landscaping improvements shall be submitted for review by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        a. Estimates shall be based on approved construction documents and shall be signed and sealed by the appropriate registrant (Engineer or Landscape Architect).
        b. Approved cost estimates are required prior to the acceptance of any assurances.
    6. For projects involving public facilities, a cost estimate for construction only, which may include site stabilization and landscaping, shall be submitted for review by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        a. Estimates shall be based on approved construction documents and shall be signed and sealed by the appropriate registrant (Engineer or Landscape Architect).
        b. Approved cost estimates are required prior to the acceptance of any assurances.
    7. A contractor’s itemized formal bid may be substituted for any required cost estimate. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
I. Releases of Assurances 
    1. The assurances shall be released, with the exception of assurances for water infrastructure, upon satisfactory performance and acceptance of the work as determined by the Town Engineer and/or the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    2. Trust assurances may be released upon completion and inspection of the required subdivision improvements. Partial releases, up to fifty percent (50%), may be granted for a group of lots where the required improvements for the group of lots have been satisfactorily completed and such improvements can be used and maintained separately from the improvements required for the balance of the subdivision plat. Partial releases shall be administered and approved by the Town Engineer and/or the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    3. Reductions from monetary assurances may be made from any deposit made pursuant to this Section. Such progress payments shall be made to the assurance holder in accordance with standards established by the Town Engineer and the Planning and Zoning Administrator. In no case shall the assurances be reduced to an amount less than fifty percent (50%) of the original assurance amount until such time as the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator deem the required improvements to be in full compliance, including the installation of all safety-related improvements, as determined by the Town Engineer.
    4. Once a monetary assurance has been reduced, a rider or substitute monetary assurance must be in place fourteen (14) days after a release letter has been issued.
    5. In order to grant partial release of assurances, sufficient major grading, drainage, and transportation improvements as determined by the Town Engineer shall be completed.
    6. Full release of assurances shall be processed once improvements have been completed and accepted by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator and the Town has completed a field inspection. Further, the developer shall meet the following requirements:
        a. As-built plans and required certification letters have been submitted for review and have been accepted by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        b. Submittal and approval of a close out package as defined in the approved grading permit.
        c. To guarantee the good condition of landscape improvements, one of the following:
            i. A landscape maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the original landscape bond amount shall remain in place for a period of one (1) year from the complete installation of the landscape materials and any replacement materials. The type of assurance shall be as specified in Section 26.6.F.
            ii. A signed warrantee of the landscaping for a period of one (1) year from a licensed landscape contractor with extensions as required for any replacement materials.
            iii. For deeded or dedicated streets, drainage ways and rights-of-way, compliance with Oro Valley Town Code Article 7-9.
        d. To guarantee proper function of drainage improvements, a drainage assurance in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the original site stabilization assurance amount shall remain in place for a period of one (1) year from the complete installation of drainage improvements. The type of assurance shall be as specified in Section 26.6.F.
    7. Release of the water infrastructure portion of the construction assurances shall require the completion of the following:
        a. Completion of construction deficiencies;
        b. Payment of all water-related fees including inspection and testing fees;
        c. Easements for water facilities and maintenance are recorded;
        d. Line extension agreements are executed, if applicable;
        e. Compaction test results have been submitted and approved by the water utility;
        f. Post-paving continuity tests have been submitted and approved by the water utility. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011)
J. Forfeiture of Assurances 
    1. The Town may take steps to utilize the assurances, upon the occurrence of any of the following:
        a. In order to abate any unsafe conditions as determined by the Town Engineer, Building Official or Planning and Zoning Administrator;
        b. Failure of the owner to respond within ten (10) days to cure a violation once a violation notice has been issued; or
        c. When, in any way, the owner or their agent fails to follow the approved plan and does not correct the situation within sixty (60) days of notice by the Town.
        d. Abandonment of the Project 
        A project will be presumed abandoned when there has been no development activity for six (6) months as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    2. In the event of any of the occurrences in Section 26.6.J.1, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall issue a notice to the property owner and obligor of the assurances of pending forfeiture of assurances.
        a. The owner shall respond to the Planning and Zoning Administrator in writing within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice to request a hearing with the Planning and Zoning Administrator, otherwise forfeiture shall occur.
        b. Upon a determination by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, the Town may utilize the assurances for completing the project or portions of the project, and/or for bringing the project into compliance with Town requirements. Any amount of the assurances in excess of that required by the Town to stabilize the property shall be returned to the owner. (6/11 supplement, Amended,  06/2011; (O)08-24, Enacted, )

CHAPTER 27 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:
Section 27.1 Operational Performance Standards
Section 27.2 Cultural Resource Preservation
Section 27.3 Public Artwork Provisions
Section 27.4 (Repealed by (O)09-20)
Section 27.5 Outdoor Lighting
Section 27.6 Landscape Conservation
Section 27.7 Off-Street Parking
Section 27.8 Off-Street Loading
Section 27.9 Grading
Section 27.10 Environmentally Sensitive Lands

Section 27.1 Operational Performance Standards
A. Solar Protection 
No structure shall be erected which would shade an adjacent building when the sun is more than 45 degrees above the horizon unless the written permission of the owner of the property to be shaded is first obtained.
B. Site Grading and Covering Requirements 
    1. Permit Required 
    A grading permit is required prior to grading, clearing, or grubbing.
    2. Site Marking 
    The portions of a site to be graded shall be clearly marked on the site prior to any grading, clearing, or grubbing. Construction equipment shall be permitted only within marked area.
    3. Protective Cover 
    Cleared or graded land shall not be left at any time without dust control nor shall be left uncovered for more than 60 days without temporary or permanent protective cover of the entire cleared or graded area as determined by the Town Engineer.
    4. Revegetation 
    Desert vegetation shall be re-established by the developer over septic tank leaching fields and utility trenches where such are not located within cultivated yard, parking, or driveway areas.

Section 27.2 Cultural Resource Preservation
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to:
    1. Establish guidelines and specifications for the preservation of archaeological, historical, and cultural resources within the Town. This is accomplished by a system of codes that represent a reasonable and defensible compromise between no building occurring on archaeological and historical sites, and development taking place in such a manner as to destroy significant cultural resources.
    2. Protect and perpetuate the unique character of a geographic area where existing sites, objects, archaeological remains, architecture, or other tangible records of past eras can be of enduring value in advancing education, general welfare, civic pride, and appreciation of their cultural heritage.
B. Applicability 
This Section shall apply to all development, which requires a rezoning, preliminary plat, development plan, or amendment to these. Associated off-site development and ancillary construction (utility trenches, water and sewage treatment facilities, roads, etc.) will be treated in the same manner.
    1. Areas with Approved Development Plans and Plats 
    Current provisions for archaeological mitigation shall continue to apply to all properties until December 31, 1999. Thereafter, prior to issuance of a Grading Permit and any ground modification activities, an on-the-ground cultural resources survey and appropriate mitigation measures shall be conducted on the subject property in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
    2. Annexed Areas 
    For areas with County approved plats or development plans County provisions for archaeological mitigation shall continue to apply to all annexed properties until the later of December 31, 1999 or two (2) years after the date the property was annexed. Thereafter the provisions of this Section shall apply.
C. Site Analysis Requirements 
Specific provisions for Site Analyses are found in the appropriate Section of this Code. In summary, those provisions require an application for a rezoning to:
    1. Complete a records check
    2. Describe and map archaeological and historic sites identified on the property
    3. If necessary, complete and record a field survey.
D. Cultural Resources Mitigation Plan 
    1. Submittal and Review 
    A cultural resources mitigation plan for any identified archaeological or historical sites on the subject property shall be submitted at the time of, or prior to, the submittal of any preliminary plat or development plan. The mitigation plan shall be prepared and reviewed as described in Section 22.9.C., Preliminary Plat, and Section 22.9.E., Development Plan. The Town may request technical review from the Arizona State Museum and/or the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) when appropriate.
    2. Mitigation Plan Requirements 
    Applications required under this Chapter shall be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the application.
    3. Phased Developments 
    In lieu of a mitigation plan for the entire property, phased developments may submit and implement mitigation plans for each phase that contains cultural resources. In the event that an archaeological site spans more than one phase, a single plan shall be prepared for the phases that contain the site.
E. Site Development 
    1. Disturbance 
    No physical disturbance (including artifact collection or excavation) of archaeological or historic sites shall be permitted unless specifically indicated in the mitigation plan. Cultural resources identified for in-place preservation will be protected during development activities.
    2. Discoveries 
    Unrecorded archaeological sites unearthed during construction will be recorded and documented by a professional archaeologist. If any cultural resources are encountered during the grading/excavating process, all works shall cease in the vicinity of the resources and a qualified archaeologist shall be consulted to access the significance of the resources and recommend and undertake appropriate mitigation measures. Information on the location and nature of cultural resources will be restricted except as necessary for avoidance and protection.
    3. Off-site Development and Ancillary Construction 
    Utility trenches, water and sewage treatment facilities, roads, etc., will also be investigated, evaluated, and treated by the same criteria as within the proposed development site.
F. Treatment of Human Remains 
An agreement for the treatment of human remains shall be developed with the Arizona State Museum (ASM) and appropriate cultural groups pursuant to A.R.S. Section 41-844 and A.R.S. Section 41-865. This agreement shall be established prior to archaeological investigation. Completion of the approved mitigation program does not exempt the development from compliance with these state laws.
G. Excavations on Public Property 
No individual shall be allowed to use a probe, metal detector, or any other device to search or excavate for artifacts on public property, nor can any individual remove artifacts from public property without the written permission of the Town. Furthermore, no disturbance or construction activities shall be authorized within the properties belonging to the Town, including public streets and rights-of-way, without a Town permit and without such archaeology efforts as addressed in this chapter.

Section 27.3 Public Artwork Provisions
A. Purpose 
The purpose of these public artwork requirements is to implement the General Plan Arts and Culture Element and support the cultural and educational enrichment of the citizens and visitors to Oro Valley through the creation of artwork that is accessible to all members of the community. The Town seeks enhancements to community beauty, artistic entertainment and enrichment for all its residents and visitors, and education in and through the arts. ((O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
B. Applicability 
    1. Public artwork is a required element of new private and public construction projects in Oro Valley as specified in this section.
    2. Artwork projects created for private development as a result of the requirements of this section shall be privately owned and included in all nonresidential development projects, including religious institutions and nonprofit organizations, with the exception of communication facilities, utility installations and similar projects as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.Nakoma Sky Public Art
    3. All projects where public artwork has not been provided in accordance with Town Council requirements and legal nonconforming uses that propose twenty-five percent (25%) or more cumulative addition or structural modifications, such as changes in square footage, gross floor area, and building facade, shall meet the requirements of this section.
    4. Public artwork is required for all new public construction projects involving construction costs over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), with the following exceptions:
        a. Public art expenditure is not legally permissible due to the constraints imposed by the funding mechanism;
        b. Maintenance projects such as surface treatments;
        c. Safety improvements such as sidewalks and overlays with shouldering for bike lanes;
        d. Significant budgetary constraints necessitate cost reduction, subject to Town Council approval. ((O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
C. Artwork Budget 
    1. A budget for public artwork shall be established based on one percent (1%) of the building permit valuation for the project, including all phases of a multi-phase project. The building permit valuation shall be confirmed by the Building Official. The itemized budget and a copy of the contract or agreement with the artist shall be submitted for Town review. The budget shall be spent on the design, fabrication, installation, and the Town review process of public artwork for the project.
    2. For applicable public construction projects, one percent (1%) of the project construction cost shall be used for public artwork.
    3. If specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, artwork budgets may include integrated pedestals, bases, walls, utility extensions and architect’s fees exclusively required for the artwork.
    4. Artwork budgets shall not be used for normally required improvements and development costs, including but not limited to land acquisition, grading, paving, sidewalks and landscaping.
    5. For multi-phase projects or where building permit valuation has changed, an updated public artwork budget, based on the most current building valuation tables, will be submitted for each phase at the time of application for public artwork approval. ((O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
D. Fee in Lieu of Public Art 
    1. If the building permit valuation is less than two million dollars ($2,000,000), the owner/developer may elect to contribute the one percent (1%) to the Town of Oro Valley as an in-lieu fee. It shall be earmarked specifically for public artwork projects.
    2. If the building permit valuation is ten million dollars ($10,000,000) or more, the owner may elect to contribute that portion of the one percent (1%) over one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) to the Town of Oro Valley earmarked specifically for public artwork projects.
    3. A portion of the one percent (1%) may also be used to construct on-site performing art facilities used for and by the public for the promotion and production of the arts.
    4. The Planning and Zoning Commission may determine that, due to remoteness of location, limited access, or any other cause that may prevent the required public artwork from fulfilling the intent of these provisions, the one percent (1%) monies be made as an in-lieu fee.
    5. The in-lieu fees paid to the public art fund may be used for the maintenance of publicly owned artwork. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
E. Call for Artists 
The public art review process may be modified as provided in subsection F of this section, if a call for artists is used in accordance with the following:
    1. A “qualified agent” shall be used to perform a call for artist process in accordance with the Public Art Guidelines, prior to submitting a conceptual design proposal to the Town.
    2. If the building permit valuation is less than four million dollars ($4,000,000), a call for artists process must be at least regionally advertised in accordance with the Public Art Guidelines.
    3. If the building permit valuation is of four million dollars ($4,000,000) or more, a call for artists process shall be advertised nationally in accordance with the Public Art Guidelines.
    4. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall adopt guidelines to be known as the “Public Art Guidelines,” amended from time to time, to specify the call for artists process. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)14-02, Enacted,  01/15/2014)
F. Review Process 
    1. Conceptual public art applications may be approved in accordance with one (1) of the following processes:
        a. Conceptual public art applications which have used a qualified agent to perform a call for artists process in accordance with subsection E of this section may be administratively approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        b. Conceptual public art applications which have not used a call for artists process may be approved by Town Council, following recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    2. Final public art submittals that comply with conceptual public art approval may be approved by Town staff, subject to appeal to Town Council in accordance with Section 22.9.D.8. Changes to the approved artwork design or the approved maintenance plan shall require approval of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    3. Timing for public construction projects’ artwork conceptual and final review by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be determined by the Town Engineer and the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    4. The conceptual design review of artwork shall assess artist qualifications, artwork design and artwork location(s) as provided in subsection G of this section.
    5. Subsequent to conceptual review, the Planning and Zoning Administrator (PZA) shall complete a final review. The applicant shall provide information on the artwork’s final design and a maintenance plan per subsection I.8 of this section. Changes to the approved artwork design or the approved maintenance plan shall require approval of the PZA.
    6. Project completion shall be certified by the acceptable installation of the approved artwork and submittal by the property owner of a certification package including the following: a statement that the artwork, artist and site meet the criteria established by this section, the date on which the installation was completed, and an itemized account of the expenses incurred in fulfilling the requirements of this section.
    7. For existing development, previously approved projects, subsequent phases of phased projects, or projects that do not require a landscape plan, final review of public artwork shall be approved prior to the issuance of the building permit.
    8. Planning and Zoning Administrator decisions specified in this section shall be appealable within twenty (20) days to Town Council. Town Council decisions on appeals pursuant to this section shall be final. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
G. Design and Location Requirements 
    1. Public artwork shall be designed by an artist, as defined in Chapter 31. If a design team is employed to create public artwork, at least one (1) team member shall be an artist as defined in Chapter 31.
    2. Public artwork shall not include any of the following unless specifically allowed by the authorized approval body and the item is designed by an artist: architectural elements or structural parts of a building or other structure; fixtures or features such as grates, shade screens, streetlights, benches, signs, and bike racks. Designs of such items shall clearly result in artistic expression beyond the normally anticipated functional appearance.
    3. Public artwork shall be in an area easily accessible and clearly visible to the general public. The location shall allow for unrestricted viewing from a variety of vantage points.
    4. Public artwork may be located on a publicly viewable building facade, provided such location improves overall public accessibility to the artwork.
    5. Artwork may be located within a building subject to approval by the authorized approval body. The applicant shall demonstrate that the interior location for artwork provides equal or superior public access relative to outdoor locations. Indoor locations shall be readily accessible to the public such as lobbies and entryways and shall be accessible to the public for a minimum of forty (40) hours each week.
    6. The location of public artwork shall be indicated on the landscape plan, development plan, plat or other appropriate document as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    7. Public artwork shall be permanent, and may be integrated with the work of other design professionals.
    8. Public artwork shall not be located in sight visibility triangles.
    9. Location of art in a proposed or existing Town right-of-way shall be approved by the Town Engineer.
    10. Off-site locations within the Town for public artwork may be approved by the Town Council, upon review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
H. Public Art Design Principles 
Assessment of public art applications shall be based on conformance with the adopted design standards – Addendum A of the Zoning Code – and fulfillment of the following principles:
    1. Quality 
    Artwork demonstrates originality, artistic quality, and excellence in design and craftsmanship; to be demonstrated through renderings, explanation of construction, materials, and artist resume.
    2. Response to Context 
    Artworks should be appropriate in scale, material, form and content for the immediate and general social and physical environments with which they are to relate.
    3. Durability 
    Consideration should be given to structural and surface integrity, permanence, and protection against theft, vandalism, weathering, and excessive maintenance and repair costs.
    4. Integration 
    Where possible, in addition to meeting aesthetic requirements, artworks should also serve to establish focal points, modify, enhance or define specific spaces or establish identity.
    5. Safety 
    Artworks should not present a hazard or create unsafe conditions.
    6. Diversity 
    Artworks should contribute to a diversity of style, scale, media, artists, community values and forms of expression within the Town.
    7. Visibility 
    Artworks should be visible and accessible for the purposes of public enjoyment and security, considering pedestrian and vehicular traffic, lighting, active hours on site and future development and vegetation growth.
    8. Feasibility 
    Consideration should be given to the likelihood of successful completion of the artwork. Factors to be considered include but are not limited to: project budget, timeline, artist’s experience and soundness of materials.
    9. Advertising Elements 
    Public art shall not reflect or include advertising elements of a business or corporation including colors, graphics, logos or other representations of corporate identity. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)14-02, Enacted,  01/15/2014)
I. Installation and Maintenance 
    1. Public artwork shall be installed, inspected and certified complete prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. The Town may withhold the final certificate of occupancy until public artwork installation is complete.Public Art and Certificate of Occupancy
    2. An artwork installation schedule, addressing timing, budget allocation, artwork location(s), and specific details for each phase of a phased development project, shall be submitted for review by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Each development phase shall include public artwork allocated proportionally to building valuation as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    3. Public artworks must remain on public display and shall be maintained in the condition in which they were originally installed.
    4. The installation of the artwork will be done in a manner that will protect the artwork and the public. The general safety and permanence of artwork installation shall be inspected as determined by the Town Building Official, Town Engineer and the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Incomplete or unsafe installations shall not be approved.
    5. Artwork projects shall have a small plaque not to exceed eighty (80) square inches in size identifying the title, date and artist. The plaque shall contain the words “Oro Valley 1% for Public Art Program.”
    6. Continued maintenance of the artwork shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The artwork shall be maintained to preserve its intended appearance as specified in the approved application. Faded paint, missing or damaged parts, or deteriorated finishes represent unacceptable maintenance conditions.
    7. The original artist shall be offered the opportunity to provide maintenance and repair services for the artworks they create. If the original artist will not be maintaining the artwork, documentation of the property owner’s request to the artist for maintenance and repair services shall be submitted with the maintenance plan required in subsection I.8 of this section.
    8. A maintenance plan specifying the party(ies) intended to complete repairs, required maintenance steps, and frequency of maintenance shall be submitted with the application for public artwork approval. If the party identified to perform maintenance and repairs is not the original artist, a statement of the individual’s qualifications to repair and maintain public artwork shall be submitted with the maintenance plan. Qualified individuals shall have experience working with the media and materials used in the artwork.
    9. Public artwork responsibilities shall transfer from property owner to property owner.
    10. The property owner shall be responsible for the services and utilities necessary to operate and/or maintain public artworks over time.
    11. The property owner shall provide evidence of insurance in a minimum amount equal to the purchase and installation costs of the public artwork.
    12. Replacement of missing or damaged public artworks is required, unless the property owner provides documentation that shows that the artwork was properly maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plan. Property owners are required to respond to inquiries from the Town regarding damaged or missing public artwork within fifteen (15) days of written notice.
    13. Failure to maintain the artwork, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, shall constitute a violation of this code, and/or cause liens against the real property.
    14. Public artwork cannot be permanently removed, relocated or altered in any way without the review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    15. In the event public artwork must be temporarily moved or altered due to construction or other activity, the property owner shall submit in writing a request to the Planning and Zoning Administrator detailing the purpose, time frame, and intended temporary location for the artwork. The request must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, with reference to the maintenance plan, prior to movement or alteration of the artwork. The artwork shall be returned to its original location. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)11-25, Amended,  10/05/2011; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-06, Amended,  03/02/2011; (O)08-23, Enacted,  12/03/2008)

Section 27.4 Native Plant Preservation, Salvage and Mitigation Plan Requirements
(Repealed by (O)09-20)

Section 27.5 Outdoor Lighting
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this Code is to preserve the relationship of the residents to their unique desert environment through protection of access to the dark night sky. Intended outcomes include preservation of the Town’s residential/resort character, support of astronomical activity, minimizing excessive use of energy, and providing for the safety and security of persons engaged in outdoor night time activities.
B. Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to:
    1. New Uses and Buildings 
    2. Major Additions or Modifications to Existing Projects 
    All projects that propose twenty-five percent (25%) or more cumulative addition or structural modification such as changes in square footage, gross floor area, building facade, etc., shall meet the requirements of this Code for the entire property.
    Twenty-five percent (25%) or more cumulative modification or replacement of outdoor lighting shall meet the requirements of this Code.
    3. Minor Additions or Modifications to Existing Projects 
    All projects except in E2a lighting zone that propose less than twenty-five percent (25%) cumulative additions or structural modifications shall require the submission of a lighting plan of existing and any proposed outdoor lighting. All new outdoor lighting provided shall have to meet the requirements of this Code.
    4. Change of Use 
        a. Whenever the use of any existing building, structure, or premises is changed to a new use that is substantially different from the existing one, all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance with this Code before the new use commences. The Planning and Zoning Administrator will determine whether a substantial change has occurred by evaluating each of the following factors:
            i. Hours of operation
            ii. Type of business
            iii. Traffic generated
            iv. Occupancy
            v. Degree of existing non-conformance with this Chapter
            vi. Repealed by (O)11-15.
        b. A significant difference or issue with one (1) or a combination of the factors above may be utilized as grounds to require compliance with this Code.
    5. Resumption of Use After Abandonment 
    If a property or use with nonconforming lighting is abandoned as defined in Section 29.4, then all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance with this Code before the use is resumed.
    6. Exemptions 
        a. All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of natural gas or other fossil fuels.
        b. Street lighting both public and private, except for elements of onsite circulation described in Section 27.7.G.
        c. Seasonal decorations using unshielded fifty (50) watt or less incandescent lamp from Thanksgiving to January 15.
    7. Sign illumination shall meet the standards of Section 28.3.B. ((O)16-05, Amended,  04/06/2016; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
C. Prohibitions 
    1. Mercury Vapor Lamps Fixtures and Lamps: The installation, sale, offer for sale, lease, or purchase of any mercury vapor lamp for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited.
    2. Laser Source Light
    3. Searchlights
D. Lighting Plan Application Requirements 
    1. Applications required under this Chapter shall be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the application.
    2. Additional Submission 
    The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator to readily ascertain code compliance. If such plans, descriptions, and data are insufficient to enable this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures, or lamps proposed, the application will be deemed incomplete. The Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator may require additional evidence of compliance such as certified reports of tests by a recognized testing laboratory.
E. Total Outdoor Light Output 
    1. The total amount of light, measured in lumens, from all outdoor light fixture lamps shall be measured as follows:
        a. For all lamp types, the mean lumen output, as defined by the lamp manufacturer, shall be the lumen value used. For lamps not listed with mean lumens, the initial rating shall be used.
        b. The total light output of each outdoor light fixture shall be based on the largest lamp that it is rated to accommodate. Furthermore, the largest lamp rating for fluorescent and high intensity discharge fixtures shall be based on the installed ballast rating.
        c. For determining compliance with Table 27-5, the total lumens shall be the sum of the following:
            i. One hundred percent (100%) of the lumens from outdoor light fixtures installed at grade, on poles, and installed on the top or sides of buildings or other structures, when not shielded from above by the structure itself.
            ii. Fifty percent (50%) of the lumens from underwater light fixtures unless the fixture is aimed at an angle of less than forty-five (45) degrees above the horizontal, in which case the lumens shall be calculated at ten percent (10%) of the lumens.
            [IMAGE: <OroValley27.5E1cii.png>]
            iii. For projects in E2a lighting zones, wall mounted unshielded luminaires located within a forty-five (45)-degree angle from the edge of the canopy or overhang down to the wall shall be calculated at fifty percent (50%) of the lumens.
            Exceptions: Outdoor lighting fixtures meeting any of the following conditions shall not be counted in determining the lumen caps of Table 27-5:
                a) Full cutoff light fixtures installed under canopies, building overhangs, or roof eaves.
                b) Light fixtures shielded by the canopy, building overhang, or roof eaves in such a manner that no lamp or vertical element of a lens or diffuser is visible at the property line.
                c) Outdoor internally illuminated signs designed according to the Town’s sign code.
        d. For purposes of determining total light output from luminaire lighting assemblies which include multiple unshielded or full cutoff lamps on a single pole or standard shall be considered as a single unit. Two (2) or more units with lamps less than three (3) feet apart shall be considered a single luminaire. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
    2. Lighting Zones 
    The Town of Oro Valley shall have the following lighting zones for the calculation of allowed lumens:
        a. “Lighting Zone E3” shall include areas that are zoned C-2 and C-1.
        b. “Lighting Zone E3a” shall include areas that are zoned C-N, PS, R-4R, R-6, T-P, R-S, and P-1. Religious institutions and schools will be included in E3a.
        c. “Lighting Zone E2” shall include areas that are zoned POS, R-4, and SDH-6.
        d. “Lighting Zone E2a” shall include areas that are zoned R1-144, R1-72, R1-43, R1-36, R1-20, R1-10, and R1-7.
        e. “Lighting Zone E1” is a special overlay zone, whereby the preservation of a naturally dark environment and preservation of habitat value is considered of paramount importance. It includes identified riparian areas, natural open spaces preserved via easements, covenants, or code restrictions, and PAD designated open spaces. No lighting is permitted in this overlay zone.
    3. Table 27-5 provides requirements of the total mean lumens permitted per net lighting acre for the different lighting zones.
        a. The applicant may use any one of the three (3) options - I, II, or III for the entire property.
        b. Net lighting acre is defined in Chapter 31, Definitions.
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        |        Lighting Options        |       Lighting Zones       |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        |                      |   E3    |   E3a   |   E2    |  E2a   |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        |     Option I: Mostly Low Pressure Sodium (LPS) Lighting     |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        | Total lumens         | 400,000 | 250,000 | 100,000 | 70,000 |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        | Limit on non-LPS FCO | 45,000  | 25,000  | 10,000  | 7,000  |
        | lumens               |         |         |         |        |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        | Limit on unshielded  | 12,000  | 9,000   | 6,000   | 4,000  |
        | lumens               |         |         |         |        |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        | Option II: All Full Cutoff (FCO) Lighting                   |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        | Total lumens | 300,000         | 150,000 | 65,000  | 45,000 |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        | Option III: Mostly Full Cutoff Lighting                     |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        | Total lumens | 200,000         | 100,000 | 50,000  | 35,000 |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        | Limit on     | 12,000          | 9,000   | 6,000   | 4,000  |
        | unshielded   |                 |         |         |        |
        | lumens       |                 |         |         |        |
        +--------------+-------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
        c. Lumens for any fraction of a net lighting acre shall be calculated on a pro-rated basis. ((O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
F. Outdoor Light Fixture Height Requirements 
    1. The height of a pole-mounted luminaire shall be measured from finished grade to the bottom of the lens of a luminaire and the poles shall not extend greater than two (2) feet above the bottom of the lens for any purpose.
    2. The maximum height of the pole-mounted luminaire shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet or as otherwise specified herein.
        a. In C-2 zoned districts, the maximum height shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet.
        b. In T-P zoned areas, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may allow maximum height up to twenty-eight (28) feet based on the following factors but not limited to:
            i. Proximity to residential areas
            ii. Height of buildings
            iii. Size of the site
            iv. Size of parking lot
            v. Proximity to open space
    3. All pole-mounted luminaires within E3, E3a, or E2 lighting zones that abut E2a or E1 lighting zones shall be restricted as follows:
        a. Limited in height to ten (10) feet for the first row of luminaires and may increase in elevation at a rate of one (1) foot in height for every two (2) feet, six (6) inches away from the first row of luminaires to maximum height as allowed in this Code.
        b. Luminaires installed within fifteen (15) feet of the property line shall have internal house-side shields or forward throw optics.
        c. Installed at least ten (10) feet away from the property line.
    4. Wall-mounted luminaire, except for those used to directly illuminate parking areas shall be limited in height from finished grade to a maximum of nine (9) feet to the center of the luminaire. Those luminaires used to illuminate parking areas shall be the same manufacture type and style as the pole-mounted area luminaires and mounted no higher than the pole-mounted luminaires.
    5. All wall-mounted luminaires utilizing lamps in excess of four thousand (4,000) lumens and/or installed above nine (9) feet in elevation shall be equipped with an internal house-side shield or provided with similar forward throw optical characteristics so as to minimize the reflected light off the wall below the luminaire. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
G. Outdoor Light Design Standards 
    1. Light trespass into Lighting Zone E2, E2a, and E1 from abutting properties shall not exceed 0.3 fc measured vertically at five (5) feet above the ground.
    2. In E3, E3a, and E2 lighting zones, the design shall incorporate at least eighty (80) percent of the allowed lumens or meet the minimum illumination levels recommended in the latest Handbook of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), whichever is less. The design shall be within the recommended illuminance ratio for the specific task.
    3. The religious institutions and schools shall uniformly reduce lighting to the minimum level recommended by IESNA for security purposes one (1) hour after close of business. Other businesses in E3 and E3a areas may uniformly reduce the level of lighting one (1) hour after close of business.
    4. The light poles and luminaires shall be spaced in a manner to provide uniform lighting distribution as recommended by the IESNA in areas of frequent use such as parking lots, pedestrian walkways, etc.
    5. Canopy lighting shall be limited to an average maintained horizontal illuminance level at thirty-six (36) inches above grade of 50 fc in E3 and E3a, 30 fc in E2, and 10 fc in E2a.
    6. Each unshielded light fixture shall be limited to a maximum of two thousand (2,000) lumens.
    7. All unshielded light fixtures including seasonal decorations shall be turned off between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise.
    8. Flood or spot lamps shall be installed within a housing and aimed no higher than forty-five (45) degrees to the horizontal (halfway between straight down and straight to the side) when the source is visible from any adjacent property.
    9. Any landscaping next to the outdoor light fixtures shall be designed in accordance with Section 27.4 of the code.
    10. Full cutoff light fixtures (FCO) shall have zero (0) candelas occur at or above an angle of ninety (90) degrees and a maximum of ten percent (10%) candelas at eighty (80) degrees above the nadir of the installed luminaire. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. Such candela information shall be determined by a photometric test report from a nationally recognized independent testing agency and as certified by the manufacturer. Any structural part of the luminaire providing this cutoff angle shielding shall be permanently attached.
    Exception: Building canopies, overhangs, roof eaves, and similar types of construction shall not be considered as the means to provide the cutoff unless the fixtures are shielded in such a manner that no lamp or vertical element of a lens or diffuser is visible at the property line. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
H. Recreational Facilities 
Lighting that is directly associated with athletic fields, courts or tracks shall be exempt from the total lumen caps of Table 27.5 and the height limits of Section 27.5.F. All such lighting shall utilize full cutoff luminaires unless certified by a registered design professional that such shielding is impractical, subject to Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator’s approval. Where full cutoff fixtures are not utilized, acceptable luminaires shall include those which:
    1. Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers that are installed so as to limit direct uplight, to less than five (5) percent of the total lumens exiting from the installed fixtures; and
    2. Are installed with minimum aiming angles of 25 degrees downward from the horizontal. The aiming angle shall be measured from the axis of the luminaire’s maximum beam candlepower as certified by an independent testing agency; and
    3. All events requiring illumination shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity between 6 a.m. and the curfew times listed in Table 27-6. Illumination after the curfew shall be permitted only to complete a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before the curfew due to unusual circumstances.
    +---------+---------+---------+---------+
    |            Lighting Zones             |
    +---------+---------+---------+---------+
    |   E3    |   E3a   |   E2    |   E2a   |
    +---------+---------+---------+---------+
    | 12 a.m. | 11 p.m. | 11 p.m. | 10 p.m. |
    +---------+---------+---------+---------+
I. Temporary Lighting Exemption 
    1. Request, Renewal, and Information Required 
    Any person may submit a written request, not less than 30 days prior to the day of use, for a temporary lighting exemption request. A temporary lighting exemption shall contain the following information:
        a. Specific exemption or exemptions requested;
        b. Type and use of outdoor light fixture involved;
        c. Duration of time of the requested exemption;
        d. Type of lamp and lamp lumens;
        e. Total wattage of lamp or lamps and number of lamps to be used;
        f. Proposed location on premises of the outdoor light fixture(s);
        g. Previous temporary exemptions, if any, and addresses of premises thereunder;
        h. Physical size of outdoor light fixture(s) and type of shielding provided;
        i. Mailing labels for public notification;
        j. Such other data and information as may be required by the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    At the discretion of Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator, certain submittal requirements may be waived, if deemed unnecessary or inappropriate.
    2. Public Notification 
    All property owners and homeowners associations within 300 feet shall be notified of the temporary exemption request and given 15 days to respond, prior to the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator’s determination.
    3. Approval; Duration 
    The Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve requests for temporary lighting exemptions. If approved, the exemption shall be valid for not more than 30 days from the date of issuance. The approval shall be renewable at the discretion of the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator. Each such renewed exemption shall be valid for not more than 30 additional days.
J. Alternate Materials and Methods of Construction, Installation, and Operation 
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any design, materials or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed by this code, provided any such alternate has been approved. The Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve any such proposed alternate provided he finds that it:
    1. Provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this code; and
    2. Is otherwise satisfactory or complies with the intent of this code; and
    3. Has been designed or approved by a registered design professional and is supported by calculations showing that the design submitted meets the intent of the code. This Section shall not have the effect of waiving any requirements of this code.

Section 27.6 Landscape Conservation
This landscape conservation section integrates a range of Town requirements related to native plant salvage and preservation, revegetation, constructed landscape improvements and plant materials, irrigation and outdoor water conservation.1
A. Purpose 
The Town of Oro Valley’s adopted General Plan includes agreed upon goals and policies related to natural resource conservation and water resources. The goals and policies provide the framework for conservation in water use for irrigation, low-water-use plants in landscaping, preservation of the Town’s native vegetation and visual qualities, and promotion of compatibility between adjacent and distinct land uses.
These native plant preservation, landscape and irrigation regulations are to be applied to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by:
    1. Preserving Land Values 
        a. Preserving the existing desert landscape and creating an attractive appearance along public streets.
        b. Preserving existing views and screening from view those uses which may be detrimental to adjacent property values.
        c. Encouraging in-place preservation of native vegetation which is an integral part of the Sonoran Desert and which contributes to property values, high quality of life, and the unique lifestyle which the community enjoys.
    2. Preserving Environmental Quality 
        a. Preserving, salvaging and replacing native vegetation, which is important in stabilizing desert soils and providing food and protection for desert wildlife.
        b. Requiring use of native vegetation which is drought-tolerant and requires less maintenance than other types of landscaping materials.
        c. Contributing to the reduction of air pollution by encouraging the use of vegetation for air filtration and absorption of carbon dioxide and production of oxygen.
        d. Encouraging the preservation of wildlife habitat and wildlife-friendly design through improved site design.
        e. Preserving the Sonoran Desert landscape, including riparian and rock outcroppings.
    3. Protecting Water Quality and Promoting Conservation
        a. Reducing the amount of water utilized for landscaping while achieving aesthetic objectives specified in the General Plan.
        b. Raising awareness of water conservation objectives and savings realized by utilizing desert vegetation, water-wise irrigation, and rainwater harvesting.
        c. Increasing Town-wide compliance by residents and business owners not subject to conservation requirements made effective June 1, 2010, by providing education and neighborhood outreach to support and implement landscape water conservation techniques.
        d. Reducing soil erosion by slowing storm runoff, which increases infiltration.
        e. Restricting the use of turf to recreational purposes.
        f. Establishing techniques for the installation and maintenance of landscape materials.
        g. Implementing sustainable irrigation standards including the required use of rainwater harvesting techniques.
    4. Enhancing Design 
        a. Enhancing the design qualities of each site and using landscape designs to reduce the mass of buildings.
        b. Reducing adverse impacts between potentially incompatible uses and zones by requiring an appropriate level of buffering and screening.
        c. Using context-sensitive design by considering existing landscaping within four hundred (400) feet of the project site to provide and maintain landscape continuity within the community.
    5. Promoting Living Quality 
        a. Protecting the right of property enjoyment through nuisance reduction.
        b. Promoting the use of low-pollen-producing plants, thereby reducing the risks of airborne respiratory ailments.
        c. Providing direct and important physical and psychological benefits to human beings through the use of landscaping, to reduce glare and to break up the monotony and soften the harsher aspects of urban development, while addressing security issues related to landscape design.
B. Native Plant Preservation, Salvage and Mitigation 
    1. Applicability 
        a. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all new development, both public and private.
        b. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to expansion of existing development or redevelopment projects unless native vegetation, specified in Addendum C, Tables C-1 and C-2, exists in the area to be impacted by the expansion or redevelopment.
        c. All Planning and Zoning Administrator decisions or determinations allowed in this section may be appealed to the Town Council.
    2. General Provisions 
        a. Native plant preservation and salvage plans shall include an inventory of, and specifications for, the proposed treatment of all protected native plants, listed in Addendum C, Tables C-1 and C-2, which are being disturbed due to development.
        b. Protected native plants shall not be destroyed, mutilated, removed from the premises or relocated on the premises except in accordance with an approved native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plan and all Arizona Department of Agriculture and Horticulture requirements.
        c. Preservation of significant native on-site vegetation, as characterized in subsection B.3.b of this section, shall be a primary objective of site planning for development. Mature native trees shall be given particular consideration for retention in place. All saguaro cacti shall be preserved in place or relocated on site, unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    3. Site Resource Inventory Standards and Requirements 
        a. Site Resource Inventory 
            i. The Site Resource Inventory (SRI) shall be a primary evaluative design tool upon which the site design and salvage plans are based. The information contained in the SRI shall be utilized for purposes of site planning and design, and shall describe and identify natural characteristics of the site, as listed below, including areas of significant vegetation. Preservation of protected natural areas and significant vegetation shall be a primary consideration.
            ii. The SRI shall strive to:
                a) Minimize native plant disturbance, destruction, or removal.
                b) Promote creative plat or development design to preserve significant vegetation.
                c) Propose mitigation that maintains, as nearly as possible, significant native vegetation and animal habitat while preserving site soil stability.
                d) Incorporate native vegetation of a size, quality, and type consistent with native vegetation and the development.
                e) Maintain significant vegetation, as described herein, in place, unless there is no other area available for construction.
                f) Identify any prohibited plants (Appendix E) such as buffelgrass or tamarisk.
        b. Significant Vegetation 
        Significant vegetation (SV) is characterized as distinctive native plant stands and/or distinctive individual native plants that demonstrate, through the presence of certain criteria, as listed below, areas of special value to the Sonoran Desert ecosystem.
            i. Distinctive native plant stands are areas of native vegetation that exist in contrast to the majority of the surrounding vegetative community due to either microclimates or availability of water sources. Criteria include:
                a) Saguaro cacti stands that include one (1) foot or taller saguaro occurring at a density of twenty-five (25) or more over a minimum one-half (1/2) acre area.
                b) Ironwood tree stands that include thirty percent (30%) or more average cover at the edge of all tree canopies within a minimum one (1) acre area.
                c) Palo verde tree stands that include fifty percent (50%) or more average cover within a minimum one (1) acre area.
                d) Mesquite tree stands that include fifty percent (50%) or more average cover within a minimum one (1) acre area.
                e) Ocotillo stands that include areas of fifty (50) ocotillo of any size within a minimum one (1) acre area.
            ii. A distinctive individual native plant refers to any native tree, shrub, or cacti with extraordinary characteristics such as, but not limited to, age, size, shape, form, canopy cover, or aesthetic value. Criteria include:
                a) Saguaro cacti over fifteen (15) feet tall with two (2) or more arms.
                b) Crested saguaro cacti.
                c) Native tree with twelve (12) inch basal caliper and over twelve (12) feet tall.
                d) Native nurse tree with three (3) or more saguaro cacti under or within its canopy.
                e) Any plant listed as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act or highly safeguarded by the Arizona Department of Agriculture.
            iii. Criteria for identifying areas of significant vegetation include the presence of the following (in addition to being characterized as a distinctive native plant stand and/or a distinctive individual native plant):
                a) Plant species that are native to the area.
                b) Plant species composition is typical for the area.
                c) Plants are generally healthy and will survive for five (5) or more years.
                d) Plant density is normal for the site conditions (soil, slope, orientation, water availability).
                e) Mature specimens of individual trees and/or columnar cactus species are present.
                f) Noxious/invasive species are few and not visually prominent, such as buffelgrass, desert broom, tamarisk, Mexican palo verde, and tree of heaven.
                g) Grading or clearing has not substantially altered the landscape in the area.
                h) Constructed nonnative landscapes do not qualify as significant vegetation.
                i) Specific groups of plant communities that are known to be habitat for protected species, for example: ironwood, saguaro, mesquite, and palo verde are known pygmy owl habitat.
            iv. Preservation of significant vegetation should emphasize maintenance or creation of connections between natural areas and significant vegetation. Areas of significant vegetation include, but are not limited to, other natural areas protected by this zoning code, such as riparian habitat.
        c. Mitigation 
            i. When areas of significant vegetation are present but are not preserved in place due to development, salvage and mitigation shall be required. For example, for one hundred (100) plants identified as significant vegetation that are not preserved in place, those that meet the salvage criteria in subsection B.4.c of this section will be salvaged. If ten (10) are salvaged, the ninety (90) remaining shall be mitigated as set forth in Table 27-1.
            ii. Mitigation of significant vegetation does not apply to environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS) as provided in Section 27.10.G.
            iii. Mitigation of Significant Vegetation, Under-Story Requirements, and Area Measurement 
                a) Mitigation of significant vegetation shall be according to the ratios in Table 27-1.
                +--------------+-----------------+---------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+
                | Amount of SV | Tree Mitigation | Percent Trees |    Percent     | Under-Story*  |    Cacti and    |
                |  Disturbed   |      Ratio      |   Replaced    | Trees Replaced |  Vegetation   | Other Protected |
                |              |                 |  w/ 48" Box   |     w/ 36"     |   Required    |     Plants      |
                |              |                 |               |      Box       |               |                 |
                +--------------+-----------------+---------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+
                | 0 – 29%      | Standard mitigation requirements                 | 5 under-story | Same size       |
                |              | of Section 27.6.B.4.d apply.                     | plants        | and species     |
                |              |                                                  | for each      | as that         |
                |              |                                                  | mitigated     | removed         |
                |              |                                                  | tree.         | or destroyed.   |
                +--------------+-----------------+---------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+
                | 30 – 49%     | 1:1             | None          | 100%           | "             | "               |
                +--------------+-----------------+---------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+
                | 50 – 100%    | 2:1             | 50%           | 50%            | "             | "               |
                +--------------+-----------------+---------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+
                | *Under-story plants selected from the supplemental native plant                                   |
                | list, Addendum C, and either transplanted from on-site or nursery                                 |
                | plants.                                                                                           |
                +--------------+-----------------+---------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+
                b) The percentage of significant vegetation shall be measured as the square footage of the ground cover area.
                If the mitigated plant does not survive the first eighteen (18) months of transplanting after landscaping is complete, mitigation standards, as listed above, shall apply.
        d. Preservation Incentives 
        In order to promote preservation in place, development standard incentives are offered to permit clustering of development, as set forth in Table 27-2.
        +------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------+
        | Amount of SV Preserved |  Reduction in Lot Size   | Increase in FAR Permitted |
        |        in Place        |        Permitted         |                           |
        +------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------+
        | 71 – 100%              | Up to 20% of appropriate | Up to 20%                 |
        |                        | interior lots*           |                           |
        +------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------+
        | 51 – 70%               | Up to 15% of appropriate | Up to 15%                 |
        |                        | interior lots*           |                           |
        +------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------+
        | 50% or less            | None                     | None                      |
        +------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------+
        | *Appropriate interior lots are those lots not on the perimeter of the         |
        | development and not adjacent to a natural resource area.                      |
        +------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------+
        e. Mitigation Remedy 
        When a proposed development is in conformance with the General Plan and meets other development standards of the code, but unique circumstances exist in regard to significant vegetation, such as when a large percentage of a site is covered with significant vegetation and mitigation results in plants too numerous to survive on the site, the developer may request approval for a mitigation remedy. Remedies include provision of required vegetation, irrigation materials, and associated labor as follows:
            i. Relocation to an adjacent property
            ii. Placement on a Town property
            iii. In-lieu fee for a Town landscape or restoration project
            iv. Other similar relocation effort
        The developer must make his/her request to the Town for a mitigation remedy before or concurrent with a preliminary plat or development plan submittal. The request shall include a mitigation proposal and rationale and justification for the proposal. The Development Review Board (DRB) shall consider the proposal and make their decision at a public meeting.
    4. Native Plant Preservation, Salvage and Mitigation Plan Requirements 
        a. A native plant preservation, salvage, and mitigation plan shall be prepared for the entire site. Areas of significant vegetation from the SRI and all protected native plants listed in Addendum C, Tables C-1 and C-2, and related mitigation shall be clearly identified on the native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plan.
        b. All existing native plants shall be preserved in their original location, except within those areas permitted to be graded. Any areas of disturbance outside of significant vegetation shall be inventoried for protected native plants and mitigated according to the standards set forth in subsection B.4.d of this section.
        c. Determination of Transplantability 
        The following standards shall apply to any protected native plant salvaged, removed from the site, or destroyed:
            i. Transplantability shall be indicated on the native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plan submittal and may be reviewed, at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Administrator, by a third party plant salvage specialist. The evaluation of protected native plants shall be based on the stipulations in this section.
            ii. All protected trees with a minimum caliper of three (3) inches, or protected multiple trunk plants with a three (3) inch combined caliper measurement of the three (3) largest trunks, and all protected cacti, shall be included in the native plant inventory. All caliper measurements are to be taken one (1) foot from ground level.
            iii. All plants that meet the following criteria shall be either preserved in place or salvaged:
                A) Plant health is good to excellent with no major infestations or apparent diseases. “Plant health” is defined as a plant in a sound state, free from disease and expected to survive for five (5) or more years.
                B) The plant is of a size and age to suggest a likely chance of transplant survival.
                C) Plant is undamaged and is conducive to box or spade transplanting (upright branching).
                D) Soils can be excavated, are cohesive, and appear capable of supporting a boxed or spaded root ball.
                E) Surrounding topography permits access with the appropriate equipment needed to box or spade and remove the plant.
                F) Adjacent plants do not pose a likely interference with root systems or interfere with plant removal.
                G) The overall form and character is representative of the species and is a valuable specimen for landscape or habitat purposes.
        d. Mitigation of Protected Native Plants Not in an Area of Significant Vegetation 
        Any tree, shrub, or cactus that meets the salvage criteria shall be salvaged and either relocated on site or utilized on another site within the town. Any tree, shrub, or cactus that meets the salvage criteria as salvageable but is destroyed shall be replaced on a one-to-one (1:1) ratio of the same species and size as that destroyed. Five (5) understory plants from the supplemental Arizona Department of Water Quality native plant list will be planted for every mitigated tree.
        e. Mitigation Remedy 
        When a proposed development is in conformance with the General Plan and meets other development standards of the code, but unique circumstances exist in regard to mitigation requirements, such as when a large percentage of a site is covered with vegetation and mitigation results in plants too numerous to survive on the developed site, the developer may request approval for a mitigation remedy as specified in subsection B.3.e of this section.
        f. Native plants salvaged from the site shall be transplanted into common areas, landscaped areas, or front yards. Whenever feasible, plant salvage shall include immediately transplanting salvaged plants in a permanent location as indicated on the landscape plan. Immediate transplant is preferred to placing salvage plants in a holding nursery for future relocation on site.
        g. All native plants salvaged from a site (or a plant comparable in size and species salvaged from another site) shall be utilized in the corresponding project landscape plan.
        h. All significant vegetation mitigation and native plant mitigation requirements, as documented on the native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plans, shall be included with the plant schedule of the landscape plan.
        i. In no case may native understory plants be removed, destroyed, or relocated from an existing stand of native plants which is to be preserved in place. The perimeter of the area preserved in place shall be designated in accordance with standards set forth in subsection B.7.c.ii of this section. Any spaded or boxed tree transplanted on site that dies due to neglect or lack of maintenance shall be replaced with the same size and species of the original salvaged tree, as required by the approved salvage and mitigation plan.
        j. Protected native plants determined to be transplantable shall be salvaged when they are located within areas designated to be graded. Any salvaged plant utilized on site shall either be spaded directly into the new location or stored in a temporary holding nursery. All work shall be performed in accordance with development standards and/or technical bulletins as may be adopted by the Town. All temporary nurseries shall:
            i. Provide fertilizer to promote plant health.
            ii. Provide automatic drip irrigation systems.
            iii. Provide adequate, routine water and maintenance of the plants.
            iv. Nursery plants that die due to neglect shall be replaced with the same size and species of the salvaged plant.
        k. Native plants to be transplanted on site shall be used within those areas designated as “common area” or landscaped area such as buffer areas, streetscapes, and parking lots and within the front yards of residential lots, or other areas as may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        l. Any spaded or boxed tree transplanted on site that dies due to neglect or lack of maintenance shall be replaced with the same size and species of the original salvaged tree, as required by the salvage plan.
        m. The limits of grading shall be staked in the field, in accordance with subsection B.7.c.ii of this section. Disturbance outside the approved grading limits shall not be permitted.
        n. Areas needed for root zone protection for native plants preserved in place shall be indicated on the native plant preservation, salvage, and mitigation plan, grading plan, development plan, and/or preliminary plat.
    5. Plant Salvage Protocol 
    The Town of Oro Valley reserves the right to publish and modify technical bulletins establishing recommended protocol for boxing, spading, and salvage techniques.
    6. Compliance 
        a. Failure to comply with the requirements of the approved native plant preservation salvage and mitigation plan may cause immediate revocation of all permits. New permits may not be issued until the required fines are paid to the Town for the purposes of replacing and maintaining protected native plant materials as required in the approved native plant preservation and salvage plan.
        b. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall assess fines based on the approved fee and penalty schedule. Fines exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) may be assessed.
        c. The developer shall replace removed or damaged plant materials with like size and species, and shall maintain and guarantee (in accordance with Section 26.6.C and I) the replacement plant materials for a period of three (3) years.
        d. Prior to issuance of any permits for development of the property on which the violation occurred, the property owner shall enter into an agreement, with a landscape installation and maintenance service and the Town, to ensure replacement and three (3) years’ maintenance of the replacement plant materials. Any fines in excess of the amounts specified in the agreement to replace and maintain plants shall be refunded.
    7. Approval for Salvage 
        a. All protected native plants scheduled to remain in place or authorized for destruction, removal or relocation by the approved native plant preservation and salvage plan must be tagged and numbered, in accordance with the native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plan, prior to an on-site inspection by the Town staff. Salvage operations shall not commence until the Zoning Inspector has performed an inspection and given approval to begin salvage.
        b. No salvage of plants regulated by the Endangered Species Act and/or the Arizona Native Plant Law may occur without the issuance of the appropriate permit by the State Department of Agriculture.
        c. Tagging and fencing shall be completed as outlined below:
            i. Once affixed, the tags shall not be removed until the approved native plant preservation and salvage plan is implemented and Town staff has performed a final inspection in accordance with subsection E.3.a of this section.
            ii. All areas designated to remain as natural open space shall be fenced or taped off for protection during the grubbing and/or grading operation. The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining this “no disturbance” boundary line and no plants shall be salvaged from this protected area.
        d. No plant salvage shall begin until approval by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. After approval of the native plant preservation, salvage, and mitigation plan, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve limited boxing of trees. Such boxing shall be at the applicant’s risk. No plant materials will be removed from the site until such time as the applicant may apply for a grading permit. When the final grading limits are established, any boxed tree outside the limits will be reestablished in place and any areas disturbed by equipment will be revegetated. All areas to be preserved in place shall be protected from grading. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011; (O)11-01, Amended,  02/16/2011)
C. Landscape Design 
    1. Applicability 
        a. The provisions of this subsection apply to all projects where a development plan or plat is required in accordance with Section 22.9 of the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised.
        b. The provisions of this subsection apply to front yard landscaping for individual residential lots in all zoning districts with exceptions specified in subsection F of this section. This section does not apply to residential rear or side yards.
        c. All projects that entail a twenty-five percent (25%) or more expansion of parking area shall meet the requirements of this code for the entire project area.
        d. The provisions of this subsection apply to all projects that entail cumulative revegetation of twenty-five percent (25%) or more landscaped area.
        e. Specific applicability provisions and exceptions to requirements within this section are detailed in subsection F of this section.
        f. Any activity requiring a Type 3 grading permit shall be treated or revegetated in accordance with subsection C.8 of this section.
    2. General Landscape Standards 
        a. Any part of the development site which has been disturbed and is not required for buildings, structures, private residential yards, loading and vehicular access ways, streets, parking and utility areas, pedestrian walks and hard-surfaced activity areas shall be landscaped.
        b. Natural desert is an acceptable form of landscape. Plants meeting requirements of subsection C.3 of this section, walkways, sculpture rock groupings, and organic and inorganic groundcovers may be used as an alternative. Inorganic groundcovers and architectural features shall not be used exclusive of living plants.
        c. For all proposed subdivisions where front yards are to be graded, one (1) of the following options shall be incorporated:
            i. One (1) tree, placed in the front yard, that has been salvaged from the site.
            ii. One (1) nursery tree, Type 1 or 2 water use and a minimum of twenty-four (24) inch box size, placed in the front yard; and one boulder at least four (4) feet by three (3) feet by three (3) feet in size or two (2) boulders at least three (3) feet by three (3) feet by two (2) feet, and two (2) cacti or shrubs.
            iii. Two (2) nursery trees, Type 1 or 2 water use and a minimum of twenty-four (24) inch box size, placed in the front yard. Tree spacing must comply with subsections C.2.j and k of this section.
        d. In all subdivisions where sidewalks are required, a low-maintenance landscaped curb-way consisting of inorganic groundcover or plants not to exceed Type 2 water use shall be incorporated into the landscape design. A “curb-way” shall be defined as that area between the edge of pavement or back of curb and the sidewalk of any public or private street.
        e. Additional landscaping in street rights-of-way may be required by the Town and shall be subject to acceptance and issuance of a permit from the Town Engineer, or where appropriate, from the Arizona Department of Transportation. Where aggregate groundcover is used as part of the landscape treatment along a street right-of-way, the Town may require that the aggregate groundcover be extended into the street right-of-way, to the edge of the street pavement or curb.
        f. Landscape materials shall not obstruct sight distances or vehicle turning movements.
        g. Landscaped areas that are susceptible to damage by pedestrian or auto traffic shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices.
        h. Landscape shall be designed to minimize sediment, sand and gravel being carried into the streets by storm water or other runoff.
        i. A landscape architect must certify that tree species selected and actual planting has been done in a manner that precludes overcrowding at maturity by providing the following:
            i. A general note must be included on the landscape plan verifying that the design enables adequate plant spacing to ensure survivability at plant maturity.
            ii. Prior to release of landscape assurances, the landscape architect must provide a letter with registrant’s stamp verifying that actual planting has been accomplished in a manner to preclude overcrowding.
        j. Mesquite and palo verde trees may not be planted closer than twenty (20) feet on center of another mesquite or palo verde tree with the following exceptions:
            i. A landscape architect documents in writing that a particular variety, such as a screwbean mesquite, will thrive at a closer distance without negative impact to adjacent trees or vegetation.
            ii. Riparian area restoration projects.
        k. Trees shall not be planted under outdoor lighting structures. Landscape plant material shall be arranged in a manner not to obstruct security lighting.
    3. Plant Materials and Plant Restrictions 
        a. Only plants listed within Addendum C are permitted. Within Addendum C, the plants are organized by specific location requirements that include consideration of plant origin and water use characteristics at maturity. Water use types are delineated as follows:
            Type 1: Irrigation needed once a month or less.
            Type 2: Irrigation needed twice a month.
            Type 3: Irrigation needed once a week.
        b. Use of plant species listed in Addendum C are subject to the following location requirements:
            i. Sonoran and Chihuahuan species that are Type 1 or 2 water use and listed in Addendum C, Tables C-1, C-2, and C-3, may be utilized in all areas of a site.
            ii. Buffer yards, common areas, and parking areas are restricted to Sonoran and Chihuahuan species that are Type 1 or 2 water use and listed in Addendum C, Tables C-1, C-2, and C-3.
            iii. Plantings abutting nonresidential buildings and within residential front yards may include use of species not naturally occurring in the Sonoran and Chihuahuan desert that are Type 1 or 2 water use and listed in Addendum C, Table C-4.
            iv. All Type 3 or 4 water use plants depicted in Addendum C, Table C-4, are restricted to courtyards receiving shade or adjacent to buildings on the north or east elevations.
        c. Plants not specified within Addendum C are considered prohibited, unless approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. To be approved, it must be demonstrated that the proposed species or hybrid conforms to the following:
            i. All location requirements in subsection C.3.b of this section.
            ii. Low-pollen-producing relative to typical Sonoran and Chihuahuan desert species.
            iii. All other zoning code provisions, including, but not limited to, the prohibited plant list and height limitations.
            iv. Type 1 or 2 water use.
            v. Noninvasive.
        d. Salvaged native plants must be clearly specified on the landscape plan.
        e. The planting seed mixes listed in Addendum D are required for all revegetation projects in Oro Valley.
        f. The plants listed in Addendum E are specifically prohibited from use in Oro Valley.
        g. Natural turf is prohibited with the following exceptions:
            i. Town of Oro Valley public parks.
            ii. Private parks that serve more than one neighborhood.
            iii. Private parks serving only one (1) neighborhood are limited to no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total park area.
            iv. Private schools.
            v. Golf course greens and tee boxes only.
        For all uses enabled by exception, turf may only be utilized for activity areas and not for ornamental purposes. Private park areas may not be seeded with winter rye.
        h. The following minimum size requirements apply to all required plant materials:
            i. Trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallons in size, except for off-street parking areas and subdivision front yards as provided herein.
            ii. All shrubs and accent plants shall be a minimum of five (5) gallons in size.
            iii. Cactus shall be a minimum of three (3) gallons in size.
            iv. All groundcover plants shall be a minimum of one (1) gallon in size.
        i. Prior to release of landscape assurances (residential only) and certificate of occupancy (commercial only), a registered landscape architect shall certify that all plant material meets the minimum standards contained in the current editions of the Arizona Nursery Association’s Growers Committee Recommended Tree Specifications and the American Association of Nurserymen as to size, condition, and appearance.
        j. All landscaped areas shall be finished with a natural topping material that may include, but is not limited to, the following: groundcover planting, hydroseed, or mulch (organic or inorganic) of at least two (2) inches in depth. Cactus, shrubs, or other native vegetative groundcover must be planted to cover at least sixty percent (60%) of the area at maturity.
        k. Trees and large shrubs shall be adequately supported when planted.
        l. No trees shall be planted under overhead service wires if their mature heights will interfere with those wires.
        m. Earth berms shall have adequate plant material or groundcover treatment to prevent erosion.
        n. Only plants classified as water use Type 1 shall be permitted in street medians and rights-of-way. Type 2 or 3 plants may be utilized if the designer establishes sufficient rainwater harvesting to ensure survival and compliance with landscape water plan requirements (subsection D.3 of this section).
        o. To ensure plant survival within rainwater harvesting areas, the following must be accomplished:
            i. Type 2 and Type 3 plants shall be located in areas that are designed to harvest the highest amount of water runoff.
            ii. Type 1 plants must be selected and positioned in a manner to ensure tolerance of periodic rainwater harvesting.
    4. Buffer Yards 
        a. The purpose of buffer yards is to physically transition and visually minimize adjacent land uses, thereby reducing or mitigating visual and living quality impacts associated with particular land uses.
        b. Standards 
            i. A buffer yard consists of horizontal space (land) and vertical elements (plants, berms, fences, or walls).
            ii. Buffer yards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a parcel of land, adjacent to the property lines. Buffer yards shall be located in common areas, not in individual lots.
            iii. All plant materials used in required buffer yards shall be Type 1 or 2 water use. Type 3 or 4 plants may be utilized if the designer certifies availability of sufficient rainwater harvesting to ensure survival and compliance with all landscape water plan requirements (subsection D.3 of this section).
            iv. When buffer yards occur adjacent to each other (i.e., along the property lines of two (2) adjacent properties) the Planning and Zoning Administrator may require a pedestrian trail running through the buffer yard(s). The Planning and Zoning Administrator may also require a minimum twenty (20) foot wide corridor that provides pedestrian ingress/egress between the two (2) properties from the adjoining buffer yards.
            v. Buffer yards shall not be located within any portion of an existing or dedicated public or private street or right-of-way, unless specifically permitted by zoning or approved by the Town Engineer.
            vi. Determination of buffer yard requirements:
                A) Buffer yards for all zoning districts shall be provided as specified in Table 27-7.
                B) Buffer yards between districts are not required where the boundary between the districts is a street.
                C) Buffer yards are not required within a POS (parks and open space) district for any areas left as natural open space.
                D) Where a development abuts a public street, buffer yards shall be provided along all perimeter street frontages as provided in Tables 27-8 and 27-9.
                E) Perimeter street buffer yards are not required where homes front on the perimeter street.
                F) Where conflicts with sight visibility, scenic views or other standards and requirements occur, modification to the buffer yard requirements may be made by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+
            |                         |      Zoning District of Adjacent Development Site      |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+
            |   Zoning District of    | R1-144, R1-72, | R1-10, R1-7, | R-4R, R-6, | C-N, C-1, |
            |  Proposed Development   | R1-43, R1-36,  |  R-4, SDH-6  | R-S, POS,  |   C-2,    |
            |                         |     R1-20      |              |     PS     | T-P, P-1  |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+
            | R1-144, R1-72, R1-43,   | No Buffer      | No Buffer    | No Buffer  | No Buffer |
            | R1-36, R1-20            |                |              |            |           |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+
            | R1-10, R1-7, R-4, SDH-6 | A              | No Buffer    | No Buffer  | No Buffer |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+
            | R-4R, R-6, R-S, POS,    | B              | B            | A          | No Buffer |
            | PS                      |                |              |            |           |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+
            | C-N, C-1, C-2, T-P,     | B              | B            | B          | No Buffer |
            | P-1                     |                |              |            |           |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+
            +------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
            | Perimeter Street Type  | ARTERIAL    | COLLECTOR   | RESIDENTIAL |
            +------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
            | Street Frontage Buffer | B (25' min) | A (15' min) | A (15' min) |
            | Yard                   |             |             |             |
            +------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
            +------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
            | Perimeter Street Type  | ARTERIAL    | COLLECTOR   | RESIDENTIAL |
            +------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
            | Street Frontage Buffer | B (30' min) | B (30' min) | B (30' min) |
            | Yard                   |             |             |             |
            +------------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
            vii. Buffer Yards “A” and “B” are defined in the following tables:
            +-----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+----------------+
            | Minimum Width         | 10'                  | 15'                 | 20'            |
            +-----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+----------------+
            | Plants per 100 Lineal | 4 Trees              | 4 Trees             | Natural Desert |
            | Feet                  | 5 Shrubs or Cactus   | 4 Shrubs or Cactus  |                |
            |                       | 10 Accents or Cactus | 8 Accents or Cactus |                |
            +-----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+----------------+
            +----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
            | Minimum Width  | 15'           | 20'           | 30'           | 40'            |
            +----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
            | Plants per 100 | 5 Trees       | 4 Trees       | 4 Trees       | Natural Desert |
            | Lineal Feet    | 8 Shrubs or   | 7 Shrubs or   | 5 Shrubs or   |                |
            |                | Cactus        | Cactus        | Cactus        |                |
            |                | 15 Accents or | 12 Accents or | 10 Accents or |                |
            |                | Cactus        | Cactus        | Cactus        |                |
            +----------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
            viii. The natural desert buffer areas must provide trees for visual relief and screening. Any trees added to meet this requirement shall be grouped to buffer existing uses and to minimize disturbance of natural desert areas.
        c. Responsibility for Buffer Yard 
            i. When a use is the first to develop on two (2) adjacent vacant parcels, the first use shall provide the required buffer per Table 27-7, based on existing zoning.
            ii. The second property owner may develop an additional, parallel, full buffer yard as specified in Table 27-7, Required Buffer Yards, or may supplement the requirements by using elements of the existing, abutting property buffer yard as described below.
                A) Deduct the width of the existing buffer yard from the required buffer yard width specified in Table 27-7. The remaining width is the amount of land to be provided by the second property owner to meet the buffer yard requirements.
                B) Deduct the number of plants from the existing buffer yard from the number specified for the required buffer yard in Table 27-7. The remaining number of plants shall be provided on the second property to meet the buffer yard requirements.
                C) The second property owner shall design the required buffer yard to be compatible with the existing buffer yard.
        d. Use of Buffer Yards 
            i. Individual or combined buffer yards of twenty-five (25) foot width, or wider, may be used for passive recreation. They may contain sculpture, benches, and pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails; provided, that:
                A) For natural desert buffer yards, disturbance of existing plants shall be minimized. Any disturbed areas shall be revegetated. Trees that must be moved shall be relocated within the buffer yard.
                B) For constructed buffer yards, no plant material shall be eliminated.
                C) All other regulations of this section are met.
            ii. In no event shall the following uses be permitted in buffer yards:
                A) Playfields.
                B) Stables.
                C) Swimming pools.
                D) Racquetball and tennis courts.
                E) Other active, structured recreational uses.
                F) Parking lots.
                G) Circulation drives except at required access points.
    5. Screening 
        a. The purpose of screening requirements is to provide a partial visual barrier between adjacent land uses to enhance buffering, improve compatibility, aesthetics and visual quality of the community.
        b. Standards 
            i. When new development is adjacent to developed residential uses, the entire perimeter landscape buffer and screening along property lines common with the developed residential use shall be installed in the first phase of the new development.
            ii. Screening devices shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the following table:
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
            |     Zoning District     |        Zoning District of Adjacent Development Site         |
            | of Proposed Development |                                                             |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
            | "                       | R1-144, R1-72, | R1-10, R1-7, | R-4R, R-6, | C-N, C-1, C-2, |
            |                         | R1-43, R1-36,  |  R-4, SDH-6  | R-S, POS,  |    T-P, P-1    |
            |                         |     R1-20      |              |     PS     |                |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
            | R1-144, R1-72, R1-43,   | No             | No           | No         | No             |
            | R1-36, R1-20            |                |              |            |                |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
            | R1-10, R1-7, R-4,       | Yes            | No           | No         | No             |
            | SDH-6                   |                |              |            |                |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
            | R-4R, R-6, R-S,         | Yes            | No           | No         | No             |
            | POS, PS                 |                |              |            |                |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
            | C-N, C-1, C-2, T-P,     | Yes            | Yes          | Yes        | No             |
            | P-1                     |                |              |            |                |
            +-------------------------+----------------+--------------+------------+----------------+
            iii. The requirement for a screen may be waived or the height lowered by the Planning and Zoning Administrator if the buffer yard, topography, or layout of development provides adequate screening to surrounding properties, or if it would create an unsafe, unusable alley between two (2) walls.
            iv. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may increase the height of a wall and/or the number of required plantings if the buffer yard, topography, or layout of the development does not otherwise adequately screen surrounding properties.
            v. Screening devices required by this section shall be masonry (or functionally similar material) construction to provide a five (5) foot high screen. The screen shall create a complete visual barrier for its entire height and length.
            vi. Where new nonresidential development is adjacent to residential uses, the perimeter screen must consist of a five (5) foot high (minimum) wall and desert trees. Tree spacing shall provide for canopies at maturity to form a continuous visual screen.
            vii. Solid walls greater than forty (40) feet in length shall be articulated or varied by using at least two (2) of the following techniques:
                A) Decorative features such as caps, patterns, and variations in texture or materials.
                B) Use of swales, berms and landscaping.
                C) Undulations or offset areas.
                D) Varied setbacks.
            viii. All required screening devices shall be architecturally compatible with the materials and design of the buildings on the site.
            ix. Vegetation shall be required and maintained on the external side of a screen wall to provide visual relief when viewed from the property being buffered. For residential development the wall shall be on the property line of the lots and all of the vegetation buffer shall be outside the wall in a common area.
            x. Breaks in screens may be required by the Planning and Zoning Administrator to provide pedestrian and bicycle access between residential areas and commercial/service uses, particularly if these uses serve the adjoining neighborhood.
            xi. Parking facilities and/or internal drives which abut a public right-of-way or where vehicle headlights may shine on adjacent residences or natural open space shall provide a minimum three and one-half (3 1/2) foot high decorative masonry wall and/or depressed parking, or a combination thereof.
            xii. All refuse areas shall be screened on three (3) sides with a six (6) foot masonry wall and plantings and shall be finished to match the architectural character of the project. A self-closing, self-latching gate shall be installed on the fourth side of the enclosure. The gate shall be designed to provide a complete visual barrier and finished to match the architectural character of the project.
            xiii. All operations and storage shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building or within an area enclosed by a solid wall at least six (6) feet in height; provided, that no objects shall be stacked higher than the wall so erected.
            xiv. Additional screening requirements for a sexually oriented business:
                A) Wrought-iron fencing shall be used to enhance surveillance. No solid block walls are permitted, except in the following cases:
                B) If a business adjoins a site utilized for residential purposes, a continuous solid eight (8) foot high wall shall be utilized along the full length of the common adjoining property line.
                C) If the business is located in a standalone pad, a combination solid and wrought-iron eight (8) foot high view fence shall be utilized around the entire perimeter.
    6. Off-Street Parking and Vehicle Use Areas 
        a. The purpose of parking and vehicle use area landscaping requirements is to provide pedestrian refuge, adequate shade, heat reduction and visual relief. Landscape design is a primary component of off-street parking areas.
        b. Standards 
            i. Every sixth row of parking spaces shall be separated by a landscaped island measuring a minimum ten (10) feet wide (inside of curb to inside of curb) running the length of the parking row. Pedestrian walkways, four (4) feet in width, shall be provided inside the curb, running the length of the parking row and meandering around the trees. The island shall include one (1) canopy tree a minimum thirty-six (36) inch box in size for every six (6) parking spaces abutting the island.
            ii. Along each parking row, one (1) landscape island shall be provided for every nine (9) parking spaces. The island shall measure a minimum of ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length. One (1) canopy tree shall be planted in each island.
            iii. Trees within parking islands shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inch boxed, or two (2) inch spaded, or larger size.
            iv. Light poles shall not be located within parking islands.
            v. Parking area landscape islands may be designed to harvest rainwater, as approved by the Town Engineer. This practice is encouraged to meet rainwater harvesting volume requirements.
            vi. Loading areas shall be screened from adjoining properties and public thoroughfares with a six (6) foot high opaque screen, consisting of a decorative wall, earth berms, or a combination of such elements.
            vii. If a loading zone is visible from an adjacent street, residential use, or residential zoning district where development is anticipated, a minimum five (5) foot wide landscaped area must be provided adjacent to required opaque screens.
            viii. Drive-through windows and stacking lanes shall be screened from adjacent properties and public thoroughfares with a five (5) foot wide landscape island. Screening shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height. The screen shall be located on the outside of the drive-through lane and shall screen queuing automobiles from any adjacent use.
    7. Nonresidential Uses 
    The following standards supplement buffering and screening requirements and apply to all nonresidential development projects and are intended to provide appropriate mitigation for incompatibilities and aesthetic enhancements of commercial and auto-oriented development.
        a. For all new projects that include phases for future completion, a master landscape palette shall be developed as part of the first phase and applied as development progresses.
        b. When part of a center with two (2) or more lots or building pads, the landscaping of any pad building shall be compatible with the landscape design of the main center.
        c. When located in a center with two (2) or more lots or building pads, clearly identifiable landscaped pedestrian walkways shall be installed connecting the pad buildings to parking areas, streets, and the larger commercial center.
        d. All buildings, whether freestanding pads or part of a larger center, shall have a minimum ten (10) foot landscaped area on all four (4) sides of the building subject to the following:
            i. Clusters of potted plants and raised planter areas may be utilized where planting beds are impractical.
            ii. Walkways, sidewalks, or patios may be included in the ten (10) foot landscaped area; provided, that the planting area is at least four (4) feet wide except where required for access.
            iii. If the building has a loading zone, drive-through window, and/or stacking lanes, then the five (5) foot landscaped island required per subsection C.6.b.viii of this section may be substituted for the landscaped area along the corresponding side of the building.
        e. Landscaping around automatic teller machines (ATMs) or weekend deposit boxes and restrooms shall be placed so as to maximize outside visibility of the ATM, deposit box, and restrooms.
        f. Planting and selection of landscape materials for use at sexually oriented businesses shall allow sight lines to remain open and create barriers to minimize places of concealment. The following landscape requirements shall be incorporated:
            i. Plants that have thorns or needles and a dense structure shall be used as barriers in the following areas:
                A) Spaces that are largely unobserved and enable a potential hiding place.
                B) Within a fifteen (15) foot radius of gathering places such as sidewalks, pathways, parking lots, open space areas, and pay phones.
                C) All sides of the building shall have a continuous perimeter of six (6) foot high landscape material within a minimum of six (6) feet of the structure, excluding entrance doors, loading zones, and windows.
                D) The entire area under each window shall be landscaped up to the edge of the window sill. Landscaping may not extend above the window sill.
            ii. Tree canopies shall be maintained to ensure that branches or canopy foliage is not below a height of six (6) feet so to not hinder the site visibility around the building, specifically in front of windows, and into the parking lot.
            iii. Shrubs, accents, and groundcovers shall not exceed two (2) feet in height, within parking areas and landscaped buffer yards.
    8. Revegetation 
    Revegetation is required in order to restore natural vegetation and habitat and to minimize soil erosion potential of graded and/or disturbed land resulting from any permitted or nonpermitted construction activity in the Town. Further, revegetation provides improved air filtration and absorption of carbon monoxide and production of oxygen and is considered an essential measure in preserving the natural resources and character of the unique Sonoran Desert ecosystem existing in Oro Valley and Eastern Pima County.
        a. A revegetation plan shall be submitted for all development projects, public and private, that require a landscape plan or grading permit. The revegetation plan shall be included with the landscape plan submittal.
        b. Graded areas that are to be revegetated shall be planted with species appropriate to the site and its surrounding native habitat. “Appropriate,” in this sense, means that revegetation will be done, to the extent practical, with the same species and density present on undisturbed adjacent or nearby sites.
        c. Acceptable revegetation includes the planting of desert trees, desert shrubs, and large specimen cacti or the seeding of desert trees, desert shrubs, and grasses, with an adequate density to control erosion. Only those species that are compatible with the site, soils, and conditions in which they will be planted shall be used.
        d. The seed mixes specified in Addendum D are required for all revegetation work. Seeds may be raked into the soil with appropriate mulch material or established by hydroseeding, anchored mulches, or jute, rolled straw or similar material approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the Town Engineer.
        e. Temporary irrigation of revegetated plant materials may be appropriate, along with other maintenance procedures needed to establish the plants. Temporary irrigation systems shall utilize components, designs and best practices in order to minimize water use.
        f. In the process of establishing vegetation in areas of low soil productivity, the following minimum slope and surface requirements shall be followed as preconditions for revegetation:
            i. Slopes shall be no steeper than three to one (3:1) unless otherwise specified in a site-specific soils report prepared by a registered civil engineer and approved by the Town Engineer.
            ii. Slopes/surfaces shall be designed for stability.
            iii. Slopes/surfaces shall be designed for control of surface runoff and groundwater recharge.
            iv. Slopes/surfaces shall be designed for quick establishment of vegetation.
            v. A system of bench terraces or diversions may be needed to reduce effective slope length.
        g. For slopes steeper than three to one (3:1) that will not readily support soil-binding plants, plant material may have to be held in place with mechanical structures such as retaining walls or rip-rap in accordance with a soils report prepared by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the Town Engineer.
        h. Sites that are marginal for stabilization with vegetation alone, as determined by the Town Engineer, shall be successfully held in place by a combination of mechanical and vegetative means as approved by the Town Engineer. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
D. Irrigation and Water Management 
The provisions set forth in this section are designed to conserve groundwater using standards for the installation of efficient, intelligent landscape irrigation systems, establishing annual water plans for landscaped areas, and requiring the installation of passive rainwater harvesting systems.
    1. Applicability 
        a. The provisions of this subsection apply to all projects where a development plan or plat is required in accordance with Section 22.9 of the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised, with appropriate exceptions as noted herein.
        b. The provisions of this subsection apply to front yard landscaping of individual residential lots in all zoning districts with exceptions specified in subsection F of this section. This section does not apply to residential rear or side yards.
        c. All projects that entail a twenty-five percent (25%) or more expansion of parking area shall meet requirements for the entire project area, except as provided in subsection D.1.f of this section.
        d. The provisions of this subsection apply to all projects that entail cumulative revegetation of twenty-five percent (25%) or more landscaped area, except as provided in subsection D.1.f of this section.
        e. All development, or redevelopment projects that propose an increase or replacement of landscaped area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more, shall install an intelligent irrigation control system that meets the requirements of subsection D.2.d of this section to manage water distribution for the entire site.
        f. Developments are eligible for exemption from the requirements of subsections D.3, Landscape Water Plan, and D.4, Rainwater Harvesting, of this section if one (1) of the following requirements is met on or before June 1, 2010:
            i. The specific development has a valid unexpired master development plan, development plan, or recorded final plat. Any of the aforementioned “plans” or “plat” subsequently submitted for any reason cannot take advantage of this exemption.
            ii. Substantial drainage improvements to accommodate the entire specific development are constructed.
        g. Specific applicability provisions and exceptions to requirements within this section are detailed in subsection F of this section.
    2. Irrigation System 
    Provision shall be made for an approved method of underground automatic irrigation.
        a. An irrigation system shall be employed until such time as the plant materials are sustained by natural water sources. The purpose of the irrigation system is to provide adequate watering for plant establishment and to supplement rainfall as needed.
        b. Not less than quarterly inspections and seasonal maintenance of irrigation systems are required. Compliance will be enforced as specified in subsection E.2.c.ii.A of this section.
        c. Irrigation systems shall be designed to be site-specific, reflecting plant type, soil type, infiltration rates, slopes, and prevailing wind direction.
        d. All properties that employ an irrigation system shall install and maintain a control system. Control systems, including single-family residential applications, shall sense localized conditions to preclude over-watering. It shall prevent the irrigation system from turning on when specified minimum soil moisture content is present; and shall provide for differentiated plant watering needs.
        e. An irrigation control schedule must be provided. Schedule must indicate compliance with the following:
            i. Landscape water plan (subsection D.3 of this section) requirements with emphasis on methods to successfully implement required irrigation reduction.
            ii. All irrigation control systems shall be operated and maintained to reduce water application during the months of October through February.
        f. Irrigation must be provided in the following manner:
            i. Drip irrigation, low-flow bubblers, or similar components are permitted. Only pressure-compensating and self-flushing emitters may be utilized.
            ii. Sprinkler heads may only be utilized for turf applications. Use shall conform to individual site conditions and be tested for uniformity and distribution performance in accordance with subsection E.2.a.ii.B of this section.
            iii. All irrigation system components shall be durable and long lasting. The type utilized depends on long- or short-term use as follows:
                A) Rigid piping such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or other materials with a similar or longer service life is encouraged for areas that require irrigation beyond a period of five (5) years.
                B) A minimum of one-half (1/2) inch poly tubing must be utilized for all irrigation areas.
            iv. Irrigation systems connected to potable water mains (public or private) shall be equipped with backflow preventors.
            v. Irrigation water shall not leave the landscaped areas and flow onto roads, parking areas or sidewalks.
            vi. Sprinkler heads shall be installed at least eight (8) inches away from impermeable surfaces (e.g., sidewalks, buildings, walls, etc.).
            vii. The irrigation system shall be operated such that annual water use is the same or less than the approved, annual landscape water plan (subsection D.3 of this section). Seasonal adjustments of the irrigation schedule and maintenance are required and are the responsibility of the property owner.
        g. Irrigation and/or watering plans shall meet the minimum standards of the American Society of Irrigation Consultants.
        h. Metering 
            i. Separate water meters dedicated to irrigation systems are an important tool in managing water use and measuring water conservation. Separate irrigation water meters shall be installed for the following types of development:
                A) Nonresidential.
                B) Multifamily.
                C) Residential subdivision common areas only.
            ii. Irrigation submeters may be approved if:
                A) Adequate capacity exists in the primary meter to meet site water demands including domestic, irrigation, and other uses.
                B) Use of a submeter does not interfere with Town’s ability to collect water usage data.
                C) Compliance with all design and location standards is established by the water utility provider.
    3. Landscape Water Plan 
        a. To ensure irrigation efficiency and water conservation goals are accomplished, a landscape water plan specifying a maximum amount of water to be applied on an annual basis shall be established for any irrigated landscape.
        b. The plan shall include:
            i. Calculation of the monthly and total annual water use (gallons) required for all specified plant materials at maturity stage.
            ii. Specific water use reduction in accordance with subsections D.3.e and f of this section.
            iii. Delineation of project phases, if applicable, with corresponding water use details for each phase so that actual water use can be clearly compared with allocated amounts.
        c. The landscape water plan, including the reduction amounts, shall be listed on the landscape plans.
        d. Plant water use calculations shall be based on the most current plant water use information from the Arizona Department of Water Resources.
        e. The irrigation reduction plan for landscaping shall be implemented three (3) years after issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. Metered water use for landscape irrigation shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%) five (5) years from the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
        f. Eventual discontinuation of irrigation is preferred for all landscaped areas. Irrigation within the following landscape areas must be discontinued from irrigation:
            i. All vegetation located in buffer yards shall not receive irrigation water after five (5) years from the certificate of occupancy date.
            ii. All vegetation within roadway medians and rights-of-way shall not receive irrigation water after five (5) years from the date of project completion.
        g. The annual water use for a project shall not exceed the annual landscape water plan.
        h. Meter readings are to be accomplished as follows:
            i. Irrigation meter readings shall be used to determine compliance with the landscape water plan. Noncompliance is subject to penalties under Oro Valley Town Code.
            ii. Meter readings shall be taken, at a minimum, on an annual basis. Monthly readings may be required, at the discretion of Planning and Zoning Administrator, in order to address noncompliance with the Water Plan.
            iii. An initial meter reading taken prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy shall be recorded for reference as part of water plan reporting requirements (subsection E.2.b of this section).
        i. The landscape rainwater plan shall not be enforced for the first year, commonly referred to as the plant establishment period.
        j. Within three (3) years from the date of issuance of a final certificate of occupancy, the applicant, or a successor in interest, may request to revise the landscape rainwater plan. The request shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The request shall be granted only if one (1) of the following applies:
            i. A mathematical error was made in the calculation of water required for on-site landscaping.
            ii. Additional data on plant water consumption relevant to or relative to the subject site has been obtained, and results indicated a needed change in landscape water plan calculations included with the landscape plan.
    4. Rainwater Harvesting 
    “Rainwater harvesting” is defined as intercepting, catching, storing, diverting, or directing storm water runoff from roofs, parking areas, etc., during rain events and putting it to beneficial use. Adopted Town goals and policies specify the use of rainwater harvesting systems to supplement irrigation and reduce water use while supporting the area’s flora and fauna.
        a. Rainwater Harvesting Plan 
            i. The rainwater harvesting plan is required and shall:
                A) Specify the rainwater harvesting system(s) to be utilized.
                B) Integrate with the landscape water plan (subsection D.3 of this section) and include the design details for implementing on-site rainwater harvesting.
                C) Integrate with site grading design and show how any combination of capture, conveyance, storage, and distribution will be utilized on site to harvest rainwater runoff.
                D) Be provided concurrently with a development plan, preliminary plat, landscape plan, and grading plan.
                E) Be stamped by a registered landscape architect and civil engineer.
                F) Ensure catchment of rainwater into all landscaped buffer yards and common area landscaped elements.
                G) When a project is phased, represent how each phase will meet rainwater harvesting requirements.
                H) For subdivisions that propose fully graded front yards, the plan shall include alternatives to facilitate the construction of rainwater harvesting systems and specific planting options on the variety of front yard configurations found in the proposed subdivision. The plan shall be implemented on each lot prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for that residence.
        b. Rainwater Harvest System General Provisions 
            i. Both active and passive rainwater harvesting systems are permitted. Only passive systems are required. Types of systems:
                A) Passive System 
                Diverts or directs rainwater runoff to appropriate locations where it is collected and allowed to infiltrate the soil naturally. This system contains no long-term storage capabilities.
                B) Active System 
                This type of system employs a reservoir or other water storing apparatus to catch and store rainwater for later use with conventional landscape irrigation systems. It typically involves electric pumps and valves, and will be cross-connected to the site irrigation system.
            ii. Passive rainwater harvesting systems shall provide for the drainage of rainwater into a system of catchments on the site.
            iii. Site discharge water budgeting shall be in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 11.3.5 of the Town of Oro Valley Drainage Criteria Manual. Reductions in detention requirements will not affect the overall site water budget requirements.
            iv. Standing water must be managed as follows:
                A) Standing water for passive rainwater harvesting systems must infiltrate or dissipate within twelve (12) hours of rainfall cessation.
                B) Active rainwater harvesting systems by definition shall be able to store water for future use. All active rainwater harvesting storage systems must be enclosed, covered and mosquito proof.
            v. All water collected and utilized for rainwater harvesting from parking lots and streets must meet the same discharge quality as stipulated within the Town of Oro Valley Drainage Criteria Manual, Section 11.7, First Flush Requirements.
            vi. Active rainwater harvesting systems shall be approved by the Town Engineer and Building Official. Systems that connect to a potable water supply must have backflow protection installed and meet the requirements of Article 15-23 of the Town of Oro Valley Town Code, Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Program.
            vii. All passive rainwater harvesting catchment areas shall be vegetated. The landscape architect shall certify that species appropriate to the anticipated level of water collection have been utilized.
            viii. Eighty (80) percent of the area within each linear buffer yard segment must be graded to a minimum depth of four (4) inches to enable collection of rainwater with the following exceptions:
                A) The area or a portion thereof will remain undisturbed and in a natural state.
                B) There are prohibitive site characteristics such as slope as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the Town Engineer.
        c. Rainwater Harvest System Single-Family and Townhouse Residential Provisions 
            i. There is not a minimum required volume of rainwater harvesting; however, design for water catchments is required within all buffer yards, common areas, recreation areas, and front yards.
            ii. For lots with fully graded front yards, catchment areas to utilize rainwater must be established for plant use. At a minimum, depressions and/or wells must be established for all trees.
            iii. Plants in front yards, buffer yards, and common areas that require irrigation may not be established in areas that are shaped in a manner to not enable partial containment of irrigation or rainwater.
            iv. Eighty (80) percent of the areas within recreation and common areas must be graded to a minimum depth of four (4) inches to enable collection of rainwater deposited in the immediate area with the following exceptions:
                A) The area or a portion thereof will remain undisturbed and in a natural state.
                B) There are prohibitive site characteristics such as slope as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and Town Engineer.
                C) The specific footprint of a recreation fixture may be exempted when positive drainage is required to ensure function and durability as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Examples include swimming pools, tennis courts, and tot facilities.
            v. Active systems may be established within building setbacks.
        d. Rainwater Harvest System Multifamily Residential, Commercial, Technical Park, and Other Nonresidential Provisions 
            i. Projects shall include a minimum volume of rainwater harvesting in accordance with the following equation:
            VWHgal = ΣAIS x 3,000 gal/acre
            Where: VWHgal = Volume of rainwater harvesting in gallons
            ΣAIS = Sum of all impervious surface areas including pavements, sidewalks, hardscape elements, and buildings.
            ii. When a project is planned and developed in phases, each individual phase must independently achieve the extent of rainwater harvesting required. Harvesting requirements may not be transferred from one (1) phase to another.
            iii. Rainwater harvesting basins may be combined with site detention basins; provided, that the residual ponding will dissipate within twelve (12) hours. This shall be demonstrated by a combination of percolation, evapotranspiration and positive outflow device such as a metered pipe. At a minimum, a positive outflow pipe shall be installed no higher than four (4) inches above the basin invert.
            iv. No passive rainwater harvesting basins shall be allowed within ten (10) feet of a building or vertical structural element greater than four (4) feet in height without special structural consideration and design approved by the Town Engineer and the Town Building and Safety Official.
            v. Access is to be provided to all rainwater harvesting basins, appurtenant structures and facilities. The following must be achieved to evaluate and provide access:
                A) Clearly delineate area on the grading and landscape plans.
                B) Position as to provide minimal disturbance to the site vegetation.
                C) Must be sized to enable maintenance by the methods with the least potential for ground disturbance and reduction of planting area.
        e. Detention Credit 
        Detention volume may be reduced at a one-to-one (1:1) volumetric ratio by the volume utilized for rainwater harvesting. This volumetric ratio must be confirmed for the two (2), ten (10), twenty-five (25) and one hundred (100) year storm events and approved by the Town Engineer.
    5. Water Features 
    The use of water for ornamental purposes, such as water fountains, as a component of landscaping is not permitted.
E. Administration 
    1. Application, Processing and Approval 
        a. Application 
            i. SRI and native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plans (NPPSM plans), prepared in accordance with subsection B of this section, shall accompany applications for development plans, use permits, and preliminary plats.
            ii. Landscape and water plans for landscape, irrigation, buffer yards, common areas, screening, water harvesting and revegetation, prepared in accordance with requirements of this section, shall accompany applications for development plans, use permits and preliminary plats.
            iii. For subdivisions with fully graded front yards, landscape plan options must be submitted for front yards at the time of preliminary plat review.
            iv. The SRI, NPPSM plans and the landscape plans and supporting data shall be prepared in accordance with any supplemental requirements detailing rainwater harvesting, landscape or irrigation design. NPPSM plans and landscape plans may be submitted for Town review as a single package.
            v. Landscape plans shall indicate the location of required publicly accessible artwork required as stipulated in Section 27.3.
        b. Processing 
            i. A preapplication conference is required prior to the submittal of landscape plans, preliminary plat, or development plan, at which the applicant shall present conceptual landscape and irrigation plans, including an integrated design for rainwater harvesting features in the project.
            ii. The landscape plan submittal will be checked by the Planning and Zoning Administrator for completeness. If found to be incomplete as to those requirements set forth in subsections C and D of this section, the submittal will be rejected and the applicant notified within ten (10) working days of the date the plans were received.
            iii. Upon the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s certification of completeness of the landscape plan submittal, copies of the plans will be distributed to the reviewing agencies and any other interested parties, who will make known their recommendations in writing.
            iv. The Planning and Zoning Administrator will assemble the responses from the various reviewing agencies and maintain a file of all responses received.
        c. Approval 
            i. The SRI and NPPSM plans will be reviewed and may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
            ii. Landscape plans will be reviewed and may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    2. Audits, Reporting, and Compliance 
        a. Audits 
            i. A landscape irrigation audit is required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and otherwise may be mandated by the Zoning Inspector due to suspected or reported noncompliance with the provisions of this section.
            ii. When a new irrigation system is installed within new residential subdivision common areas, multifamily common areas, and nonresidential development, an on-site landscape irrigation audit of the newly installed irrigation system shall be performed by a Town-approved certified landscape irrigation auditor, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
                A) The auditor shall be independent of the property owner and of all contractors associated with the property.
                B) The audits shall be conducted in accordance with the current edition of the Landscape Irrigation Auditor’s Handbook, published by the Irrigation Association. The average distribution uniformity results for the site audit shall be a minimum of eighty percent (80%) emission uniformity for drip irrigation and seventy-five percent (75%) for all rotary systems.
                C) The results of the audit shall be provided to the Zoning Inspector in a letter or other form acceptable to the Town, and shall be signed by the auditor.
            iii. The licensed contractor must certify that all irrigation was installed in the manner specified on the landscape and irrigation plans prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
        b. Water Plan Reporting 
            i. In order to assess compliance with the water plan when applicable, the irrigation meter or meters shall be assessed, at a minimum, on an annual basis by the Oro Valley Water Utility. When a violation occurs, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, meter reading may be repeated on a monthly basis until conformance is achieved.
        c. Compliance 
            i. Upon review of annual water use, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall make a determination of compliance with the approved annual landscape water plan for the site. Noncompliance is subject to penalties under Oro Valley Town Code.
            ii. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may provide an exception to landscape water plan compliance subject to the following conditions:
                A) Applicant must provide records to establish that irrigation has been routinely inspected at least on a quarterly basis and maintained accordingly within one (1) month of any noted deficiencies; and
                B) Overage is due to unforeseen event, such as a broken private service irrigation line that has been repaired within one (1) month of recorded water use increase; or
                C) Drought conditions not occurring within a ten (10) year statistical trend require a justifiable increase during the months of March through September. This provisional increase allowance will be negated if the water utility provider mandates water reductions due to severe drought; or
                D) A significant number of plants must be replaced due to disease or insect infestation. Overage must directly correspond with specific replacement plant needs and a three (3) year establishment period.
    3. Inspections 
        a. Native Plant Salvage 
            i. No permit for grubbing or grading of a site may be issued prior to the completion of the initial on-site inspection.
            ii. For single-family lot development, the Zoning Inspector shall verify limits of grading and the relocation of any salvaged plants in accordance with the approved site plan.
            iii. A follow-up inspection shall be performed which verifies the required on-site relocation of salvaged plants to their new locations or the holding nursery, and the required in-place preservation of native plants.
        b. Landscape and Revegetation 
            i. All property required by the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised to be landscaped, stabilized or revegetated shall pass a landscape inspection prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Such inspections shall be requested by the applicant at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to being performed.
            ii. The Planning and Zoning Administrator will have the right to refuse to pass any project not in conformance with the approved landscape plans or not meeting the provisions of this chapter.
            iii. The Zoning Inspector will also have the right to reject landscape materials as being substandard as to size, condition, or appearance.
            iv. After the landscape installation is complete, periodic on-site landscape inspections may be performed by the Zoning Inspector to ensure proper maintenance.
    4. Maintenance 
        a. Property owners, lessees, and occupants shall maintain required landscape, irrigation, buffering, screening and rainwater harvesting system improvements to the standards identified herein and on the approved plans.
        b. Maintenance of landscape, irrigation, rainwater harvesting basins, buffering and screening improvements shall consist of:
            i. Regular watering until plants are established and capable of surviving without irrigation.
            ii. Watering of replacement vegetation within buffer yards is limited to only the replacement vegetation after implementation of the five (5) year irrigation stoppage requirement.
            iii. Checking, adjusting, repair and replacement of irrigation equipment, with the originally specified materials or their equivalents, as necessary to ensure water efficiency, prevent leaks and maintain water plan compliance. Broken or leaking irrigation components shall be repaired within seventy-two (72) hours of notice.
            iv. Removing debris, sediment, sand, and gravel carried into streets or parking areas within seventy-two (72) hours of notice.
            v. Checking, clearing and repair of water collection basins, spillways, and distribution systems including maintenance of basin infiltration capabilities in accordance with the approved plans.
            vi. Inlet and outlet structures are to be kept free of vegetation and debris at all times.
            vii. Pruning and fertilizing.
            viii. Clearing of prohibited species, debris and weeds.
            ix. Removal and replacement of dead plants within forty-five (45) days of notice with plant materials of the same species and of similar size and quality.
            x. Aerating and de-thatching turf areas.
            xi. Replenishing mulch.
            xii. Repair of architectural features.
        c. The maintenance schedule and requirements for rainwater harvesting basins shall be detailed in private covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs). The homeowner’s association (HOA) or responsible party shall be clearly identified within the CC&Rs and shall be responsible for maintenance of basins and rainwater harvesting appurtenances and maintenance recordkeeping.
        d. Lack of maintenance as above described shall constitute a violation of this section. The property owner and/or occupant or lessee shall be held jointly and severally liable for any infraction of the requirements set forth in this section.
        e. During the effective period of the grading permit, any weedy species (e.g., buffelgrass, Russian thistle, telegraph plant, desert broom, ragweed, pigweed, or burrow brush, among others) that have grown in a graded area shall be removed in order to prevent the spread of such species. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
F. Applicability Provisions and Exceptions 
    1. This subsection identifies specific exceptions to standards contained in this section. It is to be utilized in conjunction with specific applicability provisions provided in subsections C and D of this section.
    2. Table 27-13 identifies code sections that do not apply to specific types of development activity.
    3. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall make a determination of applicability in cases where applicability is unclear or ambiguous.
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Code Section | Single-Family | Single-Family | Multifamily | Commercial |     25%     | Revegetation | Subdivision |              Notes               |
    |     27.6     |    R1-300,    |    R1-10,     |    R-4,     |    and     |     or      |      of      |   Common    |                                  |
    |              |     144,      |     R1-7      |             |   Other    | > Expansion |     25%      |    Area     |                                  |
    |              |      43,      |     Model     |    R-4R,    |    Uses    | of Parking  |      or      |             |                                  |
    |              |      36,      |     Homes     |    R-S,     |    C-N,    |             |      >       |             |                                  |
    |              |      20       |               |     R-6     |    C-1,    |             |     Area     |             |                                  |
    |              |    Custom     |               |             |    C-2,    |             |              |             |                                  |
    |              |     Homes     |               |             |    PS,     |             |              |             |                                  |
    |              |               |               |             |    T-P,    |             |              |             |                                  |
    |              |               |               |             |    P-1,    |             |              |             |                                  |
    |              |               |               |             |    POS     |             |              |             |                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C. Landscape Design                                                                                                                                   |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Plant Materials and Plant Restrictions                                                                                                                |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C.3.a –      | Y1            | Y1            | Y1          | Y          | Y           | Y            | Y           | 1. Applies only to common        |
    | f            |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | areas and front yards;           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | does not apply to side           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | or rear yards.                   |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C.3.g –      | Y1            | Y1            | Y           | Y          | Y           | Y            | Y           |                                  |
    | h            |               |               |             |            |             |              |             |                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C.3.i        | Y2            | Y2            | Y           | Y          | Y           | Y            | Y           | 2. Applies only to subdivision   |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | common areas.                    |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C.3.j –      | Y1            | Y1            | Y           | Y          | Y           | Y            | Y           |                                  |
    | o            |               |               |             |            |             |              |             |                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Buffer Yards and Screening                                                                                                                            |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C.4 and      | Y3            | Y3            | Y3          | Y          | N           | N            | Y           | 3. Applies only to subdivision   |
    | C.5          |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | plats, not between               |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | individual residential           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | lots.                            |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Off-Street Parking and Vehicular Use Areas                                                                                                            |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C.6.a –      | Y4            | Y4            | Y           | Y          | Y           | N            | Y           | 4. Applies only to subdivision   |
    | b            |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | recreation areas and             |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | guest parking areas.             |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Nonresidential Uses                                                                                                                                   |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C.7.a –      | N             | N             | Y           | Y          | Y           | N            | N           |                                  |
    | f            |               |               |             |            |             |              |             |                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Revegetation                                                                                                                                          |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | C.8.a –      | Y             | Y             | Y           | Y          | Y           | Y            | Y           |                                  |
    | h            |               |               |             |            |             |              |             |                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D. Irrigation and Water Management                                                                                                                    |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Irrigation System                                                                                                                                     |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.2 (all)    | Y1            | Y             | Y           | Y          | Y           | Y            | Y           | 1. Applies only to common        |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | areas and front yards;           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | does not apply to side           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | or rear yards.                   |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.2.e –      | Y2            | Y2            | Y2          | Y          | Y           | Y            | Y           | 2. Applies only to subdivision   |
    | h            |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | common areas.                    |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Landscape Water Plan                                                                                                                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.3.a –      | Y6            | Y6            | Y6          | Y6         | N           | N            | Y6          | 6. Applies only to residential   |
    | j            |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | subdivision common               |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | areas, multifamily               |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | common areas, and nonresidential |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | development. Certain             |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | developments are eligible        |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | for exemption from               |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | these requirements               |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | per Section 27.6.D.1.f.          |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | This section does not            |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | apply to golf courses.           |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Rainwater Harvesting                                                                                                                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.4.a        | Y7            | Y7            | Y7          | Y7         | N           | N            | Y7          | 7. Applies to residential        |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | front yards that are             |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | fully graded, residential        |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | subdivision common               |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | areas, multifamily               |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | common areas, and nonresidential |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | development. Also,               |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | certain developments             |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | are eligible for exemption       |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | from these requirements          |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | per Section 27.6.D.1.f.          |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | This section does not            |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | apply to golf courses.           |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.4.b.i –    | Y1            | Y1            | Y1          | Y          | N           | N            | Y           | 1. Applies only to common        |
    | vii          |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | areas and front yards;           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | does not apply to side           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | or rear yards.                   |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.4.b.viii   | Y2            | Y2            | Y2          | Y          | N           | N            | Y           | 2. Applies only to subdivision   |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | common areas.                    |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.4.c.i –    | Y1            | Y1            | Y1          | N          | N           | N            | N           |                                  |
    | iii          |               |               |             |            |             |              |             |                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.4.c.iv     | Y2            | Y2            | Y2          | N          | N           | N            | Y           |                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.4.d        | N             | N             | Y5          | Y          | N           | N            | Y           | 5. Applies only to multifamily   |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | projects; single-family          |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | dwelling types in these          |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | zones are exempt.                |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.4.e        | Y2            | Y2            | Y2          | Y          | N           | N            | Y           |                                  |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Water Features                                                                                                                                        |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | D.5          | Y1            | Y1            | Y1          | Y          | Y           | Y            | Y           | 1. Applies only to common        |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | areas and front yards;           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | does not apply to side           |
    |              |               |               |             |            |             |              |             | or rear yards.                   |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
    | Legend: Y = Yes, the requirement is applicable, or applicable as noted.                                                                               |
    | N = No, the section does not apply.                                                                                                                   |
    +--------------+---------------+---------------+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+----------------------------------+
((O)09-20, Amended,  11/04/2009; (O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007; (O)06-06, Amended,  04/19/2006)
1 Code reviser’s note: Wherever there is a conflict with provisions of the Code regarding native plant salvage and preservation, revegetation, constructed landscape improvements and plant materials, irrigation and outdoor water conservation, the provisions of Section 27.6 shall prevail.

Section 27.7 Off-Street Parking
A. Purpose 
This Section establishes requirements for vehicle and bicycle parking consistent with the objectives of the general plan and a balanced transportation system to promote public safety and environmental quality. These regulations are intended to:
    1. Ensure sufficient off-street vehicle and bicycle parking facilities by establishing parking requirements for land uses.
    2. Reduce the visual impact of mass “seas of parking” by distributing spaces around clusters of buildings.
    3. Reduce excessive off-street parking by encouraging the shared use of vehicular use areas.
    4. Promote pedestrian safety by separating vehicular use areas from pedestrian areas.
    5. Encourage safe, convenient, and efficient design of parking spaces, circulation, and access areas.
    6. Improve air quality by requiring paving of vehicular use areas.
    7. Promote the enhancement of the community identity and the appearance of Town roadways and development areas.
    8. The Town of Oro Valley, in keeping with the Federal Clean Air Act, wishes to encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such as the bicycle. Reducing the number of vehicular parking spaces in favor of bicycle parking spaces will help attain the standards of the Federal Clean Air Act, reduce impervious surfaces, and save on land and development costs.
B. Applicability 
The provisions of this Section apply to:
    1. New Development 
    2. New Uses Replacing Existing Uses 
    Whenever the use of an existing development is changed to a new use which requires more parking spaces under this Section than were required for the prior use, additional parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Section. No occupancy permit shall be issued until the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator has approved the parking requirements for the new use.
    3. Expansions 
    All projects that propose 25 percent or more cumulative addition or structural modifications such as changes in square footage, gross floor area, building facade, etc. shall meet the requirements of this code for the entire property. In addition, a 25 percent or more cumulative modification or replacement of parking spaces or parking lot area shall meet the requirements of this code.
C. General Provisions 
    1. Parking Required for Uses Not Listed 
    Required parking for uses not listed in this section shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator based on similar uses listed in this section.
    2. Alternative Compliance 
    Upon written request by the applicant, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve an alternative parking ratio.
        a. Review Criteria: To approve an alternative plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission must find that the proposed alternative plan accomplishes the purpose of this section equally well or better than the standards of this section. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider:
            i. The number of employees occupying the building or land use and the number of expected customers or clients.
            ii. The availability of nearby parking (if any).
            iii. Purchased or leased parking spaces in a municipal or private parking lot meeting the requirements of the Town; trip reduction programs (if any).
            iv. Any other factors that may be unique to the applicant’s development request.
            v. Continuity and convenient proximity for pedestrians between or among existing or future uses in the vicinity.
            vi. Visual and aesthetic impact along the public street by placing parking lots to the rear or alongside of buildings, to the maximum extent feasible. Visual and aesthetic impact of the surrounding neighborhood.
            vii. Impact on any facilities serving alternative modes of transportation.
            viii. Impact on natural areas or features.
            ix. Maintenance of mobility-impaired parking ratios.
    3. Multiple Principal Uses: Where there are multiple principal uses in a development, the sum of the number of parking spaces required for the individual uses applies unless shared parking is approved per subsection D.3 of this section, Shared Parking.
    4. Maintenance: The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining any vehicular use area in good condition and free of refuse and debris.
    5. Fractional Amounts: When the final result of the calculation of required vehicle or bicycle spaces results in a fractional number, a fraction is adjusted to the next higher whole number.
    6. Areas That May Not Be Used for Required Parking: Spaces in service bays, stacking areas, car wash bays at gasoline pumps or other hose locations, or those used for the storage or display of vehicles for sale or rent to the public are not considered off-street parking spaces and fire lanes. Off-street parking required by this Chapter shall not be located within any public right-of-way.
    7. Building Permits: No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented satisfactory evidence that sufficient property to provide parking to serve the intended use as required in this Chapter is permanently available.
    8. Control of Parking Lots: Property used for parking shall be under the same ownership as and contiguous to the generating use. When the property is not under the same ownership as the generating use or is not contiguous to the generating use, the following shall apply:
        a. It shall be zoned for parking only or the same district classification as the generating use.
        b. A recommendation for approval by the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be obtained regarding the parking relationship to the generating use.
        c. The owner(s) shall record restrictive covenants running with the land on the generating use and parking properties specifying that the generating use cannot continue if the parking use is discontinued. The form of said covenants shall be approved by the Town Attorney and may not be released without the written consent of the Town of Oro Valley. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
D. Parking Lots – Required Number of Spaces for Type of Use 
    1. Residential Parking Requirements: Residential uses shall provide a minimum number of parking spaces as defined by the standards below. Any increase or decrease in parking shall be in accordance with subsection C.2 of this section.
        a. Attached Dwellings: For each two (2) family and multi-family dwelling, there shall be parking spaces provided as indicated by the following table:
        +---------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
        | Unit Number of Bedrooms/Dwelling Unit | Parking Spaces Per Dwelling |
        +---------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
        | One or less                           | 1.5                         |
        +---------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
        | Two                                   | 1.75                        |
        +---------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
        | Three                                 | 2.0                         |
        +---------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
        | Four                                  | 2.5                         |
        +---------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
        | Plus one (1) space per every four (4) units for guest parking.      |
        +---------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
        b. Guest Parking: Off-street guest parking spaces in multi-family developments shall be distributed proportionally to effectively serve the dwelling units that they are intended to serve. Such parking shall not be located more than two hundred (200) feet from any dwelling unit that is intended to be served.
        c. Single-Family Detached: For each single-family dwelling, there shall be at least two (2) parking spaces and two (2) guest spaces. Parking of any vehicle in the front yard of a lot shall be prohibited unless parked on a surface of asphalt, concrete, rock, or other similar inorganic material with a permanent border.
        d. Mobile Homes: There shall be two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit and one (1) space per four (4) units for guest parking.
        e. Boarding Houses/Group Homes /Religious Quarters/Senior Care Facilities: One (1) per bedroom or bed plus one (1) for each four (4) bedrooms or beds for guest parking, plus two (2) for every three (3) employees. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required parking for senior care facilities shall be covered parking. This requirement may be reduced or waived by Town Council when the applicant can demonstrate that the covered parking is not necessary to serve the expected needs of the residents.
            i. Recreational Uses Neighborhood Parks: For each recreational use/park located in any district, there shall be three (3) parking spaces per acre of park area. All neighborhood parks of less than one (1) acre shall provide a minimum of three (3) parking spaces.
            ii. Non-Residential Parking Requirements: Non-residential uses shall provide parking spaces as defined by the standards below. Any increase or decrease in parking shall be in accordance with subsection D.5 of this section.
    2. The table below sets forth the number of allowed parking spaces based on the square footage of the gross leasable area and of the occupancy of specified uses.
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |                  Use                   |      Required Parking Sq. Ft.       |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Restaurants                                                                  |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |   a. Convenience Use                   | 15/1000                             |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |   b. Standard                          | 10/1000                             |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Bars, Taverns and Nightclubs           | 10/1000                             |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Community Parks                        | 5/acre                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Commercial Recreational                                                      |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |   a. Limited Indoor Recreation         | 6/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |   b. Outdoor                           | .3/person                           |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |   c. Bowling Alley                     | 5/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Theaters                               | 1/3 seats                           |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | General Retail                         | 4/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Service Shop                           | 4/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Shopping Center                        | 5/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Medical Office                         | 4.5/1000                            |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Financial Services                     | 3.5/1000                            |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Grocery Store, Supermarket             | 6/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | General Office                         | 3/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Vehicle Servicing and Maintenance      | 5/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Repair Service                         | 2/1000                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Lodging Establishments                 | 1/unit                              |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Employees                              | 1 per 2                             |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Health Facilities                                                            |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |   a. Hospitals                         | 1/bed                               |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Schools, Places of Worship or Assembly | 1 per 4 seats and 2 per 3 employees |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Child Care Centers                     | 1/1000 and 2 per 3 employees        |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | Industrial Employee Parking            | .75/employee                        |
    +----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    3. Shared Parking: When a mix of non-residential uses creates staggered peak periods of parking demand, shared parking calculations shall be made to reduce the total amount of required parking for retail, office, institutional and entertainment uses. ((O)15-16, Amended,  11/08/2015)
E. Mobility-Impaired Accessible Spaces 
    1. Design Standard:
        a. Width eight (8) feet with a five (5) foot wide adjacent aisle for access to and from the side of a vehicle.
        b. Other dimensions; same as those for standard vehicles.
        c. The parking space and adjacent aisle shall have a slope less than 1:50 (2 percent).
    2. Location: Mobility-impaired parking spaces shall be located as close as possible to the nearest accessible building entrance, using the shortest accessible route of travel possible. When practical, the accessible route of travel shall not cross lanes for vehicular traffic. When crossing vehicle traffic lanes is necessary, the route shall be designated and marked as a crosswalk.
    3. Marking: Every mobility-impaired parking space shall be identified by a sign, centered between three (3) feet and five (5) feet above the parking surface, at the head of the parking space. The sign shall include the international symbol of accessibility and state RESERVED or equivalent language.
    4. Number of Spaces: Each parking lot shall contain at least the minimum specified number of mobility-impaired spaces as provided in the table below.
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Total Parking Spaces in Lot | Minimum Required Number of Accessible Spaces |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 1-25                        | 1                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 26-50                       | 2                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 51-75                       | 3                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 76-100                      | 4                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 101-150                     | 5                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 151-200                     | 6                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 201-300                     | 7                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 301-400                     | 8                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 401-500                     | 9                                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | 501-1000                    | 2% of total space                            |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Over 1000                   | 20 spaces plus 1 space for every 100 spaces  |
    |                             | or fraction thereof over 1000                |
    +-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    5. Van Accessible Spaces: One (1) space per every eight (8) mobility impaired parking spaces or fraction thereof.
        a. Width: Eight (8) feet with an eight (8) foot adjacent aisle.
        b. Other dimensions; same as those for standard vehicles.
        c. Height Clearance: 98 inches vertical clearance is required.
F. Bicycle Parking 
    1. Types:
        a. Class I: Provides covered, secured bicycle parking that insures protection against direct sunlight and theft of the entire bicycle, its components, and accessories such as commuting bags, etc. Class I facilities include bicycle lockers, check-in facilities, monitored parking, restricted access parking or other means which provide the above level of security as approved by the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        b. Class II: Provides a stationary object that is permanently fixed to the ground or physically attached to a structure to which the operator can lock the bicycle, such as single or multiple bicycle racks. These facilities must be located in a highly visible area that is in close proximity to the primary entrance of the structure it serves, and disbursed conveniently throughout the development, not blocking pedestrian access.
    2. Number Required: Provide bicycle parking spaces at the rate of:
        a. One (1) bicycle parking space per twenty (20) required vehicular parking spaces, but in all cases shall provide a minimum of two (2) bicycle spaces, except gas stations having no convenience use (mini-mart).
        b. All spaces shall be Class II spaces as defined in subsection F.2 of this section, Bicycle Parking Requirements, except Professional Offices, Retail Uses, Recreational Uses, Theaters, and Industrial Uses, shall provide ten percent (10%) percent of the required bicycle parking as Class I spaces.
        c. The maximum number of required spaces shall be one hundred (100) bicycle-parking spaces.
        d. Any increase or decrease in parking shall be in accordance with subsection D.3 of this section.
    3. Credit for Bicycle Parking Facilities:
    Performance Standards: The Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator may authorize reductions to on-site parking requirements for all non-residential uses, for the provision of bicycle facilities, as follows:
        a. One (1) vehicular space per four (4) Class I bicycle spaces.
        b. Two (2) vehicular spaces per one (1) shower.
        c. The number of vehicular spaces required shall not be reduced by more than five (5) percent. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)
G. On-Site Circulation 
    1. Access Drives:
        a. Access drives shall provide adequate storage length to prevent stopped vehicles from obstructing entering vehicles or vehicles traveling along internal circulation roadways.
        b. Entrances shall provide adequate turning radius for the design vehicle.
        c. Curbs, walls, berms, landscaping, or other barriers shall be employed to prevent ingress or egress at any point other than the approved entrances and exits.
        d. A minimum of 150 feet measured at the centerline shall separate any entrances or exits from the nearest intersecting street centerline.
        e. Entrances and exit drives are limited to two (2) per 300 feet of frontage, with a minimum spacing of 150 feet between centerlines.
        f. Cross corner sight visibility shall be provided in accordance with the Oro Valley Subdivision Street Standards.
        g. The Town Engineer shall approve any deviation from these requirements.
    2. Ring Roads:
    Definition: A Ring Road is defined as a roadway encircling a commercial, office or industrial complex with no on street parking, frequent curb cuts to adjacent parking aisles, and parking internal to the ring road.
        a. Ring roads shall be designed with 30 MPH design standards and signed at 15 MPH.
        b. Ring roads shall be a minimum of 28 feet in width.
        c. Sight visibility triangles for 30 MPH shall be a minimum along ring roads.
    3. Perimeter Drive:
    Definition: A Perimeter Drive is defined as a roadway next to a building or group of buildings inside a Ring Road. A Perimeter Drive may be used for pick-up and drop-off of passengers or cargo.
        a. Perimeter drives shall have uninterrupted distances greater than 400 feet.
        b. Perimeter drives shall be no wider than 28 feet with no parking, except as defined above.
        c. Short radius curves are encouraged along the perimeter roads to limit speeds.
        d. Sight visibility triangles for 20 MPH shall be a minimum along perimeter drives.
    4. Parking Aisles:
        a. Parking aisles shall not be designed to require or encourage vehicles to back into a street, pedestrian way, or alley in order to leave the parking lot or maneuver out of a parking space.
        b. Parking aisles shall not be designed to carry more than 1000 vehicles per day.
        c. Parking aisles shall not be longer than 300 feet without a break in circulation.
        d. The preferred parking format is 45 degree parking on one-way parking aisles. Other parking configurations may be accepted provided it does not result in increased pedestrian-vehicular conflicts, and is consistent with Table 27-16.
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        |       MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING AREA DIMENSIONS       |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        |   A    |   B    |   C    |   D    |   E   |   F   |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | 0°     | 9.0'   |        | 12.0'  | 23.0' | 28.0' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | 20°    | 9.0'   | 16.3'  | 12.0'  | 57.6' | 44.6' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | 30°    | 9.0'   | 18.6'  | 12.0'  | 29.6' | 49.2' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | 45°    | 9.0'   | 21.2'  | 13.0'  | 14.1' | 55.4' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | 60°    | 9.0'   | 22.5'  | 18.0'  | 13.0' | 63.0' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | 70°    | 9.0'   | 22.3'  | 19.0'  | 11.5' | 63.6' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | 80°    | 9.0'   | 21.5'  | 24.0'  | 10.6' | 67.0' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | 90°    | 9.0'   | 20.0'  | 24.0'  | 10.0' | 64.0' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        | Elements                                          |
        | A. Parking Angle                                  |
        | B. Space Width                                    |
        | C. Space Depth                                    |
        | D. Aisle Width                                    |
        | E. Curb Length                                    |
        | F. Center to Center Width of Double Row and Aisle |
        | Minimum 2 - way traffic aisle width: 24'          |
        | Minimum 1 - way traffic aisle width: 12'          |
        | Minimum 1 - way fire lane access aisle width: 20' |
        +--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+
        [IMAGE: <OroValley27.7G4d.png>]
            i. End islands shall be sufficiently large to assure adequate cross corner sight visibility with the intersecting access drive.
        e. Passenger Drop-Off Points: Drop-off points, separated from street traffic lanes, ring roads, parking aisles, loading areas, access drives, or perimeter roads, and readily accessible without hazardous maneuvering, shall be provided in conjunction with the following uses: senior care facilities, hotels, motels, resorts, hospitals and clinics, educational facilities, libraries, and day care centers with fifty (50) or more students or children, religious facilities with one hundred (100) or more seats, transit terminals, park and ride lots, major recreational facilities, public buildings, financial services greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area, shopping centers and other office/commercial uses and restaurants. Passenger drop-off points for senior care facilities shall include a shade structure with bench seating.
        f. Transit Stops: Any Commercial, Office, or Industrial development of a minimum one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall provide transit turn-outs. Transit turn-outs shall be centrally located for ease of access and shall be in sufficient numbers and designed in accordance with the standards established by the Town Engineer.
        g. Carpools: Off street parking provided for all employment uses requiring eighty (80) or more spaces shall provide at least ten (10) percent of the total parking area as designated for use by car pools, and be clearly signed and managed to that end. Carpool parking shall be as close to the building as possible, without impeding visitor or mobility-impaired parking. Where car pool parking is provided by this Section, the required parking may be reduced by five (5) percent. ((O)15-16, Amended,  11/08/2015)
H. Design and Improvement Standards 
    1. Parking Lot Layout (Design) 
        a. Parking Space Dimension: Parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length. Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and twenty-three (23) feet in length. Motorcycle parking spaces, if provided, shall be in addition to any required parking and shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in width and ten (10) feet in length.
        b. Parking Structures: Parking structures, including underground parking, are recognized as a means to conserve on-site open space and are encouraged as an alternative to developing all required parking as surface lots. As an incentive, allowable floor area ratios (FAR) may be increased up to ten percent (10%) for every one hundred (100) underground parking spaces or aboveground parking structures.
        c. Circulation Routes: Parking lots shall provide well-defined circulation routes for vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians. Layout and design shall anticipate the needs of users and provide continuity between vehicular circulation, parking, pedestrian and bicycle circulation.
        d. Traffic Control Devices: Standard traffic control signs and devices shall be used to direct traffic, where necessary, within a parking lot and must incorporate traffic calming methods in the design. Parking lot sign standards shall be in accordance with Chapter 28.
        e. Orientation: All parking lots shall include walkways that are located in places that are logical, safe, and convenient for pedestrians.
        f. Landscape Islands: To the maximum extent feasible, landscaped islands with curbs shall be used to define parking lot entrances, the ends of all parking aisles and the location and pattern of primary internal access drives, and to provide pedestrian refuge areas and walkways. Every nine (9) parking spaces shall have a landscaped island. The dimensions of which shall be ten (10) feet outside edge to outside edge of curb and the curb shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in width. The length shall be forty (40) feet outside edge to outside edge of curb. For single loaded parking the landscaped island shall be ten (10) feet outside edge to outside edge of curb and twenty (20) feet in length outside edge to outside edge. The provisions of Section 27.6, Landscape Conservation, shall apply.
        [IMAGE: <OroValley27.7Hf.png>]
        g. Shopping Cart Bays: Parking areas where shopping carts are an integral part of the commercial business shall be designed to accommodate shopping cart storage. Cart storage spaces shall be integrated into the landscape areas within the parking area and shall be placed appropriately to accommodate the maximum number of parking spaces. Cart storage spaces shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide and a maximum of nine (9) feet wide and the length shall be no longer than the depth of a parking stall. The minimum height shall be forty-five (45) inches measured from finished grade. Any lot for retail stores such as grocery or home improvements, and containing one hundred (100) or more parking spaces shall install at least one (1) shopping cart bay per eighty-five (85) spaces provided. The Planning and Zoning Administrator and Town Engineer may increase or decrease the number of shopping cart bays.
        h. At a minimum shopping cart bays shall be constructed of opaque material that may consist of the following: landscaping, berming, and/or masonry block faced with the same material of the serving store. Such bays shall be maintained by the serving store or the Property Owners Association, if any, or the property owner/management company of the center. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall have the right to inspect such bays and cite the serving store, Property Owners Association, or property owner/management company if such bays are not kept in good condition and properly maintained.
        i. Points of Conflict: The lot layout shall specifically address the interrelation of pedestrian, vehicular and bicycle circulation in order to provide continuous and direct pedestrian access with a minimum of driveway and drive aisle crossings. Required treatment such as raised pedestrian crossings, forecourts and landings, special paving, signs, lights, and bollards shall be provided at significant points of conflict.
        j. Lot Size/Scale: Large surface parking lots shall be visually and functionally segmented into several smaller lots according to the following standards:
            i. Large parking lots shall be divided into smaller sections by landscape areas. Each section shall contain a maximum of two hundred (200) parking spaces.
            [IMAGE: <OroValley27.7Hji.png>]
            ii. Parking bays shall extend no more than nine (9) parking spaces without an intervening tree landscape island or landscaped peninsula. The provisions of Section 27.6, Landscape Conservation, shall apply.
            iii. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the off-street parking area be located in the front yard (see definition of front yard, Chapter 31).
        k. Truck Traffic: All development that generates truck traffic that may adversely affect a neighborhood by creating noise, dust, or odor problems shall avoid or mitigate those impacts either through physical design or operational procedures and Section 27.8, Off-Street Loading.
    2. Improvement Standards 
    All public and private parking areas except for residential uses permitted in the R-1 and R-4 Districts shall be improved and maintained to the following standards:
        a. Slope and Grading: The finished grade of the parking lot shall be in accordance with the Town’s grading standards. Grading of a site shall benefit landscaped areas and conform to the requirements of the Town’s Grading Ordinance, Section 27.9. Below-grade or recessed parking lots are encouraged and may be required by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or the Town Engineer to provide additional screening from major thoroughfares or residential areas.
        b. Drainage: In addition to the Town’s drainage requirements, drainage flow shall be considered a resource and be designed to benefit landscaped areas on the development site. Erosion control measures shall be designed and implemented to control drainage flow from impervious areas onto abutting soil surfaces.
        c. Surfacing: All non-landscaped parking areas shall be paved with a durable asphalt, concrete, stone, tile, or brick surface, consistent with pavement design principles and engineered according to soil conditions and wheel-loads. Pedestrian use areas and crossings within parking areas shall be paved with tile, brick, concrete pavers, colored asphalt, patterned and colored concrete, or asphalt.
        d. Barriers: Parking areas and spaces shall be provided with bumper barriers, wheel stops or wheel stop curbing designed to prevent parked vehicles from extending beyond the property lines, damaging adjacent landscaping, walls or buildings, or overhanging sidewalk areas. Wheel stops or wheel stop curbing shall be located three (3) feet from the front of the parking space. No barriers shall be required for head-to-head parking.
        e. Pavement Marking: Parking spaces in paved parking areas shall be permanently marked with striping. Space lines shall be a minimum of four (4) inches wide, white paint or plastic, and extend for a minimum of ten (10) feet for interior lines. End lines shall extend the full length of the space.
        f. Lighting: All parking areas shall comply with the Town of Oro Valley Outdoor Lighting Code, Section 27.5, Outdoor Lighting. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)

Section 27.8 Off-Street Loading
A. Applicability 
The provisions of this section apply to:
    1. New development.
    2. New uses locating in an existing development, as required in Section 27.7.B.2.
    3. Any expansion of an existing use or any addition of a new use to an existing development, as required in Section 27.7.B.3.
B. General Regulations 
All buildings hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading spaces as determined by the Town Engineer subject to conditions herein.
    1. No part of an alley or street, including public walkway easements and fire lanes, shall be used for loading or maneuvering unless so designated by the Town.
    2. No loading space that is provided in an approved development shall hereafter be eliminated, reduced or converted unless equivalent facilities are provided elsewhere.
    3. All required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use served.
    4. Use of Loading Space: A loading space shall not be used for the repair, storage, or dismantling of vehicles or to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking and no general storage.
    5. Mixed Uses: If there are mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street loading spaces are the sum of the individual requirements of the various uses.
    6. Modification of Requirements: The Town Engineer may reduce the number and location of required loading spaces where he or she determines that an unusual situation exists. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
C. Design Standards 
    1. Location of Loading Space: Required off-street loading spaces shall be located:
        a. Onsite and no further than 100 feet from the building served.
        b. No closer than 30 feet to any property used, zoned, or designated by the General Plan, for residential purposes.
    2. Dimensions:
        a. A required loading space for commercial, institutional, or office use shall be at least 12 feet wide by 35 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of 15 feet.
        b. A required loading space for an industrial use shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 45 feet in length with a minimum height clearance of 15 feet.
    3. Access: Each loading space shall be accessible from a street or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street. Such access may be combined with access to a parking lot if designed in a manner that will not disrupt normal traffic flow. Access to loading spaces shall not be blocked by other loading spaces, stacked goods, permanent or movable structures of any type including trash receptacles or compactors, nor shall any loading space interfere with any fire exit or emergency access or fire lanes.
    4. Prohibited Location: No loading space shall be located within the right-of-way of any street, roadway, or public alley, or in any designated off-street parking area. At no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed into a public thoroughfare or right-of-way while the truck or van is being loaded or unloaded.
    5. Maneuvering: Adequate off-street maneuvering area shall be provided on-site and not within any public street right-of-way.
    6. Accessibility: All loading spaces shall be accessible at all times from a street, alley, or driveway intended to serve such off-street loading areas. Access to loading areas may be provided by way of designated off-street parking areas using only marked aisles for such access. If access to loading spaces involves the utilization of off-street parking areas, no interference of any type shall be permitted in terms of the normal use and function of said off-street parking lot, and no designated off-street parking area or space shall be infringed upon at any time for the movement of any vehicle waiting to gain access to said loading space.
    7. Enclosure of Loading Space: Required off-street loading space may be partially or entirely enclosed within a building, provided the building meets all the requirements pertaining to required setbacks.
    8. Screening: The Oro Valley Landscaping Standards shall apply.
    9. Lighting: Lighting in a loading area, if installed, shall be in accordance with Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised, Section 27.5.
    10. Surfacing: An outdoor loading space shall be surfaced in such a manner as to make it weatherproof and dust-proof in accordance with the provisions of Section 27.7.F.5.b.iii, Surfacing.
D. Off-Street Loading Required 
    1. Retail establishments, Restaurants, Industrial, Manufacturing, Warehouse, Wholesale Uses, Freight Terminals or Hospitals having an aggregate gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or more.
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | Gross Floor Area  | Number of Spaces |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    |    Square feet    |                  |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | 5,000 - 24,999    | 1                |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | 25,000 - 49,999   | 2                |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | 50,000 - 99,999   | 3                |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | 100,000 - 174,999 | 4                |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | 175,000 - 249,999 | 5                |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    For each additional 75,000 square feet (or fraction thereof) of gross floor area, one (1) additional loading space shall be provided.
    2. Public Assembly uses, such as auditoriums, and hotels.
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | Gross Floor Area  | Number of Spaces |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    |    Square feet    |                  |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | 5,000 - 24,999    | 1                |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | 30,000 - 129,999  | 2                |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    | 130,000 - 229,999 | 3                |
    +-------------------+------------------+
    For each additional 100,000 square feet (or fraction thereof) of gross floor area, one (1) additional loading space shall be provided.
    3. Office uses shall provide one (1) loading space for the first 5,000 to 100,000 square feet with one (1) additional loading space for each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
    4. Office uses may, in-lieu of providing loading spaces as per the above, may provide loading space for UPS, FedEx, Office Supply delivers within the passenger drop-off area, provided that the drive aisle is a minimum of 30 feet in width or a loading zone may be designated and marked within the parking lot.

Section 27.9 GradingGrading requirements for driveway improvements
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare and to protect and preserve the aesthetics of the natural environment through regulation of all types of excavation and earthwork on private and/or public land.
The grading regulations contained in this ordinance are designed to:
    1. Regulate the development of potentially hazardous terrain; and
    2. Preserve, where possible, or recreate the natural contours, the native vegetation and the visual character of the site in harmony with the surrounding terrain; and
    3. Enhance the quality and value of new development; and
    4. Maintain property rights and property values of adjacent developed and undeveloped parcels.
B. Intent 
The regulations, as set forth in this ordinance, have been prepared in the context of Oro Valley’s specific desert environment. They are intended to complement the applicable provisions of the Hillside Development Zone and the Floodplain Management Ordinance, and not to authorize any grading activity prohibited by this ordinance or any Town ordinance.
The intent of this grading ordinance is to assure that the design and implementation of all grading projects shall:
    1. Avoid scarring and other adverse visual impacts resulting from cut, fill and any other type of ground disturbance; and
    2. Blend with the natural contours of the land; and
    3. Restrict the areas of disturbance and volume of material displaced to the minimum amount necessary to implement the planned development; and
    4. Limit mass grading to residential subdivisions with an average lot size of 15,000 square feet or less; and
    5. Employ measures that:
        a. Ensure that graded hillside, slopes or other areas subject to erosion are stabilized; and
        b. Reduce the erosion effects of storm water discharge, preserve the flood-carrying capacity of natural or constructed waterways by limiting soil loss, and protect drainageways from siltation; and
        c. Minimize dust pollution and surface water drainage from graded areas during grading and development; and
        d. Ensure that proposed development activity is designed and implemented to avoid adverse impacts and appropriate restorative measures; and
        e. Encourage phased projects, to preserve natural contours and vegetative communities until such time as grading must necessarily occur on a site.
C. Protective Cover and Dust Control 
Cleared or graded land shall not be left at any time without dust control nor shall be left uncovered for more than 60 days without temporary or permanent protective cover of the entire cleared or graded area as determined by the Town Engineer.
D. Applicability 
This ordinance shall apply to all grading operation for which applications were received subsequent to its adoption date (August 19, 1998), unless exempted by Section 27.9.D.4 below. If a conflict between this and any other Town ordinance exists, the more restrictive shall apply. This grading ordinance shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws that prescribe more restrictive limitations, nor shall the provisions of this ordinance be presumed to waive any limitations imposed by other Town ordinances.
The design, implementation, and mitigation of grading regulated by this ordinance shall be reviewed prior to the issuance of any grading permit, to ensure full compliance with the regulations, requirements, and specific standards as set forth herein.
Grading permits must be obtained, after plan approval, as follows:
    1. Type I Grading Permit 
    A Type I Grading Permit is required for the following:
        a. A residential development on a single lot, other than those defined as Type 2 or 3.
        b. Alteration of existing stabilized slope of 3:1 or greater, on a residential lot.
        c. Addition of paved areas such as concrete or asphalt, in excess of 1000 square feet on a residential lot.
        d. Import and stockpiling of 100 cubic yards or more of earthen materials on a residential lot.
        e. Clearing vegetation from a residential lot, which encompasses an area of 1000 square feet or more.
    2. Type 2 Grading Permit 
    A Type 2 Grading Permit is required for any new public or private street or roadway, a commercial, office or resort project, or any residential development consisting of more than two (2) platted lots. Mass grading, as defined herein, shall be permitted only for new residential subdivisions, with an average lot size of 10,000 square feet or less (R1-10, R1-7, SDH-6 zoning designations). Mass grading on lots between 10,000 and 15,000 square feet is allowable with an Exception pursuant to Section 27.9.G.1.
    3. Type 3 Grading Permit 
    A Type 3 Grading Permit is required for stockpiling of earthen materials. A Type 3 grading permit shall be required for the installation of utilities and other infrastructure for which a Type 2 grading permit is not required. Utility and other infrastructure installation confined to the Town of Oro Valley right-of-way and requiring a right-of-way permit will not be required to obtain a Type 3 grading permit. However, a grading plan pursuant to Section 27.9.E.3.a shall accompany the right-of-way permit application. The Town may waive the requirements for the grading plan should staff determine that the scope of the grading activity does not warrant such a plan.
    4. Exemptions to this Ordinance 
    The following activities are exempted from this ordinance:
        a. The clearing, brushing or grubbing for activities exempted in this subsection;
        b. Stockpiling of less than 100 cubic yards of uncompacted earth material;
        c. Resurfacing or maintenance of an existing paved surface;
        d. New pavement of less than 1000 square feet;
        e. Individual sewage disposal system with a Pima County Department of Environmental Quality permit;
        f. Excavation below finished grade for a basement, foundation, wall or swimming pool authorized by a building permit or zoning construction permit;
        g. Excavation below existing grade for any story of a structure as long as the finished grade immediately outside the structure meets all other cut and fill limitations.
        h. Exploratory excavation under the direction of a Soil Engineer or Engineering Geologist provided all excavation is property backfilled. Whenever possible, such exploratory excavation and testing shall be conducted only in areas which have been previously disturbed;
        i. Archaeological exploration conducted under state permit by a qualified archaeologist;
        j. Removal of selected individual plants for storage and replanting;
        k. Grading for the maintenance of an existing private access, road, or driveway, provided that it either existed prior to adoption of, or was established in conformance with, this ordinance.
E. General Grading Requirements and Notes 
    1. Cut and Fill Limitations 
    Cut and fill slopes shall meet the following requirements:
        a. The maximum depth of a cut or fill shall not exceed six (6) feet measured vertically from the existing grade to the finished elevation. The depth of a cut or fill slope may be increased to eight (8) feet when terracing is utilized in conformance with Illustration 27.9 - 3. The terraces shall be landscaped to the satisfaction of the Town. For any construction, the height of exposed, constructed slopes shall not exceed 12 feet in vertical dimension.
        Should a PAD (Planned Area Development), existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, have conflicting cut and fill limitations, the PAD limitations shall govern grading operations within the PAD area.
        b. Cut or fill slopes 3:1 (horizontal: vertical) or less steep shall be revegetated. At the Town’s discretion, the Town may retain sufficient funds from the restoration or landscape assurance to ensure revegetation of slopes again, should the initial revegetation efforts fail to become established to the satisfaction of the Town.
        c. Cut or fill slopes 2:1 or less steep (but steeper than 3:1) shall be rock riprapped with filter fabric installed beneath the rock. Filter fabrics used shall meet specifications found in the latest edition of the “Pima County - City of Tucson Standard Specifications for Public Improvements”.
        d. Cut or fill slopes steeper than 2:1 shall have grouted riprap or retaining walls as appropriate. No slope shall exceed 1:1.
        e. Alternative methods of stabilization may be allowed if in accordance with a registered geotechnical (soils) engineer’s recommendation and approved by the Town.
        f. Fill shall be compacted and soil tested in accordance with a soil engineer’s recommendations and compaction tests shall be presented to the Town for the permanent record.
        g. Any structure used to retain slopes shall be designed to blend with the surrounding natural colors of the native rock and soils of the site. The surface shall be rough textured with heavy shadow patterns, which may be achieved by color-treated or veneered surfaces (or other methods approved by the Town).
        h. It shall be unlawful to dump or push dirt of any quantity over an existing slope (unless approved as part of a Type 1, 2 or 3 Grading Plan).
    2. Site Revegetation and Stabilization 
        a. All graded areas, except those to be used for agriculture or livestock purposes, shall be revegetated, stabilized, and/or constructed prior to the expiration of the grading permit. Should the graded area not be revegetated and/or stabilized per approved grading plans or permit conditions at the time of expiration, the applicant shall have 60 days from the date of permit expiration to revegetate and/or stabilize per approved plans and permit conditions. If after the 60 day period, the applicant has not revegetated and/or stabilized graded areas, the applicant is in violation of this ordinance. The Town may use the posted restoration assurance to restore the native vegetative community or complete the revegetation and stabilization per the approved grading plan.
        b. The applicant shall provide the Town with an assurance in a form approved by the Town (See Section 26.6) equal to 120 percent of the monetary amount necessary to hydroseed and revegetate cut/fill slopes or graded areas. Said assurance shall be posted prior to any site disturbance. The assurance shall be held until such time as the grading operation, infrastructure installation, building construction is completed to the satisfaction of the Town, or until such time as the project is deemed abandoned. If, after 12 months from the date of commencement of work, revegetation efforts fail to establish growth to the satisfaction of the Town, the Town may use the assurances to revegetate or apply other erosion control methods to cut/fill slopes or the graded area.
        c. Upon request by the applicant, an inspection will be performed by the Town for consideration of the release of the restoration assurance.
    3. Driveways 
    All driveways shall be paved with a durable asphalt, concrete, brick, aggregate, or other surface that will maintain a dust free condition.
    4. Slope Setbacks 
    The Town may increase the following slope setbacks, if considered necessary for safety or stability, or to prevent possible damage from water, soil, or debris:
        a. Top of cut slope: The top of cut slopes shall be made not nearer to a site boundary line than one-fifth (1/5) of the vertical height of cut, with a minimum of two (2) feet, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer and the Planning and Zoning Administrator and upon written consent from the adjacent property owner. The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains.
        b. Toe of fill slope: The toe of fill slope shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line than one-half (1/2) the height of the slope, with a minimum of two (2) feet, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer and the Planning and Zoning Administrator and upon written consent from the adjacent property owner.
        c. Building: Buildings shall be set back from the toe and top of slopes in accordance with the building codes (minimum five (5) feet, see Figure 27.9 – 1) and the approved soils report. In addition, the building setbacks of the applicable zoning district shall apply.
        d. Rights-of-way: The required setback of a slope toe adjacent to a public right-of-way may be reduced with the approval of the Town, if there will be no adverse effect and:
            i. Easements are not required, or
            ii. Retaining walls are used.
    5. Restriction of Slope Development 
        a. For the purposes of this section, a regulated slope is one that has a minimum vertical difference of six (6) feet from its toe to top edge, and the regulated sloped area extends for a distance greater than thirty (30) feet in any horizontal direction.
        b. New subdivisions shall not create lots where access to any individual lot requires crossing a naturally occurring slope that is twenty-five percent (25%) or steeper. Nor shall new subdivisions be created where the actual building area for homes or buildings would require grading activity on slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or steeper.
        c. The design for new subdivisions shall be created to avoid construction on naturally occurring slopes fifteen percent (15%) or greater. On parcels or lots with fifteen percent (15%) or steeper slopes, any grading on said slopes shall be consistent with restrictions in the Hillside Development Zone, Section 27.10.
    6. Erosion Control Systems 
        a. Permanent Systems 
            i. Permanent erosion control measures shall be implemented and property maintained to prevent erosion of slopes, and cleared, brushed, grubbed or graded areas.
            ii. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the native materials, erosion control may be omitted upon approval by the Town.
            iii. Stabilization devices to prevent erosion or sediment deposition on off-site property may be required by the Town.
            iv. The shoulders of a paved public or private roadway shall be protected against erosion wherever curbing or constructed spillways are not provided.
            v. Surface drainage:
                a) Cut and fill slopes shall be protected from erosion by surface drainage with appropriately designed methods (e.g., surface drainage interceptors);
                b) Drainage control shall be provided to keep drainage away from foundations;
                c) Any grading activities within a regulatory floodplain shall comply with the Oro Valley Floodplain Management Ordinance.
                d) Subsurface drainage: Should subsurface drainage be encountered or expected by the soils engineer or the Town, then appropriate measures shall be employed to ensure stability and protection of affected properties from ground water seepage. Methods used to minimize impact by subsurface drainage/seepage shall be approved by the Town prior to installation.
        b. Interim Systems: Plans for interim erosion control systems shall be submitted with all grading permit applications and shall be approved by the Town. Erosion control measures shall be implemented and properly maintained to prevent erosion of slopes, and cleared, brushed, grubbed or graded areas. Stabilization devices to prevent erosion or sediment deposition on adjacent roads and off-site property shall be required. The applicant shall be responsible for the control of dust emissions and shall use appropriate dust control measures. Applicants who are required to submit a U.S.E.P.A. Notice of Intent (NOI) for coverage under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) for their project shall provide a copy of the NOI and the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to the Town prior to issuance of a grading permit.
    7. Import and Export of Earth Material 
        a. Loading of earth material shall occur only within the time limits of subsection F.8 of this section, and dust emissions shall be controlled through appropriate dust control measures.
        b. The transportation of earth material on or across public rights-of-way shall be done in a manner that minimizes blowing soil and other hazards.
    8. Hours of Grading 
        a. Grading equipment operation within one-half (1/2) mile of an occupied residential structure shall only be conducted between 6:00 a.m. and sunset Monday through Friday. Grading equipment operation shall only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays.
        b. Equipment maintenance involving lights, motors, or generators, and occurring within six hundred (600) feet of an occupied residential structure, shall not be conducted after sunset, or before 6:00 a.m.
        c. The Town may allow grading equipment operation or maintenance during other hours, if such operations are not detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of surrounding properties.
        d. Permitted hours of operation or maintenance may be shortened by written notice to the permittee, if the Town finds a substantial adverse effect on the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding community.
    9. Phased Grading 
        a. Repealed by (O)11-15.
        b. For all projects ten (10) acres or larger requiring site plans, a phased grading concept plan may be required with the final site plan submittal. This plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer.
        c. In considering the phased grading plans, the Planning and Zoning Commission will review documentation and testimony leading to the following:
            i. A balance in cut and fills,
            ii. Efficient installation of infrastructure,
            iii. Minimal need for stockpiling earthen material for more than six (6) months,
            iv. Minimize the time that graded areas remain exposed, preferably not more than one (1) year.
    10. Restriction of Vehicles 
        a. No vehicles or equipment shall encroach onto areas designated to remain in a natural state on the approved final plat, development plan, grading, landscape, or native plant salvage plans.
        b. Points-of-entry to the site during grading shall be only as designated on the approved grading plan.
        c. Access roads to the site during grading shall be only as designated on the approved grading plan.
    11. Additional Requirements 
        a. During grading, and until revegetation or stabilization has taken place, dust shall be minimized through application of approved dust controls in accordance with subsection C of this section.
        b. Public rights-of-way, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be maintained during grading in a neat and clean condition, free of loose soil, mud, construction debris, and trash. Any damaged areas shall be restored to original appearance at no cost to the Town of Oro Valley.
        c. Debris, fill, or equipment shall not be stored within a public right-of-way without a right-of-way use permit from the Town.
        d. If applicable, archaeological exploration and mitigation work, as recommended by a qualified archaeologist (see Section 27.3.E.2), shall be performed prior to commencement of grading operations on the affected portion of the site. If, during the grading phase of construction, unexpected archaeological findings are encountered, said grading shall cease and the grading permit shall be temporarily suspended until the significance of said finding is determined and mitigation is provided by a qualified archaeologist. The analysis of any finds shall be provided to the Town prior to reactivation of the grading permit, granting occupancy permits or release of assurances. The expiration date of a reactivated grading permit may be extended for a period equal to the time of suspension necessary to complete archaeological work.
        e. Adjoining property(ies) shall be protected in such a manner as to prevent damage to said property(ies). Protection from caving, settlement, and other similar occurrences shall be the responsibility of the permittee (see Section 22.10.F.2, Liability).Figure 27.9 - 1. 
        [IMAGE: <OroValley27.9E11e.png>]Figure 27.9 - 1 (Continued). 
        [IMAGE: <OroValley27.9E11e2.png>]Figure 27.9 - 2 (A). 
        [IMAGE: <OroValley27.9E11e3.png>]Figure 27.9 - 2 (B). 
        [IMAGE: <OroValley27.9E11e4.png>]Figure 27.9 - 3. 
        [IMAGE: <OroValley27.9E11e5.png>]Figure 27.9 - 3 (continued). 
        [IMAGE: <OroValley27.9E11e6.png>]
((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)14-11, Amended,  10/01/2014; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)

Section 27.10 Environmentally Sensitive Lands
A. Purpose 
The environmentally sensitive lands (ESL) regulations implement the Oro Valley General Plan by conserving natural, scenic, hillside, and cultural resources. This has been accomplished in a comprehensive manner by accounting for environmental, archaeological and historic resources, economic development, and housing policies. These regulations protect the public health, safety and general welfare by:
    1. Conserving the Sonoran Desert and Heritage 
        a. Conserving the Town’s natural and cultural resources in a comprehensive manner.
        b. Utilizing current science of conservation biology and cultural resources treatment as represented in Pima County’s Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
        c. Providing the greatest degree of preservation for the richest and most diverse ESL resources, including those described as “significant resource areas,” and “key” and “essential” habitat in the General Plan.
        d. Enabling the long-term survival of native plants and animals by maintaining ecosystem functions necessary for their survival. Emphasis is placed on conserving landscape connections to ensure the continued viability of animal and plant communities.
        e. Managing public access and use of environmentally sensitive open spaces to maintain conservation value.
    2. Preserving Land Values 
        a. Recognizing the importance of natural, scenic, and cultural resource conservation in sustaining Oro Valley’s identity as a desired place to live, work, and visit.
        b. Ensuring conservation of the Sonoran Desert and scenic resources that enhance property values.
    3. Implementing Community Planning and Design Expectations 
        a. Developing a comprehensive ESL conservation system for the entire land area within Oro Valley in a manner that promotes interconnected open space.
        b. Planning for land conservation and sustainable development by identifying specific environmental resources and applying regulations that account for General Plan growth expectations.
        c. Enabling the conservation of wildlife habitat and other identified resources through context-sensitive site design.
        d. Utilizing flexible design tools to enable a range of housing opportunities to accommodate the varied needs of residents.
        e. Respecting efforts to ensure financial stability by establishing a diverse economy as specified in the Town’s Community Economic Development Strategy.
    4. Protecting Lives and Property 
    Protecting human life and property from recognized hazards including steep and unstable slopes and soils, flood and erosion hazards.
    5. Utilizing an Equitable Regulatory Approach 
        a. Applying new ESL regulations only to future rezonings and respecting existing development rights.
        b. Ensuring land use intensity and density can be achieved in harmony with conservation goals through the application of meaningful incentives and flexible development options.
        c. Providing opportunities for property owners not subject to ESL requirements to voluntarily opt in and thereby achieve greater zoning flexibility and conservation of environmental resources.
        Purpose statements specific to an individual ESL resource are provided in relevant sections herein. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
B. Applicability 
    1. General 
        a. The provisions of ESL only apply to properties where specified environmental conditions are identified on the ESL Planning Map or described herein.
        b. ESL regulates specific types of development applications at various stages of the development approval process as delineated below:
            i. All subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use permit, and permit applications subject to the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor, Tangerine Road Corridor Overlay Districts, and Cultural Resource Category shall comply with those respective requirements in subsection D.3 of this section.
            ii. Rezoning applications, including new PAD applications, shall be subject to all the provisions of the ESL conservation system. Applications to amend PADs or rezoning conditions in effect prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this section are subject to all requirements herein when the proposed amendment includes changes to density, intensity or use unless at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the site has been developed with infrastructure and finished building pads.ESL applicability to a proposed rezoning on Rancho Vistoso Blvd. and Vistoso Highland Dr.Applicability of the Environmentally Sensitive Lands requirements to a Stone Canyon Property
            iii. Information regarding the primary conservation categories (major wildlife linkage, critical resource area and core resource area) shall be considered as part of Type 1 and Type 2 General Plan amendment applications, in accordance with Section 22.2.
            iv. Type 1 and Type 2 General Plan amendment applications for property which has not been mapped for environmentally sensitive lands conservation categories shall include mapping for primary conservation categories (major wildlife linkage, critical resource area and core resource area).
            v. Conservation category mapping required by subsection B.1.b.iv of this section shall be completed in accordance with Addendum G and applicable provisions of this section. Following Town Council action on the General Plan amendment, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall administratively update the ESL Planning Map upon certification that the mapping was completed in accordance with this section.
        c. Once a property is rezoned and open space is conserved as provided herein, environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS) percentages may not be cumulatively reapplied a second time to property or subsequent parcel splits as part of any custom home, subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use permit, and/or off-site improvement permits.
        Rezoning on property previously subject to ESL will be evaluated by the Town Council on a case-by-case basis.
        d. All development activity on applicable properties shall comply with provisions specified in Table 27.10-1A or 27.10-1B, ESL applicability, respectively.
        e. Applicability is further established in each ESL section.
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        |      Section Title       | Code Section | Single-Family | Subdivision | Site Plan | Conditional |  Off-Site   |
        |        and Notes         |    27.10     | R1-300, 144,  |    Plat     |           | Use Permit  | Improvement |
        |                          |              |  43, 36, 20   |             |           |             |   Permit    |
        |                          |              | Custom Homes  |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        |                          |     ESLS     |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Application Incentive    | B.3          | Y             | Y           | Y         | Y           | N           |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Major Wildlife           | D.3.a        | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        | Linkage                  |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Critical Resource        | D.3.b        | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        | Areas                    |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Core Resource            | D.3.c        | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        | Areas                    |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Resource Management      | D.3.d        | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        | Areas                    |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Cultural Resources       | D.3.e        | N             | Y           | Y         | Y           | Y           |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Scenic Resources         | D.3.f        | Y             | Y           | Y         | Y           | N           |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Scenic Resource          | D.3.f ORSCOD | Y1            | Y1          | Y1        | Y           | N           |
        | Viewshed, Vegetation     |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | and Landscape            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Standards for            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Properties in            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | the Oracle Road          |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Scenic Corridor          |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Overlay District.        |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | 1 See Section            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | D.3.f.iv.a for           |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Specific Information     |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Scenic Resource          | D.3.f TCOD   | Y2            | Y2          | Y2        | Y           | N           |
        | Viewshed, Vegetation     |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | and Landscape            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Standards for            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Properties in            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | the Tangerine            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Corridor Overlay         |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | District.                |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | 2 See Section            |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | D.3.f.iv.a for           |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Specific Information     |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | ORSCOD Standards         | D.3.f.vi.a   | Y1            | Y           | Y         | Y           | Y           |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | TRCOD Standards          | D.3.f.vi.b   | Y2            | Y           | Y         | Y           | Y           |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Scenic Resources         | Addendum     | Y             | Y           | Y         | Y           | Y           |
        | design guidelines        | H            |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Hillside Area            | D.3.g        | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        | Category                 |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Hillside Development     | Addendum     | Y             | Y           | Y         | Y           | N           |
        | Zone                     | I.1          |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Open Space Requirements  | E.1 – 4      | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Riparian Habitat         | Addendum     | Y             | Y           | Y         | Y           | Y           |
        | Overlay Ordinance        | I.2          |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | ESOS Use and Development | F.1          | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        | Standards                |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Development Balance      | F.24         | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        | and Incentives           |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | 4 Only Available         |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | When ESLS Is             |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        | Applied to Property      |              |               |             |           |             |             |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | ESOS Design Standards    | F.3          | N             | N           | N         | N           | N           |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        | Mitigation               | G.1 – 6      | Y             | Y           | Y         | Y           | Y           |
        +--------------------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Section Title and Notes  | Code Section 27.10 | Rezoning or Certain | General Plan Amendment |
        |                          |                    |   PAD Amendments1   |                        |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | ESLS                     |                    |                     |                        |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Application Incentive    | B.3                | N                   | N                      |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Major Wildlife Linkage   | D.3.a              | Y                   | Y1                     |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Critical Resource Areas  | D.3.b              | Y                   | Y1                     |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Core Resource Areas      | D.3.c              | Y                   | Y1                     |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Resource Management      | D.3.d              | Y                   | N                      |
        | Areas                    |                    |                     |                        |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Cultural Resources       | D.3.e              | Y                   | N                      |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Scenic Resources         | D.3.f              | Y                   | N                      |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Hillside Area Category   | D.3.g              | Y                   | N                      |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Hillside Development     | Addendum I.1       | N                   | N                      |
        | Zone                     |                    |                     |                        |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Open Space Requirements  | E.1 – 4            | Y                   | N                      |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Riparian Habitat Overlay | Addendum I.2       | N                   | N                      |
        | Zone                     |                    |                     |                        |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | ESOS Use and Development | F.1                | Y                   | N                      |
        | Standards                |                    |                     |                        |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Development Balance      | F.2                | Y                   | N                      |
        | and Incentives           |                    |                     |                        |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | ESOS Design Standards    | F.3                | Y                   | N                      |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        | Mitigation               | G.1 – 6            | Y                   | N                      |
        +--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+------------------------+
        1 Information regarding primary conservation categories (major wildlife linkage, critical resource area and core resource area) shall be considered as part of Type 1 and Type 2 General Plan amendment applications, in accordance with Section 22.2.
    2. Exceptions 
        a. This section does not apply retroactively to any development, residential or commercial, with an approved site plan or final plat prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section.
        Applications for a conditional use permit, site plan or preliminary plat for properties with zoning established prior to July 19, 2011, are exempt from the ESL conservation category open space requirements, Hillside Area category, ESOS use and conservation development, and mitigation requirements. In this case, the Hillside and Riparian Habitat Overlay District regulations in effect at the time of ESL adoption (included in Addendum H, Original Code Sections) must be utilized unless the property owner chooses to use ESL provisions, as provided herein.
        b. This section does not apply to PADs and PAD amendments approved by the Town Council prior to July 19, 2011. However, specific provisions and regulations in place prior to ESL adoption including Oracle and Tangerine Scenic Corridors, Riparian Habitat Overlay District, and cultural resource requirements continue to apply to PADs and PAD amendments approved prior to the adoption of the ESL conservation system.
    3. ESL Application Incentive for Properties Not Subject to All ESL Requirements 
        a. The development regulations in any zoning district may be modified, as provided in subsection F of this section, if the property owner develops in accordance with Table 27.10-1B and all applicable provisions of subsections E and F of this section. This includes nonrezoning and non-PAD projects where compliance would not otherwise be required.
        b. Such modifications to development regulations may only be granted in conjunction with the applicability provisions in subsection F.2.b of this section and the process specified in subsection F.2.c of this section. ((O)17-01, Amended,  01/18/2017; (O)13-19, Amended,  09/18/2013; (O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
C. Environmentally Sensitive Lands (ESL) Regulations and Maps 
    1. ESL Resource Identification 
    ESL regulations address properties where specific environmental conditions exist. The ESL maps, which are available at the Oro Valley Planning Division, have two (2) components: the Resource Science Map and the ESL Planning Map.
    2. Adopted ESL Maps 
        a. Resource Science Map 
            i. Elements 
            Resource Science Maps identify the location of conservation categories that include specific resources as defined herein. Resource types include wildlife corridors, riparian areas, distinct vegetation, and critical habitats.
            Known, biologically based, sensitive resources and associated conservation categories are consistent with Pima County’s Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan. Each has been identified in Oro Valley through field review by resource professionals.
            ii. Usage 
            The Resource Science Map is not a regulatory land use map. It is the basis for creating and maintaining the regulatory ESL Planning Map.
            If an amendment to the ESL Planning Map is approved containing changes to the location of sensitive resources, the Resource Science Map shall be administratively updated by the Town as necessary.
        b. ESL Planning Map 
            i. Elements 
            The Planning Map is constructed by merging the Resource Science Map with adopted General Plan land use and growth area designations. Six (6) categories, each corresponding to specific conservation requirements in these regulations, are identified on the Planning Map including: major wildlife linkage; critical resource area; core resource area; resource management area-1; resource management area-2; and resource management area-3.
            The resource management area category, in response to adopted land use policy, specifies three (3) levels of conservation based on planned growth patterns. Each is further described in subsection D.3 of this section.
            ii. Usage 
            The ESL Planning Map is a regulatory land use map that shall be applied to relevant development applications and properties as outlined in subsection B of this section, Applicability.
        c. Existing Overlay District Maps Adopted Prior to the ESL Regulations 
            i. Elements 
            The Existing Overlay Maps include the Riparian Habitat Overlay District, Tangerine Road Corridor Overlay District, and the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Overlay District.
            ii. Usage 
            The Overlay District elements remain as a regulatory land use map that shall be applied to relevant development applications and properties as outlined in subsection B of this section, Applicability.
    3. Unmapped Resources 
        a. The adopted ESL maps do not include the following environmentally sensitive resource categories: scenic resource areas, cultural resources and hillside areas. Identification and conservation of these three (3) resource types are addressed in subsection D of this section.
        b. Minor wildlife linkages, rock outcrop locations, and areas of distinct vegetation shall be identified as part of the development application review (rezoning and conceptual site plan, as applicable) process. Discovery of these resource types requires their conservation in accordance with subsection D of this section, Table 27.10-2.
    4. ESL Map Amendments 
        a. If the location and quality of environmentally sensitive resources naturally change over time to the extent that resource threshold criteria are not achieved, or resources have been mapped incorrectly, a request for ESL Planning Map amendment may be filed in accordance with Section 22.3, Amendments and Rezonings.
        b. Mapping of resources shall be performed by a qualified specialist in habitat biology, as defined in Chapter 31. All evaluative work shall be completed in accordance with these regulations. The specialist shall certify in writing that the identification of resources was completed in accordance with these regulations.
        c. Any approved General Plan amendment that results in changes to the land use or growth area designations shall require a map amendment to the corresponding resource management area category(ies) in Table 27.10-3. ESL map changes reflecting an adopted General Plan amendment shall be approved administratively. ((O)13-19, Amended,  09/18/2013; (O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
D. Environmentally Sensitive Lands Conservation System 
    1. Conservation System 
    ESL represents an interconnected system of resource conservation. The components of the system include seven (7) distinct categories for the purpose of conserving resources as open space. Key and essential biological resources are included in four (4) ESL categories:
        a. Major wildlife linkage;
        b. Critical resource;
        c. Core resource; and
        d. Resource management.
    Environmentally sensitive resource categories that are nonbiologically based include:
        e. Cultural resources;
        f. Scenic resources; and
        g. Hillside areas.
    2. Categories 
    Each category includes distinct definitions and requirements that shall be applied independently when multiple categories occur on a site.
    3. Conservation Categories 
    ESL conservation system categories and related conservation requirements are listed below.
        a. Major Wildlife Linkage (MWL) Category 
            i. General 
            Major wildlife linkages include identified large mammal corridors or landscape linkages between public preserves and open spaces.
            ii. Conservation 
                a) Major wildlife linkage areas shall be conserved as environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS) in accordance with Table 27.10-2. ESOS is defined in Chapter 31 and further described in subsection E.1 of this section.
                b) The required percentage of ESOS shall be applied to areas identified on the ESL Planning Map.
            iii. Resource Science and Identification 
                a) Major wildlife linkages provide essential connectivity that maintains the viability of the areas’ habitat by providing for dispersal, migration, and genetic transfer for wildlife and plants.
                b) In order to maximize wildlife movement within identified corridors, these corridors must be maintained as natural open space linkages with ground disturbance strictly limited to provisions in subsection F.1 of this section.
                c) MWLs include the Santa Catalina-Tortolita Mountains linkage, riparian areas, upland linkages and identified regional roadway crossings.
        b. Critical Resource Area (CRA) Category 
            i. General 
            The critical resource area open space category includes the following environmentally sensitive resources as defined herein.
                a) Riparian areas and minor wildlife linkages
                b) Major rock outcrops and boulders
                c) Distinctive habitat resource
            ii. Conservation 
                a) Critical resource areas shall be conserved as environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS) in accordance with Table 27.10-2. ESOS is defined in Chapter 31 and further described in Section E.1.
                b) The required percentage of ESOS shall be applied to areas identified on the ESL Planning Map and field verified boundaries of major rock outcrops and boulders. Major rock outcrops and boulders are subject to discovery on a site-by-site basis.
                c) Degraded or disturbed riparian segments within areas identified on the ESL Planning Map must be restored and enhanced to support their biological, hydrologic and geomorphologic functions. These areas will be credited as follows:
                    1) Restoration areas will be applied toward total ESOS requirements.
                    2) A proportional area will be exempt from Native Plant Salvage and Mitigation requirements in Section 27.6B. This does not apply to any plant listed as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act or highly safeguarded by the Arizona Department of Agriculture.
                d) ESOS shall be configured and maintained in accordance with subsections E and F of this section.
            iii. Resource Science and Identification 
                a) Riparian Areas and Minor Wildlife Linkages 
                    1) Riparian areas are an essential element of the Town’s environmentally sensitive lands and constitute the framework for the linkages and landscape connections necessary to support a viable ecosystem and wildlife habitat.
                    2) Riparian areas occur in association with a spring, cienega, lake, water course, river, stream, creek, wash, arroyo, or other body of water, either surface or sub-surface, or any channel having banks and beds through which water flows, at least periodically.
                    3) Identification of riparian areas is based on species composition, general density/size, vegetation volume, wildlife habitat, nutrient cycling, erosion control, water quality, and flood moderation. Specifications are provided in Addendum G, Section 1.
                    4) Minor wildlife linkages are composed of upland areas and degraded riparian areas. Degraded areas include hardened drainage ways and constricting drainage structures. These minor links are important in maintaining connectivity within the open space system identified in the ESL.
                b) Major Rock Outcrops and Boulders 
                    1) Rock outcrops and boulders are comprised of exposed bedrock formations and boulder piles and scatters with a minimum size of one hundred (100) square feet as measured horizontally, and a minimum of ten (10) vertical feet.
                    2) Rock outcrops and boulders provide wildlife habitat and afford thermal regulation for wildlife, particularly reptiles.
                    3) Outcrops and boulders are also a significant scenic resource.
                    4) Rock outcrop and boulder features shall be identified in the Site Resource Inventory (Section 27.6.B.3) and clearly delineated on site plans and subdivision plats.
                c) Distinct Habitat Resources 
                “Distinct habitat resources” include the following habitat elements:
                    1) Natural caves, crevices, or mine shafts with a minimum cavity area of two hundred twenty (220) cubic feet (approximately six (6) feet by six (6) feet by six (6) feet). Excavations or test pits are not included.
                    2) Groundwater seeps, whether intermittent or perennial.
        c. Core Resource Area (COR) Category 
            i. General 
            Core resource areas include the following environmentally sensitive resources as defined herein.
                a) Pima County Conservation Lands System, biological core management areas adopted by the Board of Supervisors, June 2005.
                b) Special status species habitat supporting five (5) or more priority vulnerable species.
                c) Distinctive native plant stands.
            ii. Conservation 
                a) Core resource areas shall be conserved as environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS) in accordance with Table 27.10-2. ESOS is defined in Chapter 31 and further described in subsection E.1 of this section.
                b) The required percentage of ESOS shall be applied to areas identified on the ESL Planning Map and field verified locations of distinctive native plant stands.
                c) ESOS shall be configured and maintained in accordance with subsections E.1 and F of this section.
            iii. Resource Science and Identification 
                a) Core resource area open spaces support biological diversity by conserving recognized wildlife habitat. Core resource areas include all areas designated biological core management area by the Pima County Conservation Lands System and areas identified by field review and evaluation by resource professionals.
                b) Core resource areas may contain significant stands of vegetation that support biological diversity and are integral to the Town’s distinctive character.
                c) Special status species habitats, as defined in Addendum G, Section 2, that include five (5) or more vulnerable species targeted for conservation.
                d) Distinctive Native Plant Stands 
                Distinctive native plant stands are areas of native vegetation that exist in contrast to the majority of the surrounding vegetative community due to either microclimates or availability of water sources. Section 27.6.B.3.b.i includes defining criteria.
        d. Resource Management Area (RMA) Category 
            i. General 
                a) Special status species habitat supporting three (3) or more priority vulnerable species.
                b) The RMA category is divided into three (3) areas merging resource science with adopted future land use designations and intensities as specified in the General Plan. Table 27.10-3 indicates the three RMA areas and associated General Plan land use designations.
                c) Distinctive individual native plants.
                d) Minor rock outcrops or boulders.
            ii. Conservation 
                a) The resource management area category supports utilization of identified lands based on planned land use intensities consistent with the General Plan while requiring minimum levels of sensitive land conservation.
                b) The RMA category specifies minimum ESOS amounts for each area. Table 27.10-3 indicates ESOS requirements by land use designation. ESOS is defined in Chapter 31 and further described in subsection E.1 of this section.
                c) The required percentage of ESOS shall be applied to areas identified on the ESL Planning Map and field verified boundaries of minor rock outcrops and boulders and distinctive individual native plants. Major rock outcrops and boulders and distinctive individual native plants are subject to discovery on a site-by-site basis.
                d) ESOS shall be configured and maintained in accordance with the requirements of subsections E and F of this section.
            iii. Resource Science and Identification 
            The resource management area category merges environmentally sensitive resources and public policy:
                a) Special status species habitats, as defined in Addendum G, Section 2, that include three (3) or more vulnerable species targeted for conservation.
                b) The resource management area (RMA) category couples refined mapping of Pima County multiple use management areas with the adopted land use policies of the General Plan.
                c) Criteria in Addendum G, Section 3, were used to refine mapping of Pima County multiple use management areas.
                d) A distinctive native plant refers to any native tree, shrub, or cacti with extraordinary characteristics such as, but not limited to, age, size, shape, form, canopy cover, or aesthetic value. Further definition is provided in Section 27.6.B.3.b.i.
                e) Minor Rock Outcrops and Boulders 
                    1) Minor rock outcrops and boulders are comprised of exposed bedrock formations and boulder piles and scatters with a minimum size of one hundred (100) square feet as measured horizontally, and a minimum of three (3) vertical feet.
                    2) Rock outcrops and boulders provide wildlife habitat and afford thermal regulation for wildlife, particularly reptiles.
                    3) Rock outcrop and boulder features shall be identified in the Site Resource Inventory and shall be clearly delineated on site plans and subdivision plats.
                    +----------------------------+-------------------------+
                    |          Category          | Minimum ESOS Percentage |
                    +----------------------------+-------------------------+
                    | Major Wildlife Linkage     | 100                     |
                    +----------------------------+-------------------------+
                    | Critical Resource Area     | 95                      |
                    +----------------------------+-------------------------+
                    | Core Resource Area         | 80                      |
                    +----------------------------+-------------------------+
                    | Resource Management Area-1 | 66                      |
                    +----------------------------+-------------------------+
                    | Resource Management Area-2 | 25                      |
                    +----------------------------+-------------------------+
                    | Resource Management Area-3 | 0                       |
                    +----------------------------+-------------------------+
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    |     RMA Areas     |         Area 1          |        Area 2        |    Area 3    |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | Minimum ESOS      | 66%                     | 25%                  | 0%           |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | General Plan Land | Rural Low Density       | Neighborhood         | Growth Areas |
                    | Use Designation   | Residential             | Commercial /         |              |
                    |                   | 0 – 0.3                 | Office               |              |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | "                 | Low Density Residential | Community / Regional | "            |
                    |                   | 0.4 – 1.2               | Commercial           |              |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | "                 | Low Density Residential | Commercial /         | "            |
                    |                   | 1.3 – 2.0               | Office Park          |              |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | "                 | Resort/Golf Course      | High Density         | "            |
                    |                   |                         | Residential          |              |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | "                 | Open Space              | Medium Density       | "            |
                    |                   |                         | Residential          |              |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | "                 | School, Park            | Public/Semi Public   | "            |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | "                 | "                       | MPC Rooney           | "            |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
                    | "                 | "                       | MPC Kai Capri        | "            |
                    +-------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+--------------+
        e. Cultural Resources Category 
        “Cultural resources,” as defined in Chapter 31, include a variety of historic sites and buildings, prehistoric sites, archaeological sites and supporting materials and records.
            i. Purpose 
            The cultural resources category is intended to:
                a) Implement the Town’s General Plan goals and policies for conservation of cultural resources; and
                b) Protect cultural resources that are recognized to have enduring value in advancing education, general welfare, civic pride and appreciation of the Town’s heritage in order to perpetuate the unique character of Oro Valley; and
                c) Establish regulatory criteria for the identification, assessment and protection of significant cultural resources; and
                d) Prevent or reduce adverse impacts to significant cultural resource sites by employing treatments that range from in-place preservation to various degrees of mitigation; and
                e) Integrate cultural resources in the environmentally sensitive lands system to provide for the conservation of significant cultural resources in concert with other sensitive resources.
            ii. Mapping 
            To protect sensitive sites, archaeological resources shall not be included on maps for general public distribution. Environmentally sensitive lands system maps do not include the location of cultural resource sites.
            iii. Applicability 
            This section shall apply to all development which requires a rezoning, preliminary plat, site plan or amendment to these items. Associated off-site development and ancillary construction (utility trenches, water and sewage treatment facilities, roads, etc.) will be treated in the same manner.
            iv. Conservation Strategies 
                a) Cultural resources may occur individually or in combination with other environmentally sensitive resources. Conservation of significant cultural resources shall be applied through one (1) of the following three (3) strategies:
                    1) Preserved in Place: significant resources shall be preserved in place in order to protect the cultural or historic value of the resource as specified in the approved treatment plan; or
                    2) Combination: significant resources shall be partially preserved in place and partially mitigated as provided in the approved treatment plan; or
                    3) Treatment: significant resources shall be reused or mitigated as prescribed by the approved treatment plan, allowing reuse of the site.
                b) A conservation strategy shall be assigned by:
                    1) Determination of significance.
                    2) Agency review comments.
                    3) Evaluation in relation to other environmentally sensitive resources.
                    4) Development and acceptance of a treatment plan.
            v. Review Procedures 
                a) A cultural resource professional shall perform a records search of all cultural resource records of the State Historic Preservation Office, the Arizona State Museum, AZSITE archaeological resource database and the Town of Oro Valley Cultural Resources Inventory to determine whether any surveys have been completed for the property.
                b) A cultural resources survey and inventory report that meets the Town of Oro Valley submittal requirements shall be prepared by the Planning and Zoning Administrator appointed cultural resource professional if:
                    1) Records indicate no cultural resource surveys of the subject property have been completed; or
                    2) Surveys of the property are more than ten (10) years old and sites were recorded in the survey; or
                    3) The existing survey and report lack sufficient information to determine significance in accordance with subsection D.3.e.v.e of this section; or
                    4) The Arizona State Museum recommends an updated survey.
                c) If the survey indicates there are no cultural resources present at the site or the resources are determined not significant in accordance with subsection D.3.e.v.e of this section, the review process is complete.
                d) If a new or updated survey is required, an appropriate cultural resource professional must complete the survey and treatment plan, as necessary.
                    1) If resources are present, the survey shall include a recommendation, based on the criteria contained in this section, regarding National Register and local cultural resource significance and integrity.
                    2) If significant resources are present, a cultural resource professional with appropriate specialization must develop a treatment plan for the specific resource.
                e) Determination of Significance and Integrity 
                    1) The list of known significant cultural resources maintained by the Town of Oro Valley shall be consulted. Identified resources are subject to requirements in this subsection D.3.e.
                    2) For unevaluated resources or when significance is undetermined, the determination of significance shall be based upon the evaluation of National Register and local community criteria.
                        A) National Register criteria shall be applied to determine eligibility for listing in the National and State registers of historic places in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, and the Arizona State Historic Preservation Act of 1982, as amended.
                        B) Local community criteria are used to identify sites which are important to a local group or the Oro Valley community, or a place of ancestral occupation or activity of recognized value.
                Cultural resources are locally significant if the resource is preserved in a condition of scientific integrity and the property or resources contribute to:
                i) The unique identity of the community; or
                ii) The enhancement of community economic, educational or recreational needs; or
                iii) The understanding of the unique religious, mythological, or social character of a discrete population within or outside the community.
                    3) Determination of Significance 
                        A) A determination of significance may only be made by a cultural resource professional.
                        B) The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall review the determination to ensure all appropriate resources surveyed and criteria have been addressed.
                        C) If the determination is deemed inadequate, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall consult the State Historic Preservation Office and may also consult another cultural resource professional for a new determination of significance.
                        D) The process to determine resource significance must be completed within forty-five (45) days of a complete development review application submittal.
                        E) Once a determination is accepted by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, the cultural resource professional shall submit a treatment plan prepared in accordance with subsection D.3.e.v.f of this section.
                f) Treatment Plan 
                    1) The treatment plan shall meet all submittal requirements and the following requirements:
                        A) Address specific findings and provide details of and justification for the conservation strategy that is proposed, as defined in subsection E.4 of this section.
                        B) Define a plan to protect preserved-in-place resources during construction and/or promote data recovery through a documentation plan for those resources which will be mitigated or removed.
                        C) Employ tools which will result in the permanent protection of significant resources including, but not limited to, conservation tract, dedication to stewardship organization or public displays.
                        D) Develop a specific treatment plan implementation schedule in concert with the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the applicant to ensure resource conservation and necessary flexibility.
                        E) Identify an organization that will assume long-term stewardship responsibility for significant cultural resources by managing preserved-in-place resources or documenting and conducting further study of resources that are mitigated or removed.
                        F) Recommend the appropriate methods to ensure public education and access, if appropriate, to the cultural resources.
                        G) Provide a benefit to the immediate community, broader stakeholders, or academic community that is commensurate with the significance of the cultural resource.
                    2) Phased Developments:
                        A) The treatment plan shall incorporate the entire development. The implementation of the approved treatment plan may occur incrementally for each phase that contains cultural resources.
                        B) In the event that the impact to a cultural resource site spans more than one (1) development phase, implementation shall address all phases of work at the site.
                g) Treatment Plan Review and Decisions 
                    1) The Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve the treatment plan upon consideration of the following:
                        A) Recommendations of the Cultural Resource Professional and State Historic Preservation Office.
                        B) Provisions for specific cultural resources within local and regional plans accepted by the Town which include, but are not limited to, the Oro Valley Cultural Resources Preservation Plan and Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
                        C) Nature, condition and extent of other environmentally sensitive lands to optimize conservation of all resources.
                    2) Prior to Town Council review of a development application specified in subsection D.3.e.iii of this section, or permitting of development, earthwork, construction, remodeling, change or alteration of any proposed or existing project, the property owner or his/her designated agent shall secure approval of the treatment plan.
                    3) The Town of Oro Valley process to approve a treatment plan must be complete within thirty (30) days of formal State Historic Preservation comment.
            vi. General Requirements 
                a) Cultural Resource Professional 
                    1) All cultural resources research, surveys and treatment plans shall be conducted by a cultural resource professional.
                    2) Secretary of Interior standards for professional qualification must be satisfied.
                    3) The cultural resource professional utilized must be selected by the applicant from a pre-qualification list maintained by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
                b) Disturbance 
                    1) No physical disturbance of an unevaluated site shall be permitted, including artifact collection or excavation.
                    2) No disturbance of significant cultural resource sites shall be permitted unless specifically indicated in the approved treatment plan.
                    3) Cultural resources that are to be preserved in place shall be protected during development activities by the manner specified in the treatment plan.
                c) Discoveries 
                    1) If any unrecorded cultural resources are encountered during the grading/excavation process, all work shall cease in the immediate vicinity of the resources and a qualified archaeologist shall be consulted to assess the significance of the resources and prepare recommendations in accordance with the review process specified in subsection D.3.e.v of this section.
                    2) If a treatment plan is required, it shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with subsection D.3.e.v.f of this section.
                    3) Treatment Plan Review and Decisions 
                        A) Construction may proceed in other areas of the site during the review process in a manner that ensures protection of a cultural resource discovery.
                        B) Disclosure of information regarding the location and nature of the cultural resources shall be restricted, except as required for avoidance and protection of the resource.
                        C) A determination of significance and/or completion of a treatment plan shall be accomplished within twenty (20) days of discovery notice to the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
                d) Treatment of Human Remains 
                    1) If human remains are known to exist on the site or are discovered in the course of construction, an agreement for the treatment of the human remains shall be developed with the Arizona State Museum (ASM) and appropriate cultural groups pursuant to A.R.S. Sections 41-844 and 41-865.
                    2) The agreement shall be established prior to any archaeological investigation.
                    3) The property owner shall comply with State and Federal laws regarding the treatment of human remains, even if a treatment plan has been approved.
                e) Prior to issuance of any Town permits, consultation with the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) shall be completed if the development:
                    1) Occurs on Federal or State land; or
                    2) Receives funding from a Federal, State, or County agency; or
                    3) Arises from circumstances dictated by Federal or State regulation; and
                    4) Is subject to review as specified herein.
                f) Excavations on Public Property 
                    1) No individual shall be allowed to use a probe, metal detector or any other device to search or excavate for artifacts on public property, nor can any individual remove artifacts from public property without the written permission of the Town.
                    2) No disturbance or construction activities shall be authorized within the properties belonging to the Town, including public streets and rights-of-way, without a Town permit and compliance with the requirements of this section.
                g) Conservation credit for significant cultural resources under the environmentally sensitive lands system.
                    1) Land designated as ESOS and a protected cultural resources site in accordance with an approved treatment plan shall qualify as required ESOS on a one to three (1:3) basis (each square foot of cultural resource site shall equal three (3) square feet of required ESOS).
                    2) The area to be preserved in perpetuity shall be accurately indicated in the treatment plan prior to its approval.
                    3) Only areas within the cultural resource site, as identified in the treatment plan, are eligible for the ESOS credit.
            vii. Appeals and Reviews 
                a) Within twenty (20) days of a decision, the applicant may appeal a determination of significance to the Historic Preservation Commission when local community review criteria are the sole source of analysis. An appeal of a determination based on National Register criteria is strictly subject to State and/or Federal review.
                b) The applicant may appeal the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s approval or denial of a treatment plan to the Historic Preservation Commission within twenty (20) days of a decision.
                c) A hearing on an appeal shall be scheduled within thirty (30) calendar days of the request. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a hearing and may approve, disapprove, approve with stipulations or remand the case for additional analysis.
                d) Notice of the hearing shall be posted on the property at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing.
                e) The Historic Preservation Commission may review any treatment plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. In order to overturn the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s approval, the Historic Preservation Commission is required to find an abuse of discretion on the part of the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The Historic Preservation Commission may subsequently uphold, modify or overrule the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s determination.
                Notice of Historic Preservation Commission review shall be initiated within fifteen (15) days after the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s approval in writing to the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Failure of the Historic Preservation Commission to make a timely review results in the decision of the Planning and Zoning Administrator deemed to be final, with an appeal to the Town Council available to the applicant.
                In the event the HPC timely initiates their appeal, the applicant will be notified within an additional fifteen (15) days of the time and place for the hearing. Review by the HPC shall be completed within thirty (30) days of initiation by the Historic Preservation Commission or the decision of the Planning and Zoning Administrator is deemed to be final, with an appeal to the Town Council available to the applicant.
                f) The applicant may appeal the Historic Preservation Commission decision on a determination of significance or a treatment plan to the Town Council within twenty (20) days of the Historic Preservation Commission decision.
                g) The Town Council shall have the right and prerogative to initiate its own review of any decision of the Historic Preservation Commission and shall uphold, modify or overrule said decision. Notice of Town Council-initiated review shall be given to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after action upon the application in question or the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be deemed to be final and binding upon the Town.
        f. Scenic Resources Category 
            i. Purpose 
            The Scenic Resources Category implements the Town’s General Plan by providing protection for scenic corridors, public park viewsheds, and the distinctive visual character of Oro Valley. These regulations and guidelines serve to conserve views to scenic features including the ridgelines, hillsides, peaks and foothills of the Santa Catalina, Tortolita, and more distant mountain ranges that contribute to the Town’s valued scenic character.
            ii. Scenic Resource Conservation Areas Established 
            Scenic resources within the Town are identified and designated for conservation. Each scenic resource includes requirements intended to conserve the scenic qualities of the Town as observed from Oracle and Tangerine Roads. Scenic Resource Conservation Areas function to direct development design to conserve scenic views across private property.
            The Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Overlay District and the Tangerine Corridor Overlay District regulations are substantively the same as the versions originally adopted in 1995 and 1997. The procedural requirements for implementing these ordinances are included in subsection B of this section.
            iii. Applicability 
            Applicability of Scenic Resource requirements is unique to both Oracle and Tangerine Roads. Specifics for Oracle Road are provided in subsection D.3.f.vi.a.1.A of this section and Tangerine Road in subsection D.3.f.vi.b.2.A of this section.
            iv. Viewshed and Vegetation Analysis 
                a) Viewshed Evaluation 
                Evaluation of scenic qualities is required for all development proposals within scenic corridors, unless expressly waived by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Regulations may be waived if the character of the site and terrain renders such analysis as not beneficial to the Town.
                Identification of views, particularly the immediate foreground of the subject property and significant background mountain views of the Catalinas, Tortolitas and Tucson Mountains, shall be undertaken for any applicable proposal, including rezonings or subdivision plats, on each development site with suggested methods for alleviating adverse visual impacts of any structure visible from applicable areas.
                    1) Viewshed Analysis 
                        A) A viewshed analysis of vistas across the site, including any view corridors to the mountains, shall be prepared. A set of not fewer than twelve (12) different photographs, taken from the roadway frontage corners of the property and at intervals of not more than fifty (50) feet between and properly labeled, shall be submitted, as defined herein, to document existing visual resources on and across the proposed development site.
                        B) For public parks, photographs are to be taken from the approximate center of the park and from a point representing the average topographic elevation. The angle required is one looking from this point and across the proposed development site. The photo(s) shall be prepared to document existing viewshed conditions. The Planning and Zoning Administrator can require additional photographs in order to adequately document existing conditions.
                    2) View Preservation Plan (VPP) 
                        A) A VPP is required for nonresidential developments with a proposed FAR (floor area ratio) of 0.2 or greater and for any developments with building heights proposed to exceed eighteen (18) feet from natural grade, existing or proposed road profile grade at the right-of-way or eighteen (18) feet above the elevation of the closest park boundary.
                        B) A narrative and viewshed analysis photographs with proposed structures superimposed on the existing landscape or accurate computer graphic renderings that depict impacts to scenic views across the site as viewed from scenic roadway corridors or public parks are required. These exhibits shall demonstrate methods for assuring that driveways, parking areas and structures are constructed in a manner compatible with the natural terrain and scenic qualities of the site.
                        Written and illustrative materials shall be provided by the applicant in response to the regulations and guidelines pertaining to the intended type and intensity of development. Mapping may be based on aerial photographs or base maps, with overlays if desired, prepared at an appropriate scale to illustrate the vegetation and other resources on the site, as well as proposed plans and solutions.
                            i) At a minimum, written materials shall include:
                                A) Proposed use(s) and accessory use(s).
                                B) Building height and bulk.
                                C) Principal building materials and colors.
                                D) Intended architectural theme.
                            ii) At a minimum, one (1) or more graphic exhibits, not less than eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches in size, shall depict locations of:
                                A) Proposed structures, drives and parking areas.
                                B) Topography at two (2) foot intervals.
                                C) Frontage tract and other areas where vegetation or other resources are to be preserved.
                                D) Only lands that are visible from identified scenic resource areas, scenic corridors and public parks can be included in the protected viewshed.Figure 27.10-1. VPP Graphic Exhibit Example
                                [IMAGE: <27-10-1.png>]
                b) Vegetation Identification 
                    1) Identification of corridor character vegetation (CCV) is required for all development applications within scenic corridors unless expressly waived by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
                    2) Corridor character vegetation (CCV) includes all saguaros or groupings of existing plants that provide visual screening, and tree species as specified below with a trunk diameter greater than six (6) inches, measured at a point two (2) feet above the ground, or a cluster of three (3) or more trees located within ten (10) feet of each other with trunk diameters of more than two (2) inches.
                    3) Tree species included as CCV are: Blue palo verde (Cercidium floridum), Littleleaf palo verde (Cercidium microphyllum), Velvet mesquite (Prosopsis juliflora), ironwood (Olneya tesota), Desert willow (Chilopsis linearis), Catclaw acacia (Acacia greggii), Sweet acacia (Acacia minuta), Netleaf hackberry (Celtis reticulata), and Velvet ash (Franxinus velutina).
                    4) Areas of distinct vegetation as defined in Native Plant Preservation, Salvage and Mitigation, Section 27.6.B, that exist within the established scenic resource conservation area are included as CCV.
                    5) Areas of distinct vegetation and CCV shall be inventoried in accordance with the requirements established in Section 27.6.B, Native Plant Preservation, Salvage and Mitigation.
            v. Vegetation and Landscape Treatment 
            All properties and land use categories within scenic corridors are subject to the following regulations for purposes of vegetation preservation and landscape development. Exceptions or additional requirements are noted within individual scenic corridors. These regulations and guidelines apply in addition to general Oro Valley landscape conservation requirements.
                a) Vegetation Preservation Site Planning 
                    1) Areas of the site where all corridor character vegetation (CCV), including under-story, is preserved are not subject to additional landscape requirements of the Oro Valley Landscape Conservation Code, Section 27.6; however, a landscape plan prepared in accordance with Section 27.6 is required. Where under-story is to be cleared or existing trees are to be trimmed, the appropriate requirements of Section 27.6, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, shall be complied with.
                    2) In cases where an area has previously been substantially disturbed or has little CCV to preserve, the landscape treatment requirements of Section 27.6.C shall apply.
                    3) Except for clearing necessary to provide utilities and access to the site, no CCV shall be removed within a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the dedicated right-of-way line of Oracle Road (Figure 27.10-2), or fifty (50) feet from the dedicated right-of-way line of Tangerine Road without prior Planning and Zoning Commission approval. No development, other than additional landscaping, is permitted within this CCV preservation zone (see subsections D.3.f.vi.a and D.3.f.vi.b of this section for additional landscaping requirements specific to land use type).
                    4) Where no CCV exists, no one hundred (100) foot or fifty (50) foot CCV preservation zone, as described above, is required. The preservation zone is required only along those frontage areas where CCV exists, as defined in subsection D.3.f.iv.b of this section.
                    5) Washes with runoff volumes greater than five hundred (500) cubic feet per second during the one hundred (100) year storm, and their associated riparian habitat, shall be preserved in their natural state with exceptions for access and utility crossings. Any wash deemed unique, based on quality of vegetation or habitat, regardless of flow rate, may be required to be maintained as natural by the Town Council.Figure 27.10-2. Preserved Vegetation
                    [IMAGE: <27-10-2.png>]
                b) Landscape/Screening Treatment 
                The following landscape requirements apply to all common areas, private and public open space, landscape buffers, medians and rights-of-way within scenic corridors, except when further than one hundred (100) feet from the Oracle Road right-of-way or fifty (50) feet from Tangerine Road and in fully screened enclosed areas such as courtyards, residential backyards and active open spaces, swimming pools and patios associated with resort and residential uses. All other Oro Valley landscape requirements and guidelines apply.
                    1) Tree species planted in landscaped areas within a scenic corridor are restricted to the following: Blue and Foothills palo verde (Cercidium floridum and C. microphyllum), mesquite (Prosopsis spp.), and ironwood (Olneya tesota). All introduced shrubs, accents, and ground covers shall comply with the Oro Valley Approved Native Plant List (see Addendum C).
                    2) Parking lots shall be landscaped with the specified trees.
                    3) Decomposed granite (or other inorganic ground covers) may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total landscaped area (except roadway medians). Use of rock or stone as ground cover shall be limited to areas requiring slope stabilization or drainage channels. Only rock materials indigenous to the scenic corridor area are acceptable.
                    4) All remaining disturbed areas shall be stabilized or seeded with shrubs, wildflowers, forbes or grasses from the Oro Valley Approved Plant List as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator (see Addendum D).
                    5) Native plant materials shall be allowed to maintain their natural form and character after establishment and during normal maintenance operations. Limited trimming is allowed for visibility and plant health purposes.
                    6) All right-of-way areas where significant vegetation does not exist shall be landscaped as established herein and in Section 27.6, with approval from the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Town Engineer, and ADOT, if within jurisdictional limits. The following additional requirements apply:
                        A) A continuous landscape treatment from the edge of the scenic corridor pavement to the right-of-way/private property line. Plant types (tree, shrubs, cactus, etc.) and quantity will be dictated by road safety standards.
                        B) Hydroseed in compliance with the quantity and type specified in Addendum D shall be utilized.
                c) Walls and Berms 
                The following wall and berm requirements apply to all properties within scenic corridors.
                    1) Where existing vegetation is minimal or has been disturbed, earthen berms, or portions of earthen berms, may be placed in landscape conservation tracts for purposes of traffic noise attenuation or residential screening. Berms shall be designed in a manner to promote water harvesting and have a natural shape and appearance, complementary to the existing topography (Figure 27.10-3) and shall comply with the requirements of Section 27.6.D.4, rainwater harvesting requirements.
                    2) Walls shall not exceed in length thirty-three percent (33%) of the scenic corridor frontage of each parcel.
                    3) Fences shall be prohibited, with the exception of wrought iron fence treatments used in association with masonry walls.Figure 27.10-3. Plan View and Elevations
                    [IMAGE: <27-10-3.png>]
            vi. Site Development 
            Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Overlay District (ORSCOD) and Tangerine Road Corridor Overlay District (TRCOD)
            The sensitive natural character and scenic vistas from scenic corridors require additional development design requirements to assure scenic resource conservation and implementation of the adopted General Plan. This section includes requirements for property development along Oracle and Tangerine Roads.
                a) Oracle Road Scenic Corridor District 
                Regulations and development guidelines adopted herein are intended to supplement the otherwise applicable zoning requirements and procedures pursuant to specific plan and overlay district enabling legislation.
                    1) Oracle Road Scenic Corridor District Established 
                        A) Overlay District 
                        The Oracle Road Scenic Corridor District, including the area designated and adopted by the Town Council as the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Specific Plan, is hereby designated as an overlay zoning district consistent with the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Specific Plan adopted by the Town Council. Development within the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor District shall be regulated by the provisions of this section and the requirements of the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised, including under- lying district(s) and PADs, except that in the event of a conflict, the more restrictive shall prevail.
                            i) Applicability 
                            The provisions of the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Overlay District apply to development in the area shown on the existing overlay district maps for the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor.
                            ii) Exceptions 
                                A) Rooney Ranch Planned Area Development. The Rooney Ranch Planned Area Development contains an approved layout plan for commercial development within the Oracle Road Corridor. Area G, located on the west side of Oracle Road and south of Pusch View Lane, is exempt from the provisions of this overlay zone.
                                Development area B of the Rooney Ranch PAD is exempt from the following provisions: subsection D.3.f.vi.a.3.B.i and ii of this section (front setbacks) and subsection D.3.f.vi.a.3.B.iii of this section, building bulk. Development area D is exempt from all provisions of this overlay zone except, subsection D.3.f.v.b.6 of this section, right-of-way landscaping.
                                B) La Reserve Planned Area Development. All portions of the La Reserve PAD that fall within the Oracle Road Corridor Overlay District are subject to the provisions of the district, with the exception of the Foothills Business Park. Based on the recorded plat for the Foothills Business Park, Lots 2 through 8, 16, and 17 shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection D.3.f.vi.a.3.C.iv of this section (open space) and subsection D.3.F.vi.a.3.C.v of this section (view corridors). Lots 9 through 12 of the Foothills Business Park shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection D.3.f.vi.a.3.C.ii of this section (setbacks) and subsection D.3.f.vi.a.3.C.iv of this section (open space). All other provisions of this district shall apply. Lots 1, 13, 14, and 15 of the Foothills Business Park have been fully developed, and are exempt from the provisions of the Overlay District.
                                C) Steam Pump Village Planned Area Development 
                                The Steam Pump Village PAD is exempt.
                                D) If any PAD is substantially changed from the Town approved plan, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, all provisions of this Overlay District shall apply. A substantial change from the approved land use plan includes a change in (1) the number and general massing of buildings or groups of buildings, (2) density, (3) setbacks, (4) open space or (5) circulation configuration. Such a deviation will cause the loss of exemption. All cases evaluated for significant change shall be made known to the Planning and Zoning Commission through the Planning and Zoning Administrator’s report.
                        B) Special Recommendations 
                        The Planning and Zoning Administrator may recommend such development requirements as the Administrator deems necessary to assure compliance with Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Specific Plan Goals and Objectives and for the protection of neighboring residences for all plats and site plans that may be submitted in the development period.
                    2) Approvals Required 
                    No structure or building shall be built or remodeled on land in the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor District until approval has been granted as set forth in this section and as required in other applicable sections of this Zoning Code.
                    3) Oracle Road Scenic Corridor District Use 
                    Distinctions in development regulations are applied to four (4) general types of land use (Residential, Resort, Commercial, Employment/Institutional) for their effective integration into the unique scenic corridor setting.
                        A) Residential Development Regulations 
                        The Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Specific Plan and the Oro Valley General Plan characterize the plan area’s predominant land use character as being resort-residential in nature. Accordingly, additional assurances and criteria are set forth to protect scenic quality and to protect and enhance residential character within the corridor. Zoning district requirements shall pertain except as herein provided for properties, or portions thereof, classified according to Sections 23.6 and 23.7, Single- Family and Multi-Family Residential District Regulations, and located within the Oracle Road District.
                            i) Access to Oracle Road 
                            Direct access to Oracle Road is permitted only for pre-existing, residentially zoned lots of record as of the effective date of the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Overlay District. Thereafter, subdivisions or residential clusters containing a minimum of forty (40) residential lots or dwelling units shall have access points spaced a minimum of six hundred sixty (660) feet on center, except as hereinafter required or modified by specific plan variance.
                            Indirect access to Oracle Road, by way of a dedicated public street or by private street observing the aforementioned spacing requirement, is required, as feasible, to any residence or residential development from a point not less than two hundred (200) feet from the Oracle Road right- of-way.
                            ii) Required Setbacks 
                            Setback requirements of the applicable zoning district are to be provided and, except for residentially zoned lots existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, a peripheral landscaped setback, exclusive of access driveways, is to be designated as common area to a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet from the front and rear property lines.Figure 27.10-4. Residential Indirect Access Design
                            [IMAGE: <27-10-4.png>]
                            iii) Density 
                            Within perimeter setbacks and view corridor restrictions, the setbacks, heights, coverage, density, and open space requirements of the underlying residential district apply to individual lots or dwelling clusters.
                            iv) Height 
                            Structures within one hundred (100) feet of the Oracle Road right-of-way may not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height.
                            v) Landscaping Treatments 
                            Landscaping is to be installed and maintained for perimeter setbacks and all common open space areas according to an approved phasing schedule. Further requirements are applied:
                        B) Resort Development Regulations 
                        The Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Specific Plan and the Town of Oro Valley General Plan designate the corridor as being resort-residential in character. Accordingly, resort development is encouraged for its potential contribution to the recommended use characteristics and scenic qualities of the corridor.
                            i) Access to Oracle Road 
                            Resort development requires a minimum frontage of six hundred sixty (660) feet on Oracle Road, with a single road- way access (unless frontage exceeds two thousand (2,000) feet or as may be required for emergency access). The entry drive or street is to be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet in length from the Oracle Road right-of-way to any intersecting interior drive.
                            ii) Required Setbacks 
                            A setback of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the Oracle Road right-of-way is to be provided, the front one hundred (100) feet of which shall be landscaped or natural open space. Where adjacent to existing residential development, buffers of three hundred (300) feet are required as side or rear setbacks, which may be used for parking if properly screened.
                            iii) Density/Bulk 
                            Subject to Planning and Zoning Commission approval, resort/residential developments proposed in the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Overlay District shall consist of contiguous land areas totaling seven and one-half (7 1/2) acres or more.
                                A) A qualifying resort is to contain a minimum total of thirty (30) guest rooms, casitas, and/or dwelling units, of which the majority are to be located within the principal structure.
                                B) Subject to Town Council approval, additional guest rooms or dwelling units may be constructed in excess of those determined from gross land area as specified in Section 23.7.C.1.
                            iv) Landscaping Treatments 
                            Not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross site area is to be devoted to common landscaped or natural open space recreation areas accessible to resort guests and homeowners.
                            v) View Corridors 
                            Buildings over eighteen (18) feet in height or other structures, including walls, signs or mechanical equipment over four (4) feet in height, may not be placed within one hundred (100) feet of the Oracle Road right-of-way, with the following exceptions:
                                A) Resort signage; principal resort structure two hundred (200) feet or more from the right-of-way.
                                B) Retaining walls for screened parking areas.
                            vi) Performance Requirements 
                            All other development requirements of the R4-R district, as well as the requirements of this section, shall apply.
                        C) Commercial Development Regulations 
                        The Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Specific Plan requires additional assurances with regard to the design and placement of commercial structures or uses so as to protect the scenic qualities that accrue to the value of all properties within the corridor. Zoning district requirements apply except as herein provided for properties, or portions thereof, classified according to Section 23.8, commercial district regulations, as C-1, C-N, C-2 or P-1 Districts, located within the Oracle Road District.
                            i) Access to Oracle Road 
                            Direct access to Oracle Road is to be spaced a minimum of three hundred thirty (330) feet on center, except as hereinafter required or modified by Specific Plan variance.
                            ii) Required Setbacks 
                            Setback requirements of the applicable zoning district classification are applied, except as provided below:
                                A) Front setback for multiple structure development: Average one hundred twenty (120) feet.Figure 27.10-5. Setbacks
                            [IMAGE: <27-10-5.png>]
                                B) Front setbacks for single structure development: Minimum sixty (60) feet and must comply with a four to one (4:1) setback to building height ratio.
                                C) Side setback distances of the applicable zoning district are to be provided.
                                D) Office developments on parcels of two (2) acres or less and not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross leasable area shall be permitted to observe the adjacent residential setback plus ten (10) feet for buildings up to two thousand (2,000) square feet; and for buildings of two thousand (2,000) to five thousand (5,000) square feet in area, one and one-half (1 1/2) times the residential setback. Half of the additional requirement (in excess of the residential district setback) shall be waived where all parking is provided with security concerns addressed or internalized parking; half shall be waived for single-story structures of fifteen (15) feet in height or less.
                                Examples:
                                Building up to two thousand (2,000) square feet, adjacent to R1-36: forty (40) foot rear setback plus ten (10) feet equals fifty (50) feet; may be reduced in increments of five (5) feet to forty (40) feet.
                                Building two thousand (2,000) to five thousand (5,000) square feet adjacent to R1-43: twenty (20) foot side setback times one and one-half (1 1/2) equals thirty (30) feet; may be reduced in increments of five (5) feet to twenty (20) feet.
                            iii) Freestanding Building Pads 
                            Within development envelopes established by setbacks and view corridor restrictions, the following free- standing pads may be built:
                                A) Establishment of freestanding building pads fronting on or directly accessible from Oracle Road is permitted only on sites of five (5) acres or greater, with a minimum of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of GFA (gross floor area) in the principal structure required for the first such pad. Additional pads, requiring further increments of principal building GFA, may be permitted only by express Planning and Zoning Commission approval, subject to the following requirements:
                                1) Properties not exceeding ten (10) acres in area shall provide an additional twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of GFA or portion thereof for each additional pad requested; or
                                2) Properties of greater than ten (10) acres in area shall provide an additional fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of GFA or portion thereof for each additional pad requested.
                                3) All convenience uses shall comply with Section 25.1.B.6. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)27.10-6 Freestanding PAD Illustrations
                            [IMAGE: <27-10-6.png>]
                                B) Allowable building area is 0.25 FAR for sites with an area of two (2) acres or larger; reduced by fifty percent (50%) (0.125 FAR) for sites or existing freestanding pads of lesser area. FAR may be increased, to a total not exceeding 0.3 FAR, by the following site plan features:
                                1) An additional 0.01 FAR shall be permitted for each ten percent (10%) (or fraction thereof) over eighty percent (80%) of total building volume in the rear half of the site; a 0.03 FAR increment shall be permitted for placing the total building bulk in the rear half of the site.
                                2) Principal buildings which are oriented perpendicular to Oracle Road, observing a ratio of one to three (1:3) or greater of proportionate facade parallel to Oracle Road, shall be permitted an additional 0.01 FAR.
                                3) Double-fronted principal structures, with landscaped, architecturally designed entrances on two (2) opposing sides, shall be permitted an additional 0.01 FAR.
                            iv) Landscaping Treatments 
                            Approved landscaping is to be installed and maintained prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, subject to the following:
                                A) Freestanding building pads require approved landscape plans consistent with areas maintained as natural open space.
                                B) All areas other than those covered by buildings or paving for required parking and maneuvering are to be landscaped or maintained in their undisturbed natural desert condition.
                            v) View Corridors 
                            The applicant shall be responsible for identifying view corridors as provided in subsection D.3.f.iv of this section. Flexibility from the view corridor requirements defined below shall be determined by express approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
                                A) The following requirements are applied to the east and west sides of Oracle Road as follows:
                                (1)) West Side 
                                No building heights over eighteen (18) feet or structures, including walls, signs, or mechanical equipment over four (4) feet in height, within a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the frontage to a depth of three hundred (300) feet is maintained as a view corridor.
                                (2)) East Side 
                                (a)) A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the frontage to a depth of three hundred (300) feet is maintained as a view corridor (Figure 27.10-7) and is not used for building purposes. Total building exposures or frontages will be measured to calculate the view corridor open area percentage.
                                (b)) Properties with an average depth of four hundred (400) feet or less, or containing less than two (2) acres in size, building heights in excess of twenty-five (25) feet (as permitted by underlying zoning) shall be limited to forty percent (40%) of the frontage. The remaining buildable area heights shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet.Figure 27.10-7. View Corridor Illustration
                                [IMAGE: <27-10-7.png>]
                                (c)) Landscaping, walls, or other improvements installed by the developer within or adjacent to view corridors require express Planning and Zoning Commission approval.
                                (d)) No signage, wall, or other structure may be placed so as to obstruct defined view corridors, except as provided for above.
                                (e)) No structure or appurtenance may project above ridgelines; all development must blend with the background slope as established in the applicable Scenic Resource Area design guidelines.
                        D) Employment/Institutional Regulations 
                        Campus developments on larger sites are especially desirable for preserving view corridors, adding variety to the specific plan area and creating activity balance with in-community destination sites. Special attention is required to maintain the corridor’s structural scale and efficient traffic management. Zoning district requirements apply, except as hereinafter provided, for properties classified under Sections 23.8.E, Private Schools (PS), and 23.8.F, Technological Park (T-P) Districts and located within the Oracle Road Scenic Corridor District.
                            i) Access to Oracle Road 
                            Campus uses require a minimum frontage of six hundred sixty (660) feet on Oracle Road or other arterial streets, with roadway access located so as to be at least three hundred (300) feet from an established entry point to an adjacent property or street:
                                A) Multiple entries may be required if traffic projections for the proposed use so warrant.
                                B) Signalization, at appropriate spacing, is permitted only if warranted according to Arizona Department of Transportation criteria.
                            ii) Required Setbacks 
                            A setback of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the Oracle Road right-of-way is to be provided, the front one hundred (100) feet of which shall be landscaped or natural open space.
                            Natural open space or landscaped buffers (which may include natural washes) of not less than one hundred (100) feet in width are required as side or rear setbacks to any adjacent residential district.
                            iii) Density/Bulk 
                            Development intensity for institutional or employment campus uses is limited to a maximum of 0.3 FAR and may be further limited by the Town Council.
                            iv) Landscaping Treatments 
                            Not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross site area is to be devoted to common landscaped or natural open space recreation area.
                            v) View Corridors 
                            The applicant shall be responsible for identifying view corridors as provided in subsection D.3.f.iv of this section.
                                A) Along the west side of Oracle Road, buildings over eighteen (18) feet or other structures, including walls, signs or mechanical equipment over four (4) feet in height, may not be placed within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any identified view corridor without express Planning and Zoning Commission approval.
                                B) Along the east side of Oracle Road, a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the frontage to a depth of three hundred (300) feet along the east side of Oracle Road is maintained as a view corridor and is not used for building purposes. Building exposures will be measured to calculate the view corridor percentage. For properties along the east side of Oracle Road, with an average depth of four hundred (400) feet or less, or containing less than two (2) acres in size, building heights in excess of twenty-five (25) feet (as permitted by underlying zoning) shall be limited to forty percent (40%) of the frontage. The remaining buildable area heights shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet.
                        E) Commercial Retail Intensity 
                        An increase to the intensity of commercial retail use of a specific parcel shall require a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 22.5.
                b) Tangerine Corridor Overlay District 
                    1) Tangerine Corridor District Regulations 
                    The provisions herein are adopted as supplements to the applicable zoning requirements of the underlying zoning district classifications. Regulatory provisions, including standards and measurements, are mandatory.
                    2) Tangerine Corridor District 
                    The Tangerine Corridor District is an overlay district to provide implementation directions for the Tangerine Road Corridor Specific Plan, which has been duly adopted as a refinement of the Town of Oro Valley General Plan. The purpose of these regulations and guidelines is to preserve the value of lands possessing the unique Upper Sonoran Desert character found within the Tangerine Road Corridor, as well as to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public by encouraging reasonable use and enjoyment of private property. It is the further premise of this section that attention to the corridor’s environmental quality is necessary to maintain a natural coexistence with the desert that enhances the value of all lands with it.
                        A) Overlay District 
                        The District shall include lands located between Naranja Road and Moore Road, or their alignments, within the corporate limits of the Town of Oro Valley (the “corridor”); and shall be applied to all properties lying within the corridor at the time of adoption of this ordinance codified in this section; and to such lands within the corridor which may, from time to time, be annexed into the Town.
                            i) Applicability 
                            Overlay district regulations, as stated herein, apply to all property within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the Tangerine Road centerline (the “target area,” as defined in the Tangerine Road Corridor Specific Plan). Overlay district guidelines pertain to all uses in the corridor. Construction, addition to or remodeling of individual residences within the target area shall require only observance of frontage tract and setback requirements and of nonaccess provisions.Figure 27.10-8. Target Area Illustration
                            [IMAGE: <27-10-8.png>]
                            ii) Exceptions 
                            Site plans, preliminary plats, or final plats approved prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section and still in effect, and individual residences on single lots, are exempt from the requirements of this section.
                                A) The adopted Rancho Vistoso PAD, having addressed, met or exceeded certain requirements of this Overlay District, is exempt from the following requirements of this section: subsection D.3.f.vi.b.4.A.i of this section; and subsections D.3.f.vi.b.5.A.ii, A.v, B.iii, and B.vii.C.3 of this section, except that the allowances of subsection D.3.f.vi.b.5.B.iii.B of this section shall be applicable.
                                B) The adopted Rancho Vistoso PAD design guidelines shall prevail, where they conflict with the guidelines in subsection D.3.f.vi.c of this section. However, large expanses of glass or other materials of high reflectivity should not be used. In addition, residential developments, which may be impacted by noise from Tangerine Road, should include the noise mitigation provisions of subsection D.3.f.vi.c of this section.
                        B) Conformance to General Plan 
                        The Overlay District is intended as a refinement to the Oro Valley General Plan, in the form of a regulatory specific plan with additional design guidelines. All development hereunder is required to be consistent with the General Plan. It is, however, expressly intended that residential densities or intensities of development may be averaged or clustered, with Town approval on any property where such siting has the effect of further separating development from Tangerine Road or from sensitive natural or cultural resources.
                        Any conflicts arising as a result of amendments to the General Plan, Tangerine Road Corridor specific plan, or the text provisions of applicable, underlying zoning districts shall be resolved in favor of the General Plan, unless interpreted otherwise in this section.
                        C) Conformance to Specific Plan 
                        Evaluations of site plans by the Planning and Zoning Commission should result in findings and/or recommendations that are consistent with the Tangerine Road Corridor Specific Plan.
                    3) Application Requirements 
                    Any application for land improvement within the Tangerine Road Corridor Overlay District target area, or where specifically required elsewhere in the corridor, shall be submitted for development review; and, in the case of nonresidential site plans, planned area development, subdivision plats or other site plans, shall be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the application.
                    Special Consideration
                    The application shall be accompanied by a statement with justification, describing any requested waiver, such as exemption from visual analysis or increased building height; or adjustment to otherwise applicable criteria, such as master planned developments flexibility.
                    4) Tangerine/Arterial Frontage Tracts 
                    As a means to assure safety through unimpeded traffic visibility with minimal distraction, separation of travel modes, adequate stormwater drainage and other recommended traffic engineering improvements, tract reservations in the nature of nonbuildable, nonaccess easements are required adjacent to all property lines abutting Tangerine Road or other arterial roadway rights-of-way in the corridor Target Area. The intent is to severely restrict direct access onto Tangerine Road or intersecting arterial (within a specified distance from Tangerine); encouraging, instead, well-separated side arterial access and internal loop circulation. These tracts serve the further purposes of providing additional buffering from transportation facilities, preserving vegetation essential to the corridor’s character and enhancing the value of private property.
                    All developments shall be responsible for reserving and maintaining tracts, as specified herein, adjacent to the property lines abutting Tangerine Road and arterial roadway frontage within a distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet from the Tangerine Road right-of-way, unless otherwise specified.
                        A) Nondevelopment or Conservation Easements 
                        The widths of tracts to be provided are as follows:
                            i) Tangerine Road 
                            A tract of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width for commercial developments located at arterial intersections and fifty (50) feet in width for all other developments shall be designated on all properties abutting Tangerine Road, measured from the right-of-way. Crossing of the tract with roads, public or private, and driveways (except for emergency vehicle access where required) is prohibited without the approval of ADOT and the Town. No direct access crossing shall be less than three hundred thirty (330) feet from an arterial intersection or less than one thousand (1,000) feet from another vehicular tract crossing, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer due to significant traffic safety concerns supported by recognized traffic safety engineering standards.Figure 27.10-9. 50 Foot Tract along Tangerine Road R-O-W
                            [IMAGE: <27-10-9.png>]
                            ii) Arterial Roads 
                            A tract not less than fifty (50) feet in width beginning at the point of intersection with the corresponding Tangerine Road tract and tapering to a width of not less than ten (10) feet at a point six hundred sixty (660) feet from the Tangerine Road centerline shall be designated on all properties abutting arterials in the target area, measured from the arterial right-of-way. Under special circumstances, such as restricted parcel dimensions, improved structural massing or uneven topography, ADOT and the Town may approve reduction of the tract to not less than three hundred thirty (330) feet in length and twenty-five (25) feet in width at the Tangerine tract. Crossings of arterial tracts are prohibited.Figure 27.10-10. Tangerine Road Crossings
                            [IMAGE: <27-10-10.png>]
                            iii) Signage Permitted 
                            Signs are permitted within the tract in accordance with Chapter 28, Signs.
                            iv) Pathway Linkages 
                            Locations for trails or paths may be approved for placement within the reserved area.
                        B) Berms 
                        Where existing vegetation is minimal or has been disturbed, earthen berms, or portions of earthen berms, may be placed in frontage tracts for purposes of traffic noise attenuation or screening requirements.
                        Berms must be designed in a manner to ensure compliance with water harvesting requirements in Section 27.6.
                        C) Drainage Facilities 
                        Natural materials, such as river rock and vegetative groundcover, shall be required for lining drainage structures placed on reserved tract areas unless other materials are approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the Town Engineer. All such drainage structures shall be designed and installed to accommodate ultimate roadway design plans.
                        D) Utility Easements 
                        Provisions for utilities may be included in separate easements within the frontage tract upon approval of the Town. Utility providers shall be required to keep disturbance of natural vegetation to a minimum during the installation or maintenance of their facilities and to restore vegetation in a manner consistent with requirements for adjacent property owners. Future aboveground power lines carrying 46 kV or less are subject to conditional use permit (CUP) approval and the criteria specified in Section 22.5. A CUP may be conditioned to require undergrounding of power lines with a specified time frame or concurrent with specific projects. Site plans for properties abutting arterial intersections shall provide conduit for future intersection lighting requirements.
                    5) Tangerine Road Corridor Overlay District Use Provisions 
                    General types of land use as anticipated for the corridor in the Oro Valley General Plan (residential, commercial, employment/institutional) are provided additional distinctions for their applicability in conjunction with underlying zoning district use regulations. Resort or other nonresidential uses not covered by these provisions may be considered in accord with commercial regulations. The Overlay District, in requiring the reservation of frontage tracts, subsection D.3.f.vi.b.4.A of this section, carries further expectation that existing vegetation shall be preserved or otherwise be revegetated with specimens from the disturbed areas on the subject site to maintain native plant material along all Tangerine Road property lines. Pathway linkages are to be provided within each development and connecting with pathways, trails or bike lanes paralleling or otherwise linking to Tangerine Road.
                        A) Residential Development Regulations 
                        Construction in any residential zoning classification shall comply with the following provisions in addition to the applicable regulations of the underlying zoning district:
                            i) Roadway Access 
                            Direct access to Tangerine Road or to an intersecting arterial roadway within six hundred (600) feet of the Tangerine right-of-way is prohibited for any future development without the express approvals of the Town and ADOT (see subsections D.3.f.vi.b.4.A.i and ii of this section). The intent is to eliminate curb cuts from Tangerine Road’s parkway improvements, affording access only from streets intersecting with Tangerine or approved circulation roadways and/or frontage roads provided with acceleration/deceleration lanes accessing the major roadway.
                            ii) Required Setbacks 
                            Setback requirements of the applicable, underlying zoning district shall be provided in addition to the reserved easement tract. Undulating setback distances may be approved in planned developments to provide variety and visual interest.27.10-11 Tangerine Road Easements and Structure Heights
                            [IMAGE: <27-10-11.png>]
                            iii) Density 
                            Coverage, density, and open space requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply to individual lots or dwelling clusters.
                                A) Lots including frontage tracts are entitled to include the tract area in meeting these requirements.
                                B) Planned residential developments may compute perimeter tracts for open space and dwelling unit density yield.
                                C) Minimum lot areas of the applicable residential zoning district may be reduced by as much as twenty percent (20%) for lots clustered in the interior of the development to take advantage of frontage tract area reservations. Further reductions may be permitted with provision of environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS) as provided in subsection F.2 of this section.
                                D) No lot of reduced area, however, may be sited adjacent to a residence existing at the time of platting.
                            iv) Perimeter Screening Walls and Berms 
                            Screening is required for traffic noise attenuation and residential privacy. Residential developments abutting Tangerine Road shall provide a solid, masonry wall five (5) feet or greater in height, which structure may be constructed to a height of eight (8) feet with engineering approval. Walls shall not be constructed within nondevelopment or conservation easements. Earthen berms may be substituted for, or alternated with, walls to a height not less than five (5) feet from natural grade. Berms must be designed in a manner to ensure compliance with water harvesting requirements in Section 27.6.D.
                            v) Building Height 
                            Structures within one hundred (100) feet of, and visible from, the Tangerine Road right-of-way shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height; except, where the natural grade of the structure’s site is below that of Tangerine Road’s proposed profile grade, the structure may be built to the lesser of eighteen (18) feet above the proposed roadway grade or the maximum height of the applicable zoning district.
                        B) Commercial Development Regulations 
                        The sensitive natural character of the Tangerine Road Corridor, coupled with the community’s desire for economic development on specified, master planned and strategically located sites, requires additional assurances with regard to the design and placement of commercial uses. Construction in any commercial zoning classification shall comply with the following provisions in addition to the applicable regulations of the underlying zoning district:
                            i) Roadway Access 
                            Access provisions of subsection D.3.f.vi.b.5.A.i and D.3.f.vi.b.5.A.ii of this section shall apply. Internal loop circulation roadways, with access/egress points observing the desired spacing and providing additional turning lanes, shall be provided.
                            ii) Required Setbacks 
                            Setback requirements of the applicable underlying zoning classification are applied, except that the front setback from Tangerine Road, including the reserved tract, shall be not less than a four to one (4:1) setback to building height ratio.
                            iii) Building Height 
                            Structures within one hundred (100) feet of, and visible from, the Tangerine Road right-of-way shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
                                A) Except, however, where the natural grade of the structure’s site is below that of Tangerine Road’s proposed profile grade, the structure may be built to the lesser of twenty (20) feet above the proposed roadway grade or the maximum allowable height of the applicable zoning district.
                                B) Architectural features, such as decorative bell or clock towers, campaniles, carillons and spires, of a size proportional to the building they embellish shall be exempted from the four to one (4:1) setback ratio and this height restriction to the maximum allowable height of the applicable zoning district upon compliance with the view preservation plan requirements of subsection D.3.f.iv of this section.
                            iv) Building Bulk 
                            The following structural volumes may be built within the development envelopes established by required setbacks: 0.3 FAR for sites with an area of two (2) acres or larger; reduced by fifty percent (50%) (0.15 FAR) for parcels or freestanding pads of lesser area.
                            v) Land Use Distinctions 
                            Uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, shall be permitted except that the following may be sited only within master planned commercial developments (such as the Rancho Vistoso PAD or Forest City sites, as indicated on the future site plan, or future commercial PADs) on parcels two hundred (200) feet or more from the development’s nearest entry point:
                                A) Building or home improvement supplies;
                                B) Plant nurseries;
                                C) Indoor theaters.
                            vi) View Preservation 
                            All properties required to submit a visual analysis will develop in accord with the View Preservation Plan as provided in that analysis.
                            
                                vii) Site Planning 
                                Additional site plan review criteria applicable to Tangerine Corridor commercial properties include:
                                A) Interior calculation shall include maneuvering aisles, access for deliveries and trash pick-up and pedestrian connections. Sites of twenty (20) acres or greater shall have entry road designs that prohibit cross traffic within two hundred (200) feet of the entry point.
                                B) The proposed location of all trash receptacles, heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment, loading and parking areas shall be screened from public view.
                                C) Employment and Institutional Regulations 
                                Sites for campus-type developments are established within the Tangerine Corridor’s natural context to create unique, unobtrusive opportunities for employment and institutional activity centers. Construction shall comply with the following provisions in addition to the applicable regulations of the underlying zoning district.
                                1) Roadway Access 
                                Access provisions of subsection D.3.f.vi.b.5.A.i and D.3.f.vi.b.5.A.ii of this section apply; however, multiple access points from Tangerine Road may be appropriate for institutional developments exceeding twenty (20) acres in area, which experience high peak hour traffic demand. Construction of a public roadway perpendicular to Tangerine, separated by not less than one-quarter (1/4) mile from any arterial intersecting Tangerine, may be approved for the purpose of providing multiple entries to the campus. Secondary, alternative access to an intersecting arterial is also desirable.
                                2) Required Setbacks 
                                The commercial development regulations, subsection D.3.f.vi.b.5.B.ii of this section, shall also apply.
                                3) Building Height 
                                The commercial development regulations, subsection D.3.f.vi.b.5.B.iii of this section, shall apply.
                                4) Building Bulk 
                                The following structural volumes may be built within the development envelopes established by required setbacks:
                                a) The overall campus building area shall not exceed the FAR for the appropriate zoning district.
                                b) Buildings within the campus core (an area representing one-quarter (1/4) or less of the total site area surrounded by an equidistant peripheral band with lesser or no structural development; see Figure 27.10-12) shall not exceed 0.8 FAR.
                                c) Building area within peripheral area shall not exceed 0.4 FAR or the FAR for the appropriate zoning district, whichever is less.Figure 27.10-12. Allowable FAR using Campus Core
                            [IMAGE: <27-10-12.png>]
                                5) Land Use Distinctions 
                                Uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be permitted except that the following may be sited only within master planned institutional or employment developments at a distance of two hundred (200) feet or more from the development’s nearest entry point:
                                a) Office buildings exceeding two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height.
                                b) Research, fabricating or manufacturing structures exceeding one (1) story or twenty-four (24) feet in height.
                                c) Hospitals/senior care facilities exceeding two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height.
                                d) Warehouse structures.
                                6) View Preservation 
                                The commercial development regulations, subsection D.3.f.vi.b.5.B.vi of this section, shall apply.
                                7) Site Planning 
                                The commercial development regulations, subsection D.3.f.vi.b.5.B.vii of this section, shall apply.
                                D) Master Planned Developments Flexibility 
                                Master planned developments are encouraged. The Town may accept alternative means for compliance with this section and design guidelines criteria on master planned sites of fifteen (15) acres or more, which include, among other things, clustering of residential uses (if included in the plan) away from Tangerine Road, comprehensive interior circulation plans, a mixture of land use types (see subsection D.3.f.vi.b.5.B.vii.D.4 of this section) and pedestrian access amenities among uses.
                                1) Applicability 
                                Requests for waivers of otherwise applicable provisions and/or requirements of this Overlay District may be submitted in conjunction with applications filed under Town development procedures.
                                2) Subject Matter 
                                Any provision of this Overlay District, other than express prohibitions, may be altered in its application to an individual site upon persuasive presentation, documentation, and stipulation of alternative means for meeting or exceeding the intent of this section.
                                3) Frontage Tracts 
                                Use of reserved easements contained on the subject property which is consistent with Tangerine Road Corridor purposes (such as pathways, trails, view points, nature walks or other recreation) may be provided. The overriding interest of preserving native vegetation shall, in all instances, be observed.
                                4) Mixtures of Use Types 
                                Complementary land uses within planned developments that are principally intended to benefit its residents, customers or employees (such as commercial recreation, banking, retail and service establishments) may be proposed. Such uses shall be located internal to the development, buffered appropriately to be compatible with the predominant type of use.
                                a) Density/Intensity 
                                Acceptable, additional uses, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total site area, shall not alter the overall yield of dwelling units or FAR of the proposed development; however, if such uses are found to contribute positive amenities for site quality, areas devoted to such uses shall not be subtracted from the gross site area for the purpose of dwelling density or FAR calculations.
                                b) Compatibility Assurance 
                                Landscaping buffer yards or walls shall be employed to separate mixed uses from areas devoted to the predominant use. Vehicular traffic shall be minimized with a preference for pedestrian access to mixed uses.
                                c) Shared Facilities 
                                Parking for mixed uses with differing peak activity times, open space, and project amenities may be proposed in locations suitable for meeting the requirements of this section and the needs of site residents, guests, customers, and/or employees.
                c) Design Guidelines 
                    1) Scenic resource area design guidelines are included in Addendum H. Guidelines are directions for achieving Town of Oro Valley expectations; they may be applied flexibly to achieve desired effects as a regulatory supplement to the development requirements set forth in subsections D.3.f.v and D.3.f.vi of this section. They are also in addition to the design guidelines included in Addendum A. The full intent of the design guidelines criteria should be met, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
                    2) The review of a development proposal’s responsiveness to design guidelines is mandatory for all properties or portions of properties located in all three (3) tiers of the scenic resources category. Alternative means for complying with the guidelines’ intent may be accepted by the Town.
                    3) Applicants or designers of these uses are expected to document proposals for construction with plans, graphics, elevations, and narrative descriptions that demonstrate responsiveness to these design guidelines.
        
            g. Hillside Area Category 
                i) Purpose 
                The Hillside Area category is intended to protect public safety, conserve visually significant sloped areas, evaluate slopes and potential impacts, and ensure development compatibility with the distinct hillside topography that is vital to the visual and scenic character of the Town.
                ii) Applicability 
                The Hillside Area requirements apply to:
                    a) Sloped areas of fifteen percent (15%) and greater where the sloped area is greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length and no less than fifty (50) feet wide and greater than seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet vertically.
                    b) Sloped areas of fifteen percent (15%) and greater contiguous to any area defined in subsection D.3.g.ii.a of this section.Figure 27.10-13. Hillside Area Applicability
                    [IMAGE: <27-10-13.png>]
                    c) Ridges, as defined in Chapter 31, with an elevation change of twenty-five (25) feet or more.
                    d) Areas of less than fifteen percent (15%) slope are not restricted by these Hillside Area requirements.
                    e) Rock outcrops and boulders, as defined in subsections D.3.b.iii.b and D.3.d.iii.e of this section, are excluded from this section.
                    f) If a lot or parcel existing as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section does not meet the minimum size requirements of Table 27.10-4, disturbance limitations based on percent of slope from Table 27.10-4 still apply.
                iii) Sloped Area Analysis 
                    a) When land division, subdividing, site plan or other development approval is requested, a sloped area analysis shall be prepared and all areas of fifteen percent (15%) slope or greater shall be identified and delineated on the plans.
                    b) The sloped area analysis must be prepared by a State of Arizona licensed and registered engineer and shall identify and map all percent slope categories specified in Table 27.10-4.
                    c) Digital topographic information, with a one (1) foot contour interval, shall be used to prepare the sloped area analysis. Alternative information or methodologies may be approved by the Town Engineer.
                iv) Conservation 
                Hillside areas shall be conserved in the following manner:
                    a) Sloped areas from fifteen percent (15%) to less than twenty-five percent (25%) may be developed in a limited manner in accordance with the requirements of this section, subsection B of this section and the zoning code.
                    b) In accordance with the Critical Resource Category, ninety-five percent (95%) of sloped areas of twenty-five percent (25%) and greater are to be conserved as ESOS. For residential parcels of thirty-six (36) acres or larger comprised completely of twenty-five percent (25%) and greater slopes, ninety-six percent (96%) of sloped areas thirty-three percent (33%) and greater are to be conserved as ESOS. Exceptions may be approved in accordance with subsection F.2 of this section, Development Balance and Incentives.
                v) General Requirements 
                    a) A development envelope shall be delineated, in accordance with subsection F.3 of this section, on the subdivision plat, development and site plan when sloped areas of fifteen percent (15%) or greater are present on the plat, development or site plan.
                    b) For all subdivision plats, development envelopes for roadways, each lot and other disturbed areas shall be delineated. The development envelope shall be treated in accordance with subsection F.3 of this section.
                    c) When lots or site plans include sloped areas over fifteen percent (15%), the extent of grading or other ground disturbance of fifteen percent (15%) and greater sloped areas is limited in accordance with Table 27.10-4. The limits of Table 27.10-4 do not apply to sloped areas of less than fifteen percent (15%).
                    d) Subsection F.2 of this section, Development Balance and Incentives, may be applied to provide flexibility in designing lots that do not include areas of fifteen percent (15%) and greater slope.
                    +------------------+------------------+--------------+------------------+
                    |  Percent Slope   | Minimum Lot Size | Maximum % of | Maximum Building |
                    |                  |     (acres)      | Sloped Area  |   Height (ft)    |
                    |                  |                  | Disturbance  |  within Sloped   |
                    |                  |                  |              |       Area       |
                    +------------------+------------------+--------------+------------------+
                    | 15 < 18          | 1.00             | 40.0         | Per Base Zoning  |
                    +------------------+------------------+--------------+------------------+
                    | 18 < 20          | 1.5              | 30.0         | 18               |
                    +------------------+------------------+--------------+------------------+
                    | 20 < 25          | 2.00             | 20.0         | 18               |
                    +------------------+------------------+--------------+------------------+
                    | 25 < 33          | 8.00             | 5.0          | 18               |
                    +------------------+------------------+--------------+------------------+
                    | 33.0 and Greater | 36.00            | 4.0          | 18               |
                    +------------------+------------------+--------------+------------------+
                    | * Or as permitted by base zoning, whichever lot size is larger.       |
                    +------------------+------------------+--------------+------------------+
                    e) If proposed lots include multiple slope categories:
                        1) The extent of each slope category on the lot shall be delineated;
                        2) Lot size is determined by the slope category comprising the largest percent of the proposed lot; and
                        3) Sloped area disturbance limits in Table 27.10-4 apply to each slope category on the lot.
                    f) Calculations shall be provided indicating the percent of disturbance, if any, to each slope category described in Table 27.10-4.
                    g) Flexible Disturbance 
                        1) Applicability 
                        Flexible design options may be applied to property or portions of property with slopes of fifteen percent (15%) and greater, but less than twenty percent (20%), and ridge features when:
                            A) Visually significant slopes and ridges are ninety-five percent (95%) conserved.
                            B) The cumulative size of designated hillside view conservation areas is five (5) acres or greater.
                            C) There are no demonstrable adverse impacts to other ESOS areas on site or to a riparian area downstream.
                        2) Modified Requirements 
                        Modified requirements can only be applied to areas that are not visible from existing public roadways, parks, and all trails identified in the Oro Valley Trails Master Plan.
                        When the conditions specified in subsection D.3.g.v.g.1 of this section are met, the slope density requirements and disturbance limitations of Table 27.10-4 are modified in conjunction with the rezoning, subdivision plat or site plan review process. Allowable modifications include:
                            A) Sloped areas of fifteen percent (15%) and less than twenty percent (20%). Areas within these slope categories are exempt from the density and disturbance limitations of Table 27.10-4.
                            B) Cut and Fill Limits 
                            The maximum cut or fill restrictions in Section 27.9 may be increased and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet measured vertically from existing grade to finished grade elevation.
                    h) In determining the areas to be developed, maximum disturbance limits and specific design criteria must be considered. Table 27.10-4 indicates the maximum amount of grading and disturbance to sloped areas. Prioritized criteria for site planning and the delineation of hillside ESOS and/or hillside conservation areas are included below.
                        1) Subdivision design shall meet the following:
                            A) Contiguous location of hillside open space to established open space areas or other ESL features;
                            B) Minimized disturbance of ESL features as prioritized in subsection E.4.d of this section;
                            C) Conservation of the largest sloped areas of fifteen percent (15%) and greater on the site; and
                            D) Consolidation of hillside and other open space areas.
                        2) Development envelope design on individual lots shall meet the criteria as listed above; however, replacing criteria in subsection D.3.g.v.h.1.C of this section with:
                        Exclude the areas of highest percent slope from the development envelope.
                        3) Designation, Ownership and Maintenance of Hillside Areas 
                            A) After delineation of permissible development areas, all remaining areas of twenty-five percent (25%) and greater slope shall be designated as ESOS tract(s) in accordance with the provisions of subsection E of this section, Open Space Requirements. Areas of twenty-five percent (25%) slope that do not meet the minimum requirements for ESOS shall be designated as Hillside conservation area.
                            B) Areas of fifteen percent (15%) and greater slope to be conserved may be designated as ESOS in accordance with subsection E of this section. Areas of fifteen percent (15%) and greater slope not designated as ESOS or that do not meet the minimum requirements for ESOS shall be designated as hillside conservation area. Hillside conservation areas may be allocated to common areas or designated on individual lots.
                            C) Ownership and maintenance of hillside open space areas shall be assigned as follows:
                                i) Hillside ESOS tracts shall be dedicated to the HOA and hillside conservation areas shall be dedicated to the HOA or designated as a conservation easement on individual lots.
                                ii) Alternative ownership arrangements that provide an equivalent degree of conservation may be approved by the Town Council.
                            D) Open space identified during individual residential lot development or open space not meeting the minimum requirements for ESOS must be designated as hillside conservation area.
            vi. Hillside Area Design 
                a) Development must be in compliance with subsection F.3 of this section, Design. Flexible development or conservation design options may be applied in accordance with the provisions and limitations in subsection F.2 of this section.
                b) Building Height 
                    1) Building heights are limited in accordance with the applicable zoning district, except in ridge areas as described in subsection D.3.g.vi.c of this section.
                    2) For buildings located in slope areas of fifteen percent (15%) and greater, building height shall be measured in the following manner:
                        A) Where building pad elevation is the same or higher than predevelopment grade due to engineered fill, the building height contour line method shall be used (as defined and illustrated in Chapter 31). Small areas of rugged terrain shall not increase or reduce building height. Small areas are those features with a maximum width of twenty-five (25) feet.
                        B) Where building pad elevation is lower than predevelopment grade due to cut conditions, building height is measured from finished grade.
                    3) Additional building height of thirteen (13) feet may be approved in accordance with subsection F.2.c of this section, Flexible Development, but cannot be approved in scenic resource areas or protrude above adjacent ridges as viewed from public streets and abutting residential property. Adjacent ridges include ridge features on site or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the proposed building.
                c) Building rooflines shall not protrude above the existing height of a ridge, unless approved by the Town Council in accordance with the criteria below.
                    1) Structures are single story, and no more than eighteen (18) feet, including parapets, above the building height contour line.
                    2) Minimum forty (40) foot separation is maintained between residences.
                    3) Roof design is limited to a slope of no greater than one-half (1/2) inch rise per twelve (12) inch horizontal run.
                    4) Approved plant materials are installed along exterior walls of fifteen (15) feet or more in length.
                d) Cut and fill slopes shall be shielded by structures to be invisible from adjacent properties or public roadways, or shall be colored or otherwise treated as approved by the Town Engineer in a manner to blend with surrounding native soils and rocks.
                e) All structures and appurtenances thereto such as antennas and satellite dishes shall be earth tone and shall comply with subsection F.3 of this section, structures.
                f) Outdoor storage shall be located within an entirely opaque barrier designed to match the materials, color, and finish of the primary structure. Storage or stored materials may not be visible from private or public streets or adjacent residential areas.
                g) Roof-mounted equipment is prohibited unless shielded from all neighboring properties. Screening devices may not exceed permitted building heights as measured in hillside areas. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)15-16, Amended,  11/08/2015; (O)14-15, Amended,  11/19/2014; (O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
E. Open Space Requirements 
    1. Open Space ESOS Designation 
    Open space associated with the ESL conservation system is designated as environmentally sensitive open space (ESOS), except for the following resource categories:
        a. Hillside resource area.
        b. Scenic resource areas.
    2. ESOS Tracts 
    ESOS shall be permanently protected by one (1) of the following methods:
        a. Open space tract, or
        b. Dedication to the public including the Town, Pima County or Land Conservation Trust as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, or
        c. A separate tract owned by a homeowners’ association.
    3. General Requirements 
        a. Required ESOS must be configured in accordance with this section to conserve minimum percentages of identified resource categories as specified in Table 27.10-2.
        b. Development can only occur in the nonopen space areas of the site. Required open space areas must be designated as ESOS in one (1) of the approved forms described in subsection E.2 of this section.Figure 27.10-14. Areas Designated as ESOS
        [IMAGE: <27-10-14.png>]
        c. The quantity of open space created by recreation area, buffer yard, and other zoning-based open space requirements may be credited to resource management area ESOS only when:
            i. Minimum ESOS dimensions are maintained as specified in subsection E.4.e of this section.
            ii. Open space abuts ESOS and/or creates functional habitat connectivity.
            iii. Compliance with subsection F.1 of this section, ESOS Use, is achieved.
        d. ESOS areas shall be assigned for dedication, conservation, and maintenance as follows:
            i. ESOS areas of National, State, regional, or community-wide importance will be the responsibility of a public entity, land trust, or land conservation organization that is capable of satisfying the objectives specified herein. This level of dedication shall include ESOS areas with the following characteristics:
                a) Adjacent to Federal, State or County parks, preserves or other permanent open space.
                b) Regionally significant drainage.
                c) Significant cultural resource when preservation in place is specified in an approved treatment plan, subsection D.3.e of this section.
                d) Inclusion of identified major wildlife linkage areas.
            ii. All other ESOS areas that contribute resource value primarily to adjacent neighborhoods and do not meet the criteria above shall be the responsibility of an HOA.
            iii. Alternative ownership arrangements that provide an equivalent degree of conservation may be approved by the Town Council.
        e. Permanent open space easements and/or deed restrictions must be provided for all ESOS tracts, unless dedicated to the public, prior to certifying that all conditions of rezoning, site plan or plat have been satisfied. Said easements or deed restrictions will be included on documents upon official recordation.
        f. The open space easement or deed restriction must include the following:
            i. Compliance with use and access provisions provided in subsection F.1 of this section.
            ii. Provisions to fund maintenance in perpetuity that may include:
                a) Use of future homeowners’ association dues, or
                b) Agreement for the Town to provide open space maintenance, or
                c) Assurance from a third party caretaker such as a land trust, or
                d) Other methods to assure maintenance as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        g. Maintenance 
            i. Maintenance, when necessary, is required for established ESOS areas. Provisions for ESOS maintenance shall be established prior to development application approval.
            ii. Maintenance shall include ongoing trash removal, sign repair/replacement and elimination of invasive plant species.
            iii. The Town retains the authority to perform maintenance in ESOS tracts or common areas managed by an HOA or other property management association. A note will be included on the subdivision plat and/or site plan indicating the Town’s ability to enter the property and perform ESOS maintenance.
        h. Common area or tract ESOS locations and boundaries, including precise acreage, shall be shown on the subdivision plat and/or site plan.
        i. The following subdivision plat requirements apply to required ESOS areas:
            i. On residential lots one-half (1/2) acre or less, ESOS must be platted separately from designated building areas.
            ii. On residential lots greater than one-half (1/2) acre, ESOS may be included within the building lot area or platted separately from designated building areas.
            iii. ESOS must be platted separately from any developable commercial lot.
        j. In no event shall the provisions of this section require greater area of ESOS than required by subsection D.3 of this section.
    4. Criteria for ESOS Selection and Location 
    The following criteria must be used to select and locate ESOS providing the greatest degree of conservation for the most sensitive resource categories.
        a. All resource areas identified on the ESL Planning Map enable limited encroachments as specified in Table 27.10-5.
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        |          Category          | Maximum Percentage Disturbance | Minimum Percentage ESOS |
        |                            |           Permitted            |      Conservation       |
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        | Major Wildlife Linkage     | 0*                             | 100                     |
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        | Critical Resource Area     | 5                              | 95                      |
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        | Core Resource Area         | 20                             | 80                      |
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        | Resource Management Area-1 | 34                             | 66                      |
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        | Resource Management Area-2 | 75                             | 25                      |
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        | Resource Management Area-3 | 100                            | 0                       |
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        | * Permitted uses, such as trails, specified in subsection F.1.b of this               |
        | section require a minimal degree of disturbance.                                      |
        +----------------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
        b. The required percentage of ESOS is applied to total acreage of the identified resource area(s) and not a cumulative total of individual resources such as rock outcrops, boulders, and distinctive plant stands.
        c. Within the resource categories, specific locations of final conservation and permitted disturbance areas shall be identified for each individual site as part of the development review process.
        d. All mapped ESL resource areas meet required values specified in the category descriptions in subsection D.3 of this section. The following factors must be utilized to select priority areas for conservation within a resource category designation:
            i. Areas that maintain or create connectivity of open space within and beyond the site are the highest priority.
            ii. Areas that exceed resource area density, size, and frequency specifications are a high priority.
            iii. The value of different resources within a specific category will be balanced in a manner to achieve diversity of habitat.
            iv. ESOS credit for cultural resources will be addressed in concert with an approved treatment plan.
            v. Disturbance areas should be located in areas of least resource density, size, and frequency.
            vi. Areas that include healthy and viable resources are a priority.
            vii. When a site includes multiple outcrops and boulders, conservation priority will be given to outcrops and boulders displaying one (1) or more of the following characteristics:
                a) The largest rock outcrop or boulder features, including height and areas as measured vertically from the lowest adjacent natural grade or horizontally in any direction.
                b) The rock outcrop or boulder is an isolated feature, located one thousand (1,000) feet or more from public preserves, major wildlife linkages or other rock outcrop or boulder features.
                c) The rock outcrop or boulder feature provides connectivity between two (2) identified ESL areas, or is part of an identified linkage area including minor or major wildlife linkages and riparian areas.
                d) The rock outcrop or boulder exhibits fractures, cracks and/or crevices.Figure 27.10-15. Multiple ESL Features and ESOS Areas
                [IMAGE: <27-10-15.png>]
        e. Minimum ESOS Dimensions 
            i. Applicability 
            Dimensions apply to all resources except rock outcrops, boulders, and cultural resources.
            ii. Area 
            The minimum contiguous area for ESOS is four thousand (4,000) square feet.
            iii. Horizontal 
            The minimum horizontal dimension for ESOS areas is thirty (30) feet.
            iv. Exceptions 
            ESOS dimensions do not apply to distinct native vegetation.
            v. Modification 
            The Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve modifications to the minimum ESOS dimensions set forth above, subject to the following criteria:
                a) The ESOS location criteria set forth in this subsection E.4 are met.
                b) Landscape connectivity and open space linkages are maintained.
                c) Reductions in dimensions will maintain ESOS areas that provide habitat value, are easily recognizable, and will not result in maintenance problems due to their proposed locations.
                d) Adjacent land uses, such as streets, will not negatively impact the viability of vegetation or other features of the land to be preserved.Figure 27.10-16. Minimum ESOS Dimensions
                [IMAGE: <27-10-16.png>]
        f. ESOS distribution within planned area developments (PADs) 
        If a master developer elects to provide ESOS in excess of the minimum requirements for a specific development site, the balance may be credited against ESOS requirements for other development sites within the Town, if approved by the Town Council. ESOS may be credited as follows:
            i. Any excess ESOS areas and the resultant credits shall be acknowledged by the property owner and shown as part of an Open Space Master Plan.
            ii. The Open Space Master Plan shall be included with the PAD application and must identify any excess ESOS by development project and allocate any excess ESOS to specific development locations elsewhere within the Open Space Master Plan.
            iii. The excess ESOS must result in additional protection for the most sensitive resources in accordance with the hierarchy established in Table 27.10-5. Reductions in ESOS due to the application of credits cannot be applied to major wildlife linkage or critical resource areas.
        g. Connectivity of ESOS areas is essential in maintaining ecosystem function. Conservation of identified areas that provide connectivity but are environmentally degraded is required.
            i. Degraded areas that provide connectivity to the natural open space system, including identified minor wildlife linkages, must be protected from further disturbance. Restoration in accordance with ESL mitigation requirements, subsection G of this section, may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
            ii. Additional open space linkages that have not been identified on the ESL Planning Map may be recommended by the Planning and Zoning Administrator when the area:
                a) Provides a unique and necessary connection to other ESOS areas.
                b) Is not isolated from other open space areas.
                c) Serves as a habitat corridor for movement of wildlife.
                d) Newly identified linkages will be conserved in accordance with the following:
                    1) Restoration areas will be applied toward total ESOS requirements of the appropriate resource category as assigned by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
                    2) A proportional area will be exempt from native plant salvage and mitigation requirements in Section 27.6.B. This does not apply to any plant listed as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act or highly safeguarded by the Arizona Department of Agriculture.Figure 27.10-17. Degraded/Restored Linkage
                    [IMAGE: <27-10-17.png>]
                    ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
F. ESOS Use and Conservation Development 
    1. ESOS Use 
        a. Applicability 
        Areas protected as ESOS, upon approval of a development application, are subject to use restrictions and requirements. Each must be recorded when land is reserved by tract and/or deed restriction.
        b. Permitted Uses 
            i. Natural open space.
            ii. Trails.
            iii. Identification, use restriction, and/or interpretive signage.
            iv. Cultural resource exhibition.
            v. Essential services as provided for in subsection F.2.f.vi of this section.
            vi. The following when in the resource management category:
                a) Golf courses as limited below:
                    1) Design must be in accordance with Section 24.6.C, golf course overlay zone development, and Section 27.6, Landscape Conservation (turf limitations).
                    2) Golf course best environmental management practices for irrigation, fertilizer use and pest control must be utilized.
                    3) Golf cart paths must be designed to minimize disturbance and avoid distinct vegetation and other environmentally sensitive features. Paved paths may be utilized.
                b) Neighborhood-serving passive and active recreation facilities that are compatible with the conservation purposes of ESOS and do not include impermeable surfaces unless provided herein. Allowable facilities include:
                    1) Soccer or ball field.
                    2) Volleyball court.
                    3) Horseshoe pit.
                    4) Parcourse.
                    5) Turf area subject to the limitations of Section 27.6.
                    6) Benches.
                    7) Picnic tables.
                    8) Barbecue grills.
                    9) Pathways.
                    10) Impervious sidewalks for ADA accessibility.
                    11) Open air ramadas and/or shade awnings.
                    12) Garbage containers and dog stations.
                    13) Other uses that have no greater impact than those specified above, subject to review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        c. Prohibited Uses and Actions 
            i. Enclosed Structures.
            ii. Parking.
            iii. Walls and fences.
            iv. Dumpsters.
            v. Motorized vehicle access except for maintenance purposes.
            vi. Recreational activities not contained within the confines of a designated area.
            vii. Off-leash domestic animals.
            viii. Establishment of nonnative species.
            ix. Removal of native vegetation with the following exceptions:
                a) Development of recreation areas.
                b) Flood control purposes as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and Town Engineer.
        d. Access and Use 
            i. Private and Public Access 
                a) ESOS in common area ownership of a homeowners’ association may be restricted to private access. This excludes trail routes designated for public use as specified in subsection F.1.d.i.b of this section.
                b) All trails identified within the Eastern Pima County Trails System Master Plan and/or the Oro Valley Trails Task Force report and their subsequent updates must enable public access.
                c) All ESOS dedicated to the public will be open to public access.
            ii. Motorized Vehicular Access 
                a) Access into ESOS areas is permitted for maintenance purposes and permitted uses only.
                b) Within major wildlife linkages, access is permitted for open space maintenance purposes only. Additional access can be permitted if, supported by scientific evidence, such access will not degrade the intended function of the linkage.
            iii. Trails 
            Trails and associated amenities such as benches must conform to standards established by the Oro Valley Parks and Recreation Department.
            iv. Signs 
                a) Permanent signs shall be posted at defined points of access into ESOS areas indicating the use restrictions contained in this section.
                b) Signs must conform to standards established by the Oro Valley Parks and Recreation Department.
    2. Development Balance and Incentives 
        a. Purpose 
        Achieving or exceeding base zoning densities while implementing conservation objectives is the purpose of this section, which includes increased flexibility for site planning, lot sizes and dwelling types.
        b. Applicability 
            i. The following design options may be applied to property or portions of property when ESOS is applied to twenty-five percent (25%) or more of a project site, except as provided herein.
        c. Flexible Development 
            i. Process 
            Development requirements may be modified to allow flexibility as a part of the rezoning, subdivision plat, or site plan review process. The process to enable use of flexible development options is delineated by application type:
                a) As part of a rezoning application, or subsequent application, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may review and approve all flexible design options except the following which Town Council retains discretion to enable on a case-by-case basis:
                    1) Subsection F.2.c.iii.a of this section, Building Setback (perimeter).
                    2) Subsection F.2.c.iii.b of this section, Landscape Buffer Yards (when adjoining a residential use or a public street).
                    3) Subsection F.2.c.iii.c of this section, Minimum Lot Size.
                    4) Subsection F.2.c.iii.d of this section, Minimum Lot Width.
                    5) Subsection F.2.c.iii.f of this section, Building Height.
                    6) Subsection F.2.c.iii.g of this section, Open Space.
                    7) Subsection F.2.c.iii.h of this section, Mixed Use.
                    8) Subsection F.2.c.iii.i of this section, Modified Review Process.
                b) For site plan and subdivision plat proposals utilizing the ESL application incentive provided in subsection B.3 of this section, all flexible options are permitted upon Planning and Zoning Administrator review and approval, except the following:
                    1) Subsection F.2.c.iii.f of this section, Building Height. Increases to building height in excess of five (5) feet must be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by Town Council.
                    2) Subsection F.2.c.iii.g of this section, Open Space.
                    3) Subsection F.2.c.iii.h of this section, Mixed Use.
                c) Appeal 
                Administrative decisions of flexible design options may be appealed in the following manner:
                    1) The approval or denial by Town staff of an application shall be final unless, within twenty (20) days from the date of staff’s decision, the applicant files an appeal in writing to the Town Council. Such appeal shall be in writing in care of the Town Clerk and shall indicate where, in the opinion of the appellant, Town staff was in error. The Town Clerk shall schedule the appeal for Town Council review and the Town Council, at its meeting, shall uphold, modify or overrule the decision of Town staff. The decision of the Town Council shall be final.
                    2) The Town Council shall have the right and prerogative to initiate its own review of any decision of Town staff and shall uphold, modify or overrule said decision. Council shall have twenty (20) days to initiate a review and the applicant shall be notified.
            ii. Review Criteria 
            The determination to permit a modification is subject to all of the following findings:
                a) Enables development to the base zoning density, at a minimum, for the entire site.
                b) Compatibility with adjacent land uses is achieved through architectural design, buffers, and placement of structures and improvements to reduce view impacts.
                c) The modification does not conflict with an approved treatment plan for cultural resources.
                d) Statutes, development agreements, appeal processes, or other provisions of this code are not violated.
            iii. Requirements Subject to Modification 
            The following requirements may be modified as they relate to the proposed construction of single-family attached and detached residences, multi-family residences, commercial, employment and mixed use projects.
                a) Building Setback 
                Minimum setbacks may be reduced to no less than five (5) feet on lots less than or equal to twelve thousand (12,000) square feet and up to twenty percent (20%) of the required distance on lots greater than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. Reductions are subject to the following:
                    1) Side yards shall not be less than five (5) feet, unless a zero lot line design is utilized.
                    2) Setback reductions shall not result in on-lot driveway lengths that are less than twenty (20) feet.
                    3) Reductions do not apply to setback requirements in subsection F.2.d.ii.e.2 of this section for a conservation subdivision design.
                b) Landscape Buffer Yards 
                Minimum required buffer yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet with a corresponding decrease in planting ratios specified in Section 27.6, Table 27-10, except when the buffer yard is adjacent to an existing residential subdivision or public street.
                c) Minimum Lot Size 
                Minimum lot sizes, including associated length and width, in all R1, R-4, R-S and SDH-6 districts may be modified subject to conservation design requirements of this section.
                d) Minimum Lot Width 
                Minimum lot width in all R1 and SDH-6 districts may be modified.
                e) Alternative Parking Analysis 
                Modifications resulting in reduced amounts of parking and circulation area are supported. Off-street parking requirements may be reduced in accordance with Section 27.7.C.2.
                f) Building Height 
                Building heights for single-family attached and multi-family dwelling types may be increased by no more than thirteen (13) feet.
                g) Open Space 
                Reductions may be provided in accordance with subsection F.2.f of this section, open space requirements.
                h) Mixed Use 
                Residential uses that are functionally integrated, including access, nonvehicular circulation and amenities, with commercial or employment uses may be approved within commercial zoning districts.
                i) Modified Review Process 
                Site plans and preliminary plats submitted in substantial conformance with the approved Tentative Development Plan, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, may be administratively approved. Any proposed changes to a Tentative Development Plan must be administered as specified in Section 22.3.E.2.b., except Section 22.3.E.2.b.iv.
                j) Recreation Area Credit 
                Permissible passive and/or active recreational amenities located within resource management area ESOS may be credited toward residential recreation area requirements as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator when the locational requirements of Section 26.5, Provision of Recreational Area, are satisfied. Connectivity of open space must be maintained.
                k) Native Vegetation Preservation 
                When fifty percent (50%) or more of a site is preserved as ESOS, requirements for native plant salvage and mitigation (Section 27.6B) shall be waived within a development envelope. This modification cannot be applied to areas of distinct vegetation which are designated as a core resource area or native plants that are considered threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act or highly safeguarded by the Arizona Department of Agriculture.
        d. Conservation Subdivision Design 
            i. Purpose 
            Conservation subdivision design positions residential development on a portion of the available land in order to maximize protected open space and improve the efficiency of infrastructure systems. The provisions of this section further provide offsets to typical reductions in development yield derived from drainage and circulation improvements. Conservation options include potential increases to development density.
            ii. General Requirements 
                a) Development shall be arranged in a manner to conserve identified resources.
                b) The area to be developed must be consolidated to a greater extent than permitted in Section 23.4, Table of Dimensional Requirements, and provide a concomitant increase in ESOS.
                c) Conservation subdivision design shall enable a maximum number of individual lots that adjoin open space areas. Designs that create a single grouping of residences are not intended unless specific site conditions leave no alternative. Multiple groupings of residences are typically expected in a conservation subdivision design. Examples of desired conservation design are shown in Figure 27.10-18.
                +--------------------------+--------------------------+
                |                          |                          |
                | [IMAGE: <27-10-18a.png>] | [IMAGE: <27-10-18b.png>] |
                +--------------------------+--------------------------+
                | Example 1                                           |
                +--------------------------+--------------------------+
                |                          |                          |
                | [IMAGE: <27-10-18c.png>] | [IMAGE: <27-10-18d.png>] |
                +--------------------------+--------------------------+
                | Example 2                                           |
                +--------------------------+--------------------------+
                |                          |                          |
                | [IMAGE: <27-10-18e.png>] | [IMAGE: <27-10-18f.png>] |
                +--------------------------+--------------------------+
                | Example 3                                           |
                +--------------------------+--------------------------+
                d) Open space areas created by conservation subdivision design must remain viable for wildlife use and movement.
                e) Compatibility with adjacent land uses through architectural design, transition of density, buffers, and placement of structures and improvements must be achieved as follows:
                    1) Architectural Design 
                    Structures shall include architectural design features and a color palette that is compatible with an adjacent subdivision(s). Design compatibility is subject to Planning and Zoning Commission review and approval.
                    2) Lot Size Transition 
                    In perimeter areas adjacent to residential development, a transition shall be provided. Base zoning district lot sizes are required within one hundred fifty (150) feet of adjacent residential uses.Figure 27.10-19. Lot Size Transition
                    [IMAGE: <27-10-19.png>]
                f) Conservation subdivision designs may employ any dwelling unit type permitted by the zoning code, except site-delivered housing as defined in Chapter 31.
                    1) Alternative dwelling unit types shall employ the zoning code development requirements associated with said alternative dwelling type.
                        A) If townhouse dwellings are proposed, the requirements for the R-4 zoning classification, Section 23.7.B, shall be applied.
                        B) If multi-family dwellings are proposed, the requirements for the R-6 zoning classification, Section 23.7.E, shall be applied.
                    2) The sum total of square feet by which the area of each lot in the subdivision is reduced shall not exceed the total square footage of the conserved area.
                g) Any proposed increase in density must be specified on the tentative development plan required for rezoning.
                h) Building heights must comply with base zoning, or building heights modified by an ESL rezoning approval.
            iii. Lot Size Reduction 
                a) Conservation subdivision design without an increase in density may occur by reducing minimum lot sizes while retaining the overall base zoning dwelling count as defined in Chapter 31. All density calculations for ESL are intended to be completed using this method (See Figure 27.10-20).
                b) When ESOS is applied to twenty-five percent (25%) or more of a project site, residential lots may be reduced in size by forty percent (40%), but shall not be smaller than the minimum lot areas set forth in Table 27.10-6.
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                | District | Minimum Base Zoning Lot | Minimum Conservation |
                |          |          Area           | Subdivision Lot Size |
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                | R1-144   | 144,000                 | 43,560               |
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                | R1-43    | 43,000                  | 24,000               |
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                | R1-36    | 36,000                  | 21,600               |
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                | R1-20    | 20,000                  | 12,000               |
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                | R1-10    | 10,000                  | 6,000                |
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                | R1-7     | 7,000                   | 5,500                |
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                | SDH-6    | 6,000                   | 5,500                |
                +----------+-------------------------+----------------------+
                c) When ESOS is applied to sixty-six percent (66%) or more of a project site, residential lot size may be reduced to a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet.
        e. Conservation Development with Density Increase 
            i. When conservation development designs are utilized and minimum open space requirements of this section are met, a density increase of ten percent (10%) above the base zoning density is permitted for residential and nonresidential development.
            ii. A density incentive up to twenty percent (20%) of the residential base zoning density or commercial intensity is permitted if ESOS requirements are exceeded by ten percent (10%) or more.
            iii. This density bonus provision may be applied when utilizing the flexibility and modifications permitted in this section.
            iv. The increase in residential density is calculated by dividing the area of additional ESOS by the minimum lot area of the base zoning district. Maximum density increases for development are listed in Table 27.10-7. The increase in nonresidential intensity is two percent (2%) additional FAR for each additional one percent (1%) of open space, not to exceed the maximum listed in Table 27.10-7.
            +-----------------------------------------------------+
            | Step One:                                           |
            | Base Zoning Dwelling Count =                        |
            | Gross Land Area ÷ Minimum Lot Area of Base Zone     |
            +-----------------------------------------------------+
            
            +-----------------------------------------------------+
            | Step Two:                                           |
            | Additional Dwellings Permitted =                    |
            | Additional ESOS Area (acres) ÷ Base Zoning Lot Size |
            +-----------------------------------------------------+
            
            +-----------------------------------------------------+
            | Step Three:                                         |
            | Total Allowable Dwelling Count with Bonus =         |
            | Additional Dwellings + Base Zoning Dwelling Count   |
            +-----------------------------------------------------+
            v. The additional ESOS must meet the following criteria:
                a) Meet the requirements in subsection E of this section, Open Space Requirements.
                b) Be natural, undisturbed desert area and cannot include revegetated areas.
                c) The additional ESOS shall be provided in common area or separate tracts and cannot be located on an individual single-family lot.
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | Zoning District | Minimum Area per | Base Density (D.U.s | Maximum Density  |
                |                 |     Dwelling     |       / acre)       |    with Bonus    |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | Residential                                                                 |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R1-300          | 300,000          | 0.15                | 0.18             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R1-144          | 144,000          | 0.3                 | 0.36             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R1-72           | 72,000           | 0.6                 | 0.72             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R1-43           | 43,000           | 1.0                 | 1.2              |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R1-36           | 36,000           | 1.2                 | 1.44             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R1-20           | 20,000           | 2.2                 | 2.64             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R1-10           | 10,000           | 4.4                 | 5.28             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R1-7            | 7,000            | 6.2                 | 7.44             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | SDH-6           | 6,000            | 7.3                 | 8.76             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R-4             | 5,450            | 8.0                 | 9.6              |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R-4R            | 4,250/rental     | 10.2                | 12.24            |
                |                 | 15,000/dwelling  | 2.9                 | 3.48             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R-S             | 5,450            | 8.0                 | 9.6              |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | R-6             | 3,500            | 12.4                | 14.88            |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | Nonresidential                                                              |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                |                 |                  | Base (FAR)          | Maximum FAR with |
                |                 |                  |                     | Bonus            |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | CN              |                  | 0.20                | 0.24             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | C-1             |                  | 0.30                | 0.36             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | C-2             |                  | 0.40                | 0.48             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | PS              |                  |                     |                  |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | T-P             |                  | 0.50                | 0.60             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
                | POS             |                  | 0.15                | 0.18             |
                +-----------------+------------------+---------------------+------------------+
        f. ESOS Flexibility 
            i. ESOS flexibility is available for any property subject to the requirements contained in this section. The applicability requirements of subsection F.2.b of this section do not apply.
            ii. The Town Council may reduce the amount of required ESOS specified in Table 27.10-2.
            iii. Review and approval of a proposed reduction in ESOS is subject to the following limitations:
                a) Critical and core resource areas: ten percent (10%) maximum reduction.
                b) Resource management areas: twenty-five percent (25%) maximum reduction.
                c) Major wildlife linkage areas: No reduction permitted.
            iv. Criteria 
            When it is demonstrated that one (1) of the following criteria is satisfied and that open space connectivity is equally conserved, a reduction in minimum ESOS in the critical, core or resource management areas may be approved by the Town Council.
                a) The site is identified as appropriate for C-1, C-2 or Technological Park growth in accordance with the adopted strategic economic development policy, or
                b) Development proposal is wildlife permeable as defined in Chapter 31, or
                c) The area has been isolated by development from other open spaces and lost all connectivity with other open space areas.
            v. Resource Priorities 
            Relative resource priorities as identified in subsection E.4.d of this section shall be applied to guide open space design when ESOS flexibility is requested.
            vi. Essential Services 
                a) Essential services include utilities, sewer improvements, and roads. Within the major wildlife linkages, roads are limited to utility access and trailheads.
                b) Disturbances to ESOS for essential services may be approved by the Town Council when:
                    1) Improvements do not negate the intent to conserve viable habitat and connections for wildlife movement; and
                    2) Mitigation will be provided to achieve equivalent or superior habitat conditions; and
                    3) It has been demonstrated that the least amount of disturbance has been planned.
                c) Areas disturbed as a result of providing flexibility for essential services must be mitigated in accordance with subsection G of this section, Mitigation.
                d) Areas damaged by roads or infrastructure that do not enable complete restoration must be mitigated by providing on-site replacement of the same quantity and quality of ESOS or providing off-site mitigation as outlined below.
            vii. Off-Site Mitigation 
            As a component of ESOS flexibility, ESOS may be provided on an alternative, off-site land parcel subject to the following:
                a) Off-site mitigation proposals must further the purposes of the ESL regulations.
                b) The resources must be equal or higher value in the ESL hierarchical system.
                c) Mitigation must be provided on a one to one (1:1) ratio.
                d) The remaining ESOS, after any reduction, retains its environmental value as intended by the ESL regulations.
            viii. Approved Cultural Resources Site 
            Land designated as a protected cultural resources site in accordance with an approved treatment plan shall qualify as required ESOS on a one to three (1:3) basis (each square foot of cultural resource site shall equal three (3) square feet of required ESOS) as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    3. Design 
        a. Development Envelope 
            i. Development envelopes must be delineated when development is proposed adjacent to ESOS areas. The specific location of a development envelope shall be shown on the site plan, subdivision plat, improvement plan, and Type 1 grading permit. The method of delineating the envelope boundary must enable precise field verification.
            ii. All improvements requiring ground disturbance shall be contained within development envelopes. No clearing, grading, grubbing, or disturbance may occur outside of the approved development envelopes or within ESOS areas subject to specified exceptions in subsections F.1, Permitted Uses, F.1.c.v, prohibited uses-vehicular access, and F.2.f.vi, open space-essential services, of this section.
            iii. A field survey to determine the location of development envelope boundaries is required at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
            iv. The boundary of ESOS or the development envelope shall be delineated by a temporary, highly visible, protective fence. Fencing must be established prior to construction and remain in place until construction is complete as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        b. ESOS Setbacks 
            i. All structures must be set back to permit their installation or construction without any impact to ESOS areas. The following setbacks apply to the following structures:
                a) Walls and fences: fifteen (15) feet.
                b) Buildings, ramadas, play structures, similar accessory structures, swimming pools, and retaining walls over three (3) feet: twenty (20) feet.
                Setbacks may be reduced at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Administrator to no less than five (5) feet if the property owner can demonstrate conditions or specific techniques that ensure no encroachment into ESOS.Figure 27.10-21. Building Envelope and ESOS Setback
                [IMAGE: <27-10-21.png>]
            ii. When other setbacks are required per the zoning code, the more restrictive setback shall apply.
            iii. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may require wider ESOS setbacks where conditions dictate additional disturbance is required for construction.
        c. Rock Outcrops and Boulders 
        Mitigation measures are required for rock outcrop and boulder encroachments. A mitigation plan, prepared in accordance with the requirements contained in subsection G of this section, Mitigation, is required.
        d. Circulation Improvements 
            i. Circulation improvements include facilities for vehicular and nonvehicular use such as roadways, driveways, parking, circulation areas, bridges, drainage crossings, multi-use and bicycle pathways and sidewalks. Trail system design is addressed in subsections F.1.d and F.2.f.vi of this section, open space.
            ii. Circulation improvements must be designed to avoid impacts to environmentally sensitive areas. When no other viable alternative exists, circulation improvements shall use shortest distance alignments and otherwise minimize grading and disturbance of environmentally sensitive areas.
            iii. The design of circulation improvements and wildlife crossings in environmentally sensitive areas shall:
                a) Comply with Oro Valley subdivision street standards and the drainage design criteria unless specifically modified to preserve ESL resources and approved by the Town Engineer;
                b) Be based on a Town-approved assessment of wildlife species occurring in the area; and
                c) Include design features that support conservation of identified species.
            iv. The Town Engineer retains discretion for specifying wildlife-friendly design features for circulation improvements located in environmentally sensitive areas.
            v. Restoration of all disturbed areas is required in accordance with subsection G of this section, Mitigation.
        e. Structures 
            i. For all structures on residential lots adjacent to ESOS, or nonresidential and multi-family structures within two hundred (200) feet of ESOS, building materials must meet the requirements listed in subsection F.3.e.ii of this section.
            ii. Design requirements for all structures and utility equipment such as surface-mounted utility transformers, pull boxes, pedestal cabinets, service terminals or other similar on-the-ground facilities include:
                a) Glass surfaces shall not exceed a reflectivity of twenty percent (20%).
                b) Exterior finishes shall not exceed a reflectivity of sixty percent (60%).
                c) Materials used for exterior surfaces of all structures shall match in color, hue, and tone with the surrounding natural desert setting. Green and beige hues and tones are preferred for utility equipment located in environmentally sensitive areas.
                Surface materials of walls, retaining walls or fences shall be similar to and compatible with those of the adjacent main buildings.
                d) Cumulative application of structural and other design requirements within scenic resource areas.
        f. Permanent Walls and Fences 
            i. In open space areas such as recreation areas, buffer yards and drainage facilities adjacent to ESOS and in wildlife permeable development, wall and fence design features shall:
                a) Be wildlife-friendly and promote conservation of identified species as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
                b) Utilize wall and fence design based on a Town-approved assessment of the wildlife species using the area.
            ii. No walls, fences, or other barriers may be located so as to impede wildlife movement through designated ESOS. Walls or fences shall not enclose or disconnect contiguous ESOS.
            iii. Chain link, wire mesh, woven wire and similar fence materials are prohibited.
            iv. Walls can be in the form of a view fence that combines solid wall elements with wrought iron or other open material to permit unobstructed views.
            v. Walls and fences shall not require the removal of distinctive vegetation as defined in subsection D.3.c.iii.d of this section.
            vi. Walls shall be built of materials that blend into the rough textures and rustic character of the vegetation, rocks and other features of the natural desert setting and shall comply with Section 27.6.C.5, landscape conservation – screening. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)15-06, Amended,  02/04/2015; (O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
G. Mitigation 
    1. Purpose 
    Site-specific mitigation is required in order to restore biological functions and resource values of riparian areas, distinctive vegetation and rock outcrop features impacted by development activity or previous human disturbance.
    2. Applicability 
        a. Mitigation is required for disturbed areas of environmentally sensitive resources including restoration due to impacts from:
            i. Essential services installation as described in subsection F.2.f.vi of this section;
            ii. Degraded linkage areas as described in subsection E.4.g of this section; and
            iii. Other instances of disturbance to environmentally sensitive resources.
        b. This section applies to natural resources and does not apply to mitigation of a cultural resource.
    3. General Requirements 
    Mitigation specific to each disturbed area is required for impacts to environmentally sensitive resources including:
        a. Riparian areas;
        b. Distinctive plant stands and communities; and
        c. Rock outcrops and boulders.
    4. Mitigation 
        a. Site Characterization 
            i. If the proposed impact area is less than one-quarter (1/4) acre in size, prior to disturbance the site shall be characterized through a one hundred percent (100%) inventory of resource elements.
            ii. If the proposed impact area is greater than one-quarter (1/4) acre in size site characterization may be accomplished through sampling as described below.
        b. Sampling Riparian Areas and Distinctive Vegetation Stands 
            i. Sample Area(s) 
                a) Determine the sample areas within which plots or transects will be established in accordance with reference site requirements. The following qualities shall be included in the sample area:
                    1) Sample areas for distinctive vegetation stands should include stands of mature and healthy vegetation that meet the minimum cover or density definitions in the ESL for those resources being impacted.
                    2) Sample areas’ area shall be large enough to include all species belonging to the plant community.
                    3) The habitat should be relatively uniform throughout a single sample area. Each habitat type shall be sampled separately.
            ii. Configuration 
                a) Plots or transects shall be distributed throughout the sample area in a manner to capture all of the variability within that sample area. Plots or transects can be either located randomly within a sample area or according to an orderly sampling scheme (e.g., on a grid, at regular intervals, etc.) – as long as the result is that the sample area is accurately described by the plot number and arrangement.
                b) The sampling locations must be approved as part of the mitigation plan review process, and must be representative of the area being sampled.
            iii. Plot Sampling 
                a) Plot sampling, or quadrat sampling, can be used to describe a variety of plant community characteristics of an area that is too large for a complete vegetation inventory to be feasible.
                b) The parameters to be addressed include: diversity (species present), cover, and density (number of species in a given area).
                c) The number of plots or transects conducted within each sample area should be sufficient to characterize the range of vegetation conditions within it.
                d) Size and Shape 
                    1) Plot size and shape should fit the nature of the vegetation community to be sampled. Circular plots are generally recommended with these field mapping standards, as they are more efficient to accurately establish in the field.
                    2) Plot size should be large enough to include a significant number of individual plants, representing all dominant species, but small enough that plants can be counted without duplication or omission of individuals.
                    3) Suggested plot sizes that are typically appropriate for vegetation in the context of riparian habitat are listed below. Site characteristics may necessitate using a different plot size or shape (i.e., if the riparian vegetation entity is not wide enough). Plot shape and size should be consistent throughout.
                    4) Circular plots (preferred): ten (10) meter radius (314 m2 or 3,380 ft2).
                    5) Square plots: fifteen (15) to twenty (20) meters per side (225 m2 to 400 m2 or 2,422 ft2 to 4,306 ft2).
                    6) Rectangular plots: fifteen (15) meters by twenty (20) meters (300 m2 or 3,229 ft2).
            iv. Transect Sampling 
            Transects may be conducted according to the point intercept and belt transect methods. The method is based on a fifty (50) meter point transect centered on a two (2) by fifty (50) meter plot (i.e., the belt transect). Using this method, vegetation is sampled by points at one-half (1/2) meter intervals along the fifty (50) meter transect to determine cover. The surveyor will note the species encountered at each interval. In addition, individuals of each perennial species rooted within the two (2) by fifty (50) meter plot will be counted to determine density and diversity. All annuals present in the two (2) by fifty (50) meter plot will also be noted.
        c. Rock Outcrops and Boulders 
        If rock outcrops and/or boulders, as defined in Chapter 31, will be impacted beyond established thresholds, they must be addressed in the mitigation plan through salvage and relocation to re-create the original character as determined by an assessment of the following features:
            i. The surface area and average height of the feature.
            ii. Average size of boulders within the feature.
            iii. General density and width of crevices or fractures across the outcrop.
            iv. Aspect/orientation of the outcrop.
        d. Reference Sites 
            i. When degraded areas do not permit site characterization in accordance with subsection G.4.b of this section, a reference site shall be selected and used as a proxy for desired conditions at the mitigation site.
            ii. Reference sites shall be used to determine appropriate plant species, size and density to be included in the mitigation plan.
            iii. Reference sites shall be located in the same watershed and carefully chosen to reflect similar habitat resources including vegetation qualities and abiotic characteristics such as elevation, topography, stream characteristics, and substrate. Reference sites are informative and suggestive rather than prescriptive. Characterization of reference sites shall use the sample methodology outlined herein.
            iv. Reference sites for riparian habitat impacts should include healthy, intact riparian habitat that is the same or higher riparian/xeroriparian classification and within the same watershed as that being impacted.
            v. Each reference site may include several sampling areas.
            vi. Number of Reference Sites 
                a) If the proposed impact area is less than one-quarter (1/4) acre in size and has been previously degraded or disturbed, at least one (1) reference site shall be selected for characterization.
                b) If the proposed impact area is between one-quarter (1/4) and five (5) acres in size and has been previously degraded or disturbed, at least two (2) reference sites shall be selected for characterization.
                c) For proposed impacts areas greater than five (5) acres that have been previously degraded or disturbed, at least three (3) reference sites shall be selected for characterization.
    5. Mitigation Plan 
        a. Mitigation plans shall be prepared by a qualified habitat restoration specialist. The requirement to use a qualified habitat restoration specialist is waived for mitigation plans prepared for single residential parcels.
        b. A mitigation plan shall include accurate information about resource elements present in the proposed impact area prior to such impacts and at any proposed mitigation area if different than impact area.
        c. Mitigation Plan Contents 
        The following information must be included in a mitigation plan:
            i. Aerial photograph at an appropriate scale with the following items clearly labeled:
                a) Proposed project area, mitigation area, and reference area(s);
                b) ESL resources;
                c) Sampling entities;
                d) Plot and/or transect locations, numerically labeled, to identify the plot relative to the data;
            ii. Results summary table with all species listed;
            iii. Evaluation of species diversity and vegetation cover;
            iv. Representative photographs of each sample entity;
            v. Planting plan, including specifications for the placement and relocation of rock and boulder features; and
            vi. Other supporting data and evidence as appropriate.
        d. Plant Density 
            i. For each area sampled, calculate the mean (average) number of individuals per species, based on the area of all plots or transects in that entity. For creating a planting plan, these values can be extrapolated to a meaningful area (e.g., one (1) acre or the size of the proposed disturbance) for each species as well as a total for shrubs and trees. The mean value will be used to calculate the mitigation required, using the following formula:
            +-------------------------------------+---+-------------------------------+
            | Total number of plants in all plots | = | X plants per area of interest |
            +-------------------------------------+---+-------------------------------+
            | Total combined area of all plots    | " | Area of interest              |
            +-------------------------------------+---+-------------------------------+
            ii. At a minimum, all mitigation areas should achieve a density of forty-five (45) trees per acre and one hundred (100) shrubs per acre.
            Species and quantities of plant materials must be calculated based on density values obtained in the vegetation sampling of the reference site(s) as described below.
        e. Plant Palette 
            i. The specific plant palette should include native species that are present in the proposed impact area or reference site(s), as determined by the sampling techniques described above.
            ii. Historic flora may be consulted for additional species that may have occurred in the area in the past and that may be appropriate.
            iii. Plant materials must be selected to create a diverse native vegetation community that will have the greatest habitat value possible. This should include (as appropriate) species of trees, large and mid-sized shrubs, bunchgrasses, sub-shrubs, vines, and annuals that will provide a structurally diverse vegetation community with ample cover for a variety of wildlife.
            iv. Species selection must incorporate plant species that provide a variety of food resources for wildlife, including grains, berries, insects, pollen, and nectar.
        f. Plant Size 
        Trees and shrub size shall reflect the average found in the transects. The following serve as minimum size requirements:
            i. Trees: Fifty percent (50%) at twenty-four (24) inch boxed and fifty percent (50%) at fifteen (15) gallon.
            ii. Shrubs: One hundred percent (100%) at five (5) gallon.
        g. Planting, Rock and Boulder Design 
            i. Container plants must be installed in natural-looking patterns that mimic the surrounding and reference areas and not in rows or grids. Planting design shall be detailed on the planting plan.
            ii. The placement of rock and boulder materials shall re-create the original character of the feature to the greatest practical extent. Rock and boulder placement shall be detailed on the planting plan.
        h. Plant Material Quality 
            i. Emphasis on plant materials shall be for restoration quality stock that is native and as local to the project area as possible and preferably from within the same watershed.
            ii. Plant materials may consist of salvaged plants or cuttings as well as container plants grown in traditional or tall pots from seed collected locally specifically for the project. Container plants will be grown at a nursery that specializes in producing high-quality native plant species for habitat restoration projects.
            iii. Native soil shall be used in the plant containers if possible. If more native soil is needed than is available to fill plant containers, each container shall receive some native soil mixed with an appropriate commercial nursery soil mix.
            iv. Container plants must be grown outdoors and in full sunlight. Prior to container plants being delivered to the project site, they shall be hardened off from water, so they may be able to sustain themselves under potential drought conditions once planted.
            v. Deep-planting techniques for woody species are permitted in order to achieve maximum survival with minimal irrigation. This may include deep-planting of dormant pole cuttings as well as the use of container stock grown in tall pots.
            vi. All plant materials shall be inspected by Town staff prior to installation to ensure they are healthy, disease free, and of proper species, quantities, and sizes.
        i. Seed Types 
            i. Seed labels, including origin, purity, and germination rates, shall be made available to Town staff for review and approval prior to application at the project site.
            ii. The seed mix palette must include only native species that occur in the vicinity of the restoration mitigation area and that are appropriate for the site, as determined by vegetation sampling.
            iii. The mix should include as many species as possible, and, as with the container plants, a diverse mix of structural habits. It is important to include species that germinate at different times of the year as a contingency if precipitation is below average during the first wet season and to provide cover throughout the year.
        j. Seed Application 
        Seeds can be applied through a variety of methods, including hand-broadcasting, pelletization, pitting, and hydroseeding. Timing of application shall be coordinated with precipitation for the greatest likelihood of germination success.
    6. Off-Site Mitigation 
        a. Location 
            i. Mitigation may be proposed on site or off site subject to Planning and Zoning Administrator approval. On-site mitigation is appropriate when impacts are temporary such as disturbance for a utility right-of-way. Off-site mitigation may be proposed if impacts will be permanent.
            ii. Appropriate off-site mitigation locations include areas adjacent or in close proximity to the impacted area that contain similar resource elements such as areas upstream along the same riparian corridor where the impact occurred, or areas where resources have previously been degraded or disturbed.
            iii. The location of the proposed mitigation area should consider the following items:
                a) Proximity and connectivity to other resource elements within and adjacent to the parcel containing the mitigation area.
                b) Soil and landscape characteristics.
                c) Hydrology.
                d) Zoning and long-term protection.
                e) Access and logistical concerns.
                f) Land use history. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)

CHAPTER 28 SIGNS

Sections:
Section 28.1 General Provisions
Section 28.2 Procedures and Enforcement
Section 28.3 General Sign Requirements
Section 28.4 Definitions and Sign Types
Section 28.5 Permanent Signs
Section 28.6 Temporary Signs
Section 28.7 Permanent Signs on Public Property
Section 28.8 Temporary Signs on Public Property
Section 28.9 Temporary Public and Quasi-Public Signs
Section 28.10 Prohibited Signs
Section 28.11 Exempted Signs
Code reviser’s note: Ordinance (O)15-13, Section 1, provides, “The enforcement of the content based signs and sign walkers within Chapter 28, Signs, of the Oro Valley Sign Code Revised and any noncomplying private property provisions, is hereby suspended.”

Section 28.1 General Provisions
A. Purpose 
    1. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish reasonable regulations for the design, construction, location, and maintenance of all exterior signs in the Town of Oro Valley in order to:
        a. Preserve and protect the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience. Protect the general public from injury or damage which may be caused by faulty and uncontrolled construction or improper location of signs within the Town.
        b. Provide for an effective form of communication while preserving the scenic beauty of the desert environment. Ensure that the signage is clear; compatible with the character of the adjacent architecture and neighborhoods; and provides the essential identity of, and direction to, facilities in the community.
        c. Enhance the potential economic value and quality of development within the community, as well as promote and aid the tourism industry, an important part of the Town’s economy.
        d. Promote the effectiveness of signs by preventing sign over-concentration, improper placement, excessive clutter, size, and number.
        e. Safeguard and preserve the unique character of the Town and create an attractive and appealing community environment in which to live, work, and visit. Assure that the public benefits derived from the expenditure of public funds for the improvement and beautification of streets and other public structures and spaces shall be protected by exercising reasonable controls over the character and design of sign structures.
    2. It is not the purpose of this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this Chapter.
B. Requirement for Conformity 
If any sign and/or sign structure is located, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this Chapter, the Town or any owner or tenant of real property aggrieved by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies available at law, may institute appropriate injunction proceedings to correct the violation with the Oro Valley Magistrate Court.
C. Nonconforming and Discontinued Signs 
    1. Signs Rendered Nonconforming 
        a. If, at the time of the adoption of this Chapter or amendment thereto, or of any extension of jurisdiction resulting from annexation, any permanent sign which is being used but does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed legal nonconforming.
        b. Any sign which becomes legally nonconforming shall be permitted to remain, provided the sign:
            i. Is not increased in area or height;
            ii. Remains structurally unchanged, except for reasonable repairs or minor alteration;
            iii. If relocated, due to no fault of the owner, is placed in the same relative position on the remaining property that it occupied prior to the relocation;
            iv. Is relocated in a manner so as to comply with applicable safety requirements; and
            v. Is not discontinued per subsection C.2 of this section.
        c. Alteration or Removal of Nonconforming Signs 
            i. A nonconforming sign shall not be re-erected, relocated (except as permitted above), or replaced unless it is brought into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
            ii. Any nonconforming sign shall be removed or rebuilt in full conformity to the terms of this Chapter if it is damaged or allowed to deteriorate to such extent that the cost of repair or restoration is fifty percent (50%) or more of the costs and/or replacement of materials.
    2. Signs Rendered Obsolete or Discontinued 
        a. With the exception of Lease, Rent, and For Sale Signs, any sign which is located on a property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period exceeding three (3) months shall be deemed to have been discontinued.
        b. Sign structures which remain vacant, unoccupied, obsolete, devoid of any message or display a message pertaining to a time, event, or purpose that no longer applies for more than three (3) months shall be deemed discontinued.
        c. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to remove any sign deemed discontinued subject to penalty as set forth in Section 30.2.
    3. Change in Business 
        a. When a business establishment closes, relocates, changes names, or abandons any sign or structure, the owner of the property shall remove the sign, or cause it to be removed, within thirty (30) days of the change of business. If the sign is to be immediately re-faced with a new business name, a new sign permit shall be required and applicable fees shall be paid. A permit shall be nontransferable from one (1) owner to another.
        b. A nonconforming sign shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter when a business establishment closes, relocates, changes names, or abandons any sign. A permit and applicable fees for the sign modifications are required.
D. Liabilities for Insurance and Damages 
    1. The provisions of this code shall not be construed to relieve or to limit in any way the responsibility or liability of any person, firm, or corporation which erects or owns any sign from personal injury or property damages caused by, or attributed to, such sign. The provisions of this code shall not be construed to impose upon the Town of Oro Valley, its officers or its employees any responsibility or liability by reason of the approval of any sign under the provisions of this code.
E. Prevailing Code 
In the event a provision established in this Chapter is found to be in conflict with another provision in the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised, or any other Town Code, the more restrictive shall prevail.
In the event that a commercial, industrial, or residential development and/or subdivision should fall under a Planned Area Development (PAD), the rules and regulations of that PAD shall apply.
If the Town-adopted sign regulations/guidelines for any development project, including Planned Area Developments, do not specifically address any such sign standard, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply.
F. Signs Prohibited by Omission 
In addition to those signs, or sign types, specifically prohibited by Section 28.10, any sign, or type of sign, not specifically permitted under provisions of this code shall be prohibited. ((O)19-06, Amended,  07/31/2019; (O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011)

Section 28.2 Procedures and Enforcement
The Planning and Zoning Administrator is responsible for enforcing this Chapter pursuant to Sections 21.2.B.7 and 21.4.B.10. The Planning and Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to ensure that all provisions of this Chapter are met in fact and intent. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may appoint a designee to assure code compliance. The procedures to be followed in exercising this authority are outlined in Sections 28.2.C through F.Figure 28-1. Sign Criteria, Sign Package, and Master Sign Program Approval Process
[IMAGE: <28-1.png>]
((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)
A. Sign Permits, Fees, and Application Procedures 
    1. A sign permit shall be required in order to erect, install, relocate, modify, or change any sign within the Town of Oro Valley.
    2. Approval of all temporary sign permits shall be at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.
    3. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall authorize issuance of permits for permanent signs after applications have been reviewed by staff for code compliance. Any proposed Master Sign Program, amendments thereto, or PAD exemption is subject to review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Once sign applications have been approved, any issuance of sign permits shall meet the approved sign standards for that development.
    4. All electrical work associated with the sign installation must conform to the currently adopted versions of the National Electrical Code and must be reflected on the application.
    5. Permit Fees 
        a. Upon approval of an application for the sign permit, the applicant shall be advised of the applicable fee. Permits will not be issued until all applicable fees have been collected. Fees shall be assessed according to a schedule adopted by the Town Council.
        b. Exception: The owner of a nonconforming sign shall not be required to pay a fee for a permit to bring an existing sign into conformance with this code.
    6. Application shall be in accordance with Town policy.
    7. Permit Expiration 
        a. All permits issued under this Chapter, unless otherwise stipulated, shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not completed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit. Prior to expiration of the permit, the applicant may request an extension of the expiration date at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or his/her appointee. Once the permit has expired, before such work can recommence a new permit shall first be obtained and the fee shall be fifty percent (50%) of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been, or will be, made to the original plans and specifications.
        b. Any sign for which renewal fees have not been paid, and said remittance is delinquent for fourteen (14) or more days, is deemed to be an illegal sign, and said sign must be removed in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)
B. Sign Criteria, Master Sign Program and Sign Package 
Sign Criteria and Master Sign Programs are official documents that regulate signage within a multi-business site or development. An approved Sign Criteria or Master Sign Program is required prior to issuance of a sign permit for: (1) nonresidential multiple-occupancy buildings; (2) commercial, office, resorts, and/or industrial centers.
Any development, including single-occupancy developments within and/or adjacent to an existing development that share access and/or parking with that development, must: (1) follow the approved sign criteria or Master Sign Program for the existing development; or (2) submit a Sign Criteria or Master Sign Program. If the owner elects to follow the criteria or program of the existing center, no additional approvals are required prior to review and issuance of the sign permit.
    1. Sign Package 
    A sign package is comprised of a complete application for proposed permanent sign(s) for a single business. A sign package is required if a property does not have an approved sign criteria and/or Master Sign Program.
    2. Sign Criteria 
    A Sign Criteria is a set of proposed sign standards for a development that complies with the provisions of this Chapter and Addendum A, Design Guidelines. Sign Criteria for areas within a PAD (Planned Area Development) shall comply with the provisions of the PAD.
    3. Master Sign Program 
        a. A Master Sign Program is a set of proposed sign standards for a development that proposed alternatives to the provisions of this Chapter, and is intended to provide latitude in order to achieve variety and good design.
        b. Master Sign Programs shall be based on the provisions of this Chapter and shall conform to the purpose and intent of this Chapter and to the Addendum A, Design Guidelines.
        c. Master Sign Programs shall include only those sign types permitted herein and may allow adjustments to the standards of those types, provided they are justifiable.
        d. Master Sign Programs are intended to allow adjustments to the standards of multiple sign types and shall not be used for single-occupancy developments.
        e. Master Sign Programs require review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the Town Council.
        f. Compliance with these provisions does not guarantee approval by the Town Council.
    4. Review of Sign Criteria and/or Master Sign Program shall be guided by the following:
        a. Overall character of the entire development, including landscaping, architecture, topography, uses, and design.
        b. Compliance with the criteria specified in Addendum A, Design Guidelines A-C.4 and the purpose statements of this Chapter.
        c. Any other applicable information that may be useful in the overall presentation of the proposed criteria for the development.
    5. Consistency of typeface, illumination, and color is preferred if sign criteria or Master Sign Program have been approved, and then all requirements of that criteria or program must be utilized.
    6. Application for sign criteria and/or Master Sign Program shall be updated in accordance with subsection A.5 of this section, Application, by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)
C. PAD Exemption 
In the event that a Planned Area Development District (PAD) has established its own sign requirements, the owner of lands within the PAD, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, may elect to operate under all or a portion of this Chapter 28, Signs, in accordance with the procedures set forth below:
    1. A letter requesting exemption from the specific PAD sign regulations must be submitted by the property owner within the PAD with a list of all homeowner/master associations within the affected area. The request shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
    2. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, Town staff shall verify the list of homeowner associations for accuracy and completeness and shall notify them by first class mail of the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing date.
    3. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward a recommendation to Town Council. The Town Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)
D. Violations 
    1. Revocation of Permit 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this section whenever the permit is issued on the basis of a material omission or misstatement of fact, or is in violation of this Chapter or the Oro Valley Town Code.
    2. Signs Placed in the Public Right-of-Way 
    In the event that the requirements for temporary signs in the right-of-way are violated, the following procedures will be followed:
        a. First Violation 
        The sign owner will be notified of the violation, the sign will be confiscated, and a recovery fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) per sign will be assessed.
        b. Second Violation by the Same Sign Owner 
        The sign owner will be notified of the violation. The sign will be confiscated and the sign owner will be assessed a fine of fifty dollars ($50) per sign.
        c. Third Violation by the Same Owner within One Year 
        The sign owner will be notified of the violation. The sign will be confiscated and the sign owner will be assessed a fine of one hundred dollars ($100) per sign.
        d. A maximum of five hundred dollars ($500) in fines may be assessed to a sign owner per calendar year.
        e. Additional Violations 
            i. Any additional violation by the same sign owner is subject to revocation of the sign permit.
            ii. If a sign permit is revoked due to a violation, the permit fee shall not be refunded.
    3. Sign Lighting 
        a. Documentation from the sign and/or sign lighting manufacturer, proving compliance with the lighting standards, shall be required at the time of permit submittal. Those documents will be kept on file at the Town as evidence of code compliance for follow-up inspections and complaints. ((O)19-06, Amended,  07/31/2019; (O)16-05, Amended,  04/06/2016)
E. Abandoned, Illegal, Prohibited, or Inadequately Maintained Signs 
If an abandoned, illegal, prohibited, or inadequately maintained sign is located within the Town, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be empowered to issue a citation. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may also require removal or repair of the sign and shall advise the owner of said sign, or as an alternative, the owner of the property where said sign has been posted, to correct whatever violation or inadequacy he/she deems to exist. All actual costs and expenses of any such removal or repair shall be borne by the property owner of such sign.
F. Emergency Removals and/or Repair 
    1. The Planning and Zoning Administrator is authorized to cause the immediate removal or repair of any sign or signs found to be unsafe or defective to the extent that it creates an immediate and emergency hazard to persons or property. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall make reasonable effort to notify the property owner and/or lessee that the unsafe or defective sign must be removed or repaired immediately. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may cause any sign or advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed immediately after an attempt is made to reach the owner of the sign and the owner of the property, and without notice if the peril does not allow time for additional notice.
    2. All actual costs and expenses of any sign removal or repair shall be borne by the owner of such sign and by the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. Each of them shall be jointly and severally liable thereof, and an action for recovery thereof may be brought by the Town upon proper documentation of such cost and/or expenses by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall provide written notification to the property owner prior to the Town placing a lien on the property with the Pima County Assessor’s Office. ((O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011)

Section 28.3 General Sign Requirements
A. Construction 
    1. Building Code 
    All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the current building codes of the Town of Oro Valley.
    2. Electrical Code 
    All signs requiring an electrical permit per Section 28.2.A shall be in conformance with the current National Electrical Code adopted by the Town of Oro Valley.
    3. Permanent Sign Materials 
    All permanent signs shall be constructed using structural members of materials subject to approval of the Building Official and/or Town Engineer. Nonstructural trim may be wood, metal, aluminum, approved plastics, and/or a combination thereof.
    4. Temporary Sign Materials 
    Materials proposed to be used in constructing temporary signs shall be at the discretion of the fabricator but shall be stated in the application for the sign permit unless otherwise provided in this code. Adequacy of materials proposed from the standpoints of stability and safety and of composition and color shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and Building Official. ((O)16-09, Amended,  09/07/2016)
B. Illumination 
    1. Illumination of signs, when permitted by this chapter, may be accomplished only by the following methods:
        a. Halo or internal illumination, to the extent that only the sign characters and logos emit light, unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Commission.
        b. Sign lighting may include neon, light emitting diodes (LED) and other light sources, except where expressly prohibited in this chapter, in accordance with the following standards:
            i. Light sources shall be spaced the maximum distance to obtain uniformity on the face material.
            ii. Color temperature shall not exceed four thousand four hundred (4,400) kelvins.
        c. Area lighting provided such lighting is in accordance with the Town of Oro Valley Lighting Code.
        d. Illuminated wall signs may be turned on no earlier than 5:00 a.m. and shall be turned off no later than 11:00 p.m. or when the business closes, whichever is later, or as specified in this chapter.
        e. Electronic message boards such as LED, LCD, plasma screens and similar electronic message signs expressly permitted in this chapter shall meet the following standards:
            i. Limited to two hundred (200) nits (candela per square meter), full white mode, from sunset to sunrise.
            ii. Constant movement, blinking, flashing, high intensity, or animation caused by an LED or other electronic components of the sign is prohibited.
            iii. Message shall not change more than once every twenty-four (24) hours or as State law requires the price of the product to change.
            iv. Background of the electronic message board portion of the sign shall be black and no more than two (2) colors shall be allowed for words or numbers.
        f. Sign plans submitted for permitting shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Planning and Zoning Administrator to readily ascertain code compliance. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may require additional evidence of compliance such as cut sheets, manufacturer specifications and documentation from the sign and/or sign lighting manufacturer, proving compliance with the lighting standards, which will be kept on file at the Town as evidence of code compliance for follow up inspections and complaints.
        g. A label must be attached to the exterior of sign indicating compliance with maximum kelvin or nit rating.
    2. Prohibited Sign Lighting 
    The following types of light sources are prohibited as means to illuminate or attract attention to any sign:
        a. Exposed light source other than as expressly permitted in window signs, Section 28.5.B.14, or as a component of an electronic message board.
        b. LED illuminated window sign display areas per Section 28.5.B.14.a.iv.d.3.
        c. Blinking, flashing, rotating, constant movement and animated light sources.
        d. Search lights.
        e. An illuminated sign placed on the interior of a business which is visible from the exterior shall not be illuminated when the business is closed, except “closed for business” signs. ((O)18-08, Amended,  05/16/2018; (O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)16-05, Amended,  04/06/2016)
C. Colors 
    1. Various sign colors shall be permitted, except fluorescent or iridescent colors.
    2. All developments, including those within a Planned Area Development (PAD) that have approved sign criteria or Master Sign Program, are required to utilize only approved colors.
D. Location and Measurement Standards 
    1. Location Standards 
    A sign shall not be installed to cause the following:
        a. Obstruction of any door, window, or fire escape in any building.
        b. Interference with or to confuse traffic, present any traffic hazard or obstruct the vision of motorists.
        c. Projections over any public sidewalk, street, alley, or public place unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer and/or Planning and Zoning Administrator or is allowed by any portion of this Chapter.
        d. Placement in a public right-of-way, except as permitted by Sections 28.7 and 28.8. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or Town Engineer may cause the removal of any unauthorized signs from public right-of-way.
        e. Obstruction of another sign, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    2. Measurement Standards 
        a. The area of a sign that consists of individual letters, words and symbols, which are placed upon a building wall or freestanding wall and are not encompassed by a frame or boundary, shall be measured by the overall height of the tallest letter by the overall length of the entire sign. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve the calculation of signs by measuring the sum of the smallest rectangular shape needed to enclose each letter or symbol if special circumstances arise that would warrant the need to calculate differently.
        b. A sign that consists of multiple faces, such as a monument sign, shall be measured to encompass the overall height by overall length of the largest face.
        c. The sign height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average finished grade beneath the sign to the topmost feature of the sign. If the sign is located where the average finished grade is lower than the adjoining grade of the road, the sign height may be taken from the roadway surface nearest the sign to the topmost portion of the sign.
        d. Clearance is measured as the shortest distance between the underside of the sign and the average finished grade beneath the sign.
        e. Setbacks for freestanding signs shall be measured from the edge of the sign structure closest to the property line. ((O)19-06, Amended,  07/31/2019)
E. Inspections and Maintenance 
    1. Inspections 
    The Building Official, Planning and Zoning Administrator, and/or Town Engineer, or any such person officially designated by them, is hereby empowered to perform inspections, as deemed appropriate, to assure compliance with this code.
    2. Maintenance 
        a. Each sign shall be maintained in a new or like-new condition at all times so as not to constitute a danger or hazard to public safety or become an eyesore to the community.
        b. Repainting/Resurfacing of Signs 
        Maintenance of signage, such as repainting or resurfacing shall not require any permits as long as the sign is in no way altered, changed, or modified from its previous state. ((O)16-09, Amended,  09/07/2016)
F. Landscaping 
    1. The base for all permanent freestanding signs shall be integrated into a landscaped area.
    2. The landscaped area shall conform to the Town’s landscape requirements and shall be maintained at all times.
    3. The landscape design shall not permit plants that would obstruct the visibility of the sign face from the street. ((O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011)

Section 28.4 Definitions and Sign Types
1. A-Frame Sign 
A hinged or self-supporting upright sign constructed of durable materials and connected so as to maintain an “A” shape or similar structure.
2. Abandoned Sign 
A sign which advertises, identifies or gives notice of a business which is no longer in operation or an activity which has already occurred.
3. Advertising 
A sign primarily listing products sold or services offered, or products manufactured on the premises.
4. Alteration 
Shall mean any change, addition, or modification in construction of an existing sign.
5. Animation 
The movement or optical illusion of movement of any part of a sign structure, design, or pictorial segment, including the movement of any illumination, flashing or varying of light intensity. The automatic changing of all or part of the facing of the sign. The movement of a sign set in motion by the atmosphere.
6. Awning Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.1.
7. Balloon Sign 
Refer to Section 28.6.B.7.
8. Banner 
Refer to Section 28.6.B.1.
9. Billboard 
An off-site sign that is pasted, painted, or fastened on in a manner to allow for periodic replacement of messages that is not located on the property where the billboard is located.
10. Building Frontage 
The measurement between two (2) straight lines projecting from the outermost edges of a building or tenant space wall that are perpendicular to a straight line running along the ground level of the front of the measured wall.
11. Cabinet Sign 
A three (3) dimensional structure which includes a frame, borders and sign panel face and may include internal illumination upon which the sign logos are placed or etched, and is architecturally integrated with the building.Pill-box signs
12. Change of Copy 
A replacement face(s) or material to an existing sign without changing any structural members, sizes, and/or heights.
13. Character 
Any letter, number, logo, and/or symbol as defined in this section.
14. Color Temperature 
The warmth or coolness of white light source along the black body curve. The higher the color temperature (kelvin (k)) the cooler appearing (brighter) the white light appears.
15. Construction Sign 
Refer to Section 28.6.B.2.
16. Development Complex 
A site having common vehicular access points, which is subject to a development plan.
17. Development Sign 
Refer to Section 28.6.B.2.
18. Direct Lighting 
A source of external illumination located a distance away from the sign which lights the sign, but which itself is not visible from any normal position or view.
19. Directional Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.2.
20. Directory Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.3.
21. Display Area 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.14.
22. Double-Faced Sign 
A sign having two (2) display surfaces, one (1) (or more) support(s) of which is (are) shared by both surfaces. Hence, double-face signs include back-to-back signs as well as V-shaped signs.
23. Electronic Message Board 
A sign that permits the changing of messages by means of electronically controlled sign copy.
24. Entryway Sign 
Refer to Sections 28.5.B.4 and 28.5.C.1.
25. Fascia 
A parapet-type wall used as part of the facade of a flat-roofed building and projecting from the building face immediately adjacent thereto. Such a wall shall enclose at least three (3) sides of the projecting flat roof.
26. Flag 
Refer to Section 28.6.B.3.
27. Freestanding 
Shall mean any structure which is not attached to any other structure or portion of a structure.
28. Garage/Yard/Estate Sale Sign 
An on-site or off-site, temporary sign made from paper, poster board, cardboard, or like material.
29. Government Sign 
A sign installed or required by a public agency such as traffic, public transit, public information, or similar government entity.
30. Grand Opening Sign 
An on-site sign advertising the opening of an establishment, expansion, or change of ownership of a commercial enterprise, new business, store, or office.
31. Ground or Monument Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.7.
32. Halo Illumination 
Illumination produced by recessing a light source inside a hollow character with an open back or within the surface to which the sign letters are mounted. An outline glow around the characters is created by this light as it is reflected off the background to which the characters are attached.
33. Historical Marker 
A sign marker locating and identifying a historical interest or site.
34. Home Occupation Sign 
A sign that identifies a business or commercial activity that is conducted from the property zoned for residential use.
35. Human Signs 
Any portable commercial advertisement that is held or worn by a person or persons to draw attention to or direct the public to a business or event.
36. Identification Sign 
An on-site, permanent sign which identifies the premises where the sign is located.
37. Illuminated Sign 
A sign whose surface is lit internally or externally or has the potential or ability to be illuminated either by battery or electricity shall be considered an illuminated sign whether the sign is lit or unlit.
38. Indirect Lighting 
A source of external illumination located a distance away from the sign, but which is itself not visible from any normal position.
39. Inflatable Sign 
An object, device or structure capable of or designed to be inflated with air or lighter-than-air gas that is used for the purpose of attracting attention or to make something known to the public.
40. Internal Illumination 
A source of illumination entirely within the sign wherein the source of the illumination is not visible.
41. Kiosk Sign 
A freestanding sign that contains directional placards. The kiosk is installed per a contract with an independent contractor who is responsible for the manufacture and maintenance of the signs.
42. Logo 
A graphic symbol representing a business. Logos shall be state or federally registered trademarks.
43. Maintenance 
The replacing or repairing of a part of a sign made usable, unsafe, or unattractive by ordinary wear, tear or damage that is beyond the control of the owner, or the repainting of an existing sign without changing the wording, location, composition or color of the sign.
44. Marquee Sign 
Any sign affixed to or constructed in a roof like structure or awning projecting over an entrance to a building, such as a theater.
45. Memorial Sign 
A permanent sign, table, or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure, or site.
46. Menu Board 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.6.
47. Model Home Flags 
Refer to Section 28.6.C.3.
48. Modifier 
A word on a sign describing uses and activities other than the business name.
49. Moving or Animated Signs 
Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position, flashes, blinks lights, rotates or conveys the illusion of movement by mechanical means, illumination, and/or air movement.
50. Neon Sign 
An illuminated, commercial display made up of glass tubes, shaped to form letters and designs.
51. Nit 
A unit of visible-light intensity, commonly used to specify the brightness of an LED, cathode ray tube or liquid crystal display computer display. One (1) nit is equivalent to one (1) candela per square meter.
52. Nonconforming Sign 
Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this code but which, when first constructed, was legally allowed by the Town of Oro Valley or political subdivision then having control over signs.
53. Nonilluminated Sign 
A sign that does not have the ability to be electrified or powered in any way. The components that enable the sign to be lit must be permanently disabled in order to be considered a nonilluminated sign.
54. Off-Site Sign 
Any sign not located on the premises or site of the use identified or advertised by the sign.
55. On-Site Sign 
Any sign which is located on the premises or site of the use identified or advertised by the sign.
56. On-Site Subdivision Sign 
An on-site, temporary sign located at the entrance to a subdivision.
57.  Pan-Channel Letter  
A dimensional character fabricated to form a pan (i.e., a back and sides). The pan is formed in the shape of a character. The sides are strips of the same material fastened to the back. The open end of the pan is usually capped by a character cut from translucent acrylic, and is known as the face. Lighting may be installed inside the pan to illuminate the face.Pill-box signs
58.  Parapet  
The top portion of the wall which extends above the roofline.
59. Pedestrian Tenant Directory 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.8.
60.  Pennants  
Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, containing multi-colors and that may contain a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wires, or string, designed to move in the wind.
61.  Permanent Sign  
Letters, numerals, symbols, and/or insignia that is intended to be displayed for an indefinite or long-lasting period and the lettering or message of which is intended to remain essentially unchanged, except for the maintenance against normal effects of exposure to weather.
62.  Pole Cover  
Covers made from various materials which enclose or conceal a pole or other structural supports or members to the sign.
63.  Portable Sign  
Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be moved by means of wheels; signs converted into A-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicles are used in normal day-to-day operations of the business.
64.  Posters  
A large printed display or picture often posted in a public place as a notice or advertisement.
65.  Premises  
All contiguous land used and occupied by an establishment, whether owned or leased from another. Included are all buildings, storage and service areas, and private roads or driveways which are an integral part of the establishment.
66.  Prohibited Use  
Shall mean a use not specifically permitted.
67.  Public Service Sign  
A sign which provides directions to a public or quasi-public location such as community centers, schools, Town facilities, and religious institutions.
68.  Projecting Sign  
An on-site sign attached to and extending more than twelve (12) inches from a structure not designed exclusively for the support of the sign and/or a sign which projects from the wall of a building or structure perpendicular to the wall surface.
69.  Real Estate Sign  
A sign pertaining to the sale, rent, or lease of the premises or portion of the premises on which the sign is located.
70.  Reasonable Repairs  
To restore an existing structure to a good or sound condition resulting from decay or damage.
71.  Residential Sign  
A sign on which is displayed the name and address of the occupant.
72.  Reverse Channel Letter  
A sign with dimensional character(s) fabricated from opaque material to form a pan, i.e., a front and sides. The pan is formed in the shape of a character. The sides are strips of material fastened to the front. The back remains open. Lighting may be installed inside the pan which creates a halo illumination.
73.  Roofline  
The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.
74.  Roof Sign  
A sign that is mounted on, above, or over the roof of a building, so that it projects above the highest point of the roofline, parapet, or fascia of the building.
75. Seasonal Sign 
Refer to Section 28.6.B.5.
76. Service Station/Fuel Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.9.
77.  Setback  
The shortest straight line distance in feet from the nearest property or lot boundary to the main accessory building, structure, sign, or similar features located on the same property or lot.
78.  Sign  
Every message, announcement, declaration, display, illustration, insignia, character, surface, or space erected, maintained or attached to any structure, surface, or thing and made visible for the purpose of attracting attention or to making something known to the public.
79.  Sign Area Allotment  
The permitted amount of identification sign area on ratio to the linear footage of building frontage.
80.  Sign Modification  
Any change to an existing sign’s copy, color, and/or supporting structures.
81.  Sign Structure  
A freestanding wall, pole, pedestal, or object erected for the purpose of supporting the sign.
82.  Site Plan  
A plan drawing of an individual site including the layout of buildings, circulation system, parking, walls, landscaping, open space, and any other appropriate information as required by the Town of Oro Valley to provide adequate review.
83. Seasonal or Event Banner 
Refer to Section 28.6.B.1.c.
84.  Subcontractor Sign  
A temporary sign which identifies the firm, business, persons, or entity responsible for work or activity in progress at the location of the sign.
85.  Symbol  
A letter, figure, or other conventional mark designating an object, quantity, operation, function, or the like.
86.  Tagline  
An accessory wall sign containing a grouping of letters or characters built into a single pan channel or reverse pan channel platform that contains modifiers or is used to convey information relating to the business such as goods, services, products or business associates.
87.  Temporary Sign  
Any display in public view to advertise or convey information or direction which is intended to be displayed for a limited or finite period of time only. The type, quality, and materials of construction of which, although visually attractive and structurally sound, are not intended to be long lasting.
88. Theater Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.10.
89. Time and Temperature Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.11.
90.  Traffic Sign  
An on-site or off-site sign for which the sole purpose and placement are solely to define and streamline the flow of vehicular traffic so as to minimize congestion and promote safety.
91. Under-Canopy Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.12.
92.  Unoccupied  
A premises or structure which is not occupied or being put to those uses as authorized by the last business privilege license issued by the Town for that address and business or a premises or structure where the public utilities are not in service.
93.  Vehicle Sign  
A sign that is mounted, painted, or erected upon trucks, cars, boats, trailers, or other motorized vehicles or equipment that is parked for the primary purpose of functioning as a sign.
94. Wall Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.13.Pill-box signs
95. Window Sign 
Refer to Section 28.5.B.14. ((O)19-06, Amended,  07/31/2019; (O)18-08, Amended,  05/16/2018; (O)17-02, Amended,  02/15/2017; (O)16-09, Amended,  09/07/2016; (O)16-05, Amended,  04/06/2016; (O)15-08, Amended,  05/20/2015; (O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011)

Section 28.5 Permanent Signs
A. Identification Signs 
    1. The following signs shall be required for the purpose of identification:
        a. Residential address.
        b. Building address for multi-building development (Refer to the current Pima County Addressing Code Regulations).
        c. Names of streets, drives, circles, complexes, condominiums, etc.
B. Permanent Signs in a Commercial/Industrial Zoning District 
The following permanent sign types shall be allowed within a Commercial, Industrial and/or Private School Zoning District and for religious institutions as specified herein:
    1. Awning Sign 
        a. Definition: A sign which is placed on, or integrated into, fabric or other material canopies, which is mounted on the exterior wall of a building. Sign copy affixed to an awning may only display the name of the business and/or address.
        b. Quantity: One (1) awning allowed per business.
        c. Area of Sign Copy: Maximum twenty (20) square feet which shall count against the business’s sign area allotment.
        d. Height: Not to exceed the roofline of a building.
        e. Illumination: Internal illumination, fluorescent lamps, provided only the copy emits light. The background material shall be opaque. An awning sign must be turned off at the close of business.
    2. Directional Sign 
        a. Definition: A permanent on-site sign that is placed solely to define location and streamline the flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic so as to minimize congestion and promote safety. A directional sign may only display written or graphic directions for traffic, name of the business and/or logo, and address and/or suite number.
        b. Quantity: One (1) single- or double-faced directional sign per individual, freestanding business that is not part of a Master Sign Program. Businesses that have drive-through lanes shall be allowed one (1) additional directional sign.
        c. Area of Sign: Six (6) square feet.
        d. Height: Not to exceed three (3) feet.
        e. Location: To be located at an access point to the property and/or interior to the property of the business.
        f. Setback: None unless otherwise required.
        g. Illumination: Internal illumination allowed; provided, that the sign is turned off at the close of business.Figure 28-3. Directional Sign
        [IMAGE: <28-3.png>]
    3. Directory Sign 
        a. Definition: An on-site sign interior to a development that lists only names and locations of the businesses or activities within a building or multi-tenant complex. A directory sign shall help to direct vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.
        b. Quantity: Shall be determined and reviewed on an individual project basis by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, when applicable. The guidelines set forth under an approved sign criteria or Master Sign Program shall be followed.
        c. Area of Sign: Not to exceed forty (40) square feet, and not to exceed two (2) square feet for each business displayed on the sign.
        d. Height: Not to exceed eight (8) feet from grade.
        e. Location: Interior to the property or development, such as the parking area.
        f. Setback: Minimum forty (40) feet from the property line.
        g. Illumination: Internal illumination allowed; provided, that the sign is turned off by 11:00 p.m.
    4. Entryway Sign 
        a. Definition: A permanent sign identifying the entrance to a subdivision, complex, facility, or commercial development.
        b. Quantity: Maximum of two (2) per entryway with one (1) located on each side of entryway. If the linear frontage of the project exceeds six hundred (600) feet and there is more than one (1) entry point along that frontage, two (2) additional signs may be permitted at the second entryway on that frontage. For projects with multiple street frontages, entryway signs are permitted on each frontage in accordance with the quantity and spacing requirements listed above.
        c. Area of Sign: Thirty-two (32) square feet.
        d. Height: Not to exceed six (6) feet or the height of the entryway wall on which the sign is placed.
        e. Location: On private property, in a landscaped area at entryways, as described above.
        f. Setback: None unless otherwise required.
        g. Illumination: Halo illuminated letters or direct lighting that shall not project above the sign. The sign may be turned on at 5:00 a.m. and shall be turned off by 11:00 p.m.Figure 28-4. Entryway Sign
        [IMAGE: <28-4.png>]Figure 28-5. Allowed Entryway Signs
        [IMAGE: <28-5.png>]
    5. (Repealed by (O)19-06, 07/31/19)
    6. Menu Board 
        a. Definition: A monument style or wall-mounted sign providing a bill of fare for the purpose of placing orders at a drive-through, drive-in restaurant, or walk up window.
        b. Quantity: Two (2) per drive-through lane.
        c. Area of Sign: Thirty-two (32) square feet.
        d. Height: Not to exceed six (6) feet.
        e. Location: Within a designated drive-through lane so as not to be visible from adjacent streets or property, or another location approved by the Town.
        f. Setback: Must be on private property and shall not pose a safety hazard.
        g. Illumination: May be internally illuminated provided the menu board is turned off no later than one (1) hour after business is closed.
    7. Monument Sign 
        a. Definition: A permanent sign supported by structures, columns, uprights, and/or braces that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground independent of the building or business structure.
        b. Quantity:
            i. One (1) per street frontage.
            ii. If frontage is greater than six hundred (600) feet and there is more than one (1) entrance to the development, a second sign is permitted.
            iii. For frontages greater than eight hundred (800) feet, additional signs may be approved by the Town.
            iv. A corner sign with frontage on both streets may be utilized as an additional allowable sign.
        c. Area of Sign:
            i. Fifty (50) square feet for a single tenant or the development name.
            ii. Seventy-two (72) square feet for a multiple-tenant sign with tenant panels.
        d. Height:
            i. Not to exceed eight (8) feet from grade.
            ii. An architectural element of the sign, such as an arch or column, may exceed the height of the monument sign by twenty-five percent (25%); provided, that all text and logos are less than eight (8) feet in height from grade.
        e. Location: To be placed near the entrance or along a street frontage on private property.
        f. Setback: None unless otherwise required.
        g. Illumination:
            i. Illumination may be halo, internal, or a combination thereof.
            ii. Individual panels shall be opaque with copy that may be lit.
            iii. Unused tenant panels shall be opaque and designed to match the rest of the sign.
            iv. The sign may be turned on at 5:00 a.m. and shall be turned off no later than 11:00 p.m.
        h. Design:
            i. Blank tenant panels shall not be white.
            ii. The sign may be single- or double-faced, with all supporting structures concealed.
            iii. The sign may contain the name of the development and a maximum of eight (8) tenants, along with the property address.
            iv. No one (1) tenant may be displayed more than once in one (1) monument sign.
        i. Changeable Copy Standards for Monument Signs:
            i. Uses are limited to the following:
                a) Private schools.
                b) Religious institutions.
                c) Service stations, which are subject to subsection B.9 of this section.
                d) Theaters, which are subject to subsection B.10 of this section.
                e) Time/temperature, which are subject to subsection B.11 of this section.
            ii. Quantity: One (1) allowed as an integrated part of a monument or wall sign.
            iii. Size: Changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the proposed sign area.
            iv. Illumination: Standards of Section 28.3.B shall apply.
            v. Design:
                a) Changeable copy may be done manually or with an electronic message board.
                b) Electronic message boards shall be integrated into the monument sign.
    8. Pedestrian Tenant Directory 
        a. Definition: An exterior, wall-mounted, or freestanding sign that lists only the names and locations of tenants of a complex or development for the sole purpose of directing pedestrians. The sign shall have a uniform background color and letter style.
        b. Quantity: One (1) per building entrance, or as approved by the Town. If applicable, applicant shall follow the guidelines set forth under a Master Sign Program, Section 28.2.B.
        c. Area of Sign: Maximum four (4) square foot panel for the name of the complex and maximum two (2) square foot panel for each business or resident within the complex.
        d. Height: Shall be at eye level for pedestrian traffic and not exceed the roofline of a building.
        e. Location: May be wall-mounted or freestanding at pedestrian entrance points to the complex and/or along pedestrian walkways.
        f. Illumination: Sign shall be nonilluminated.Figure 28-6. Pedestrian Tenant Directory
        [IMAGE: <28-6.png>]
    9. Service Station/Fuel Sign 
        a. Definition: A permanent, two (2) component, monument style sign displaying fuel prices, fuel types, name of station, and/or logos.
        b. Quantity: One (1) per street frontage.
        c. Area of Sign: Thirty-two (32) square feet.
        d. Height: Not to exceed six (6) feet from grade.
        e. Location: On private property adjacent to an arterial or collector street only.
        f. Setback: None unless otherwise required.
        g. Illumination: Name and logo of the business may be internally illuminated.
        h. Changeable copy standards for service station/fuel signs:
            i. Uses are limited to the following:
                a) Fuel prices.
                b) Fuel types.
            ii. Size: Changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the proposed sign area.
            iii. Illumination: Standards of Section 28.3.B shall apply.
            iv. Design:
                a) Changeable copy may be done manually or with an electronic message board.
                b) Electronic message boards shall be integrated into the monument sign.Figure 28-7. Service Station/Fuel Sign
                [IMAGE: <28.5.B.9.png>]
    10. Theater Signs 
        a. Definition: A monument style or wall sign with changeable copy panels used to display the current movies and times they are playing within the theater.
        b. Quantity: One (1) wall sign and one (1) monument style sign allowed.
        c. Area of Sign: Fifty (50) square feet for a monument style sign and sixty-four (64) square feet for a wall sign.
        d. Height: Eight (8) feet for a monument style sign. A wall sign shall not extend above the roofline of a building.
        e. Location: A monument style sign shall be located on private property and a wall sign shall be displayed at the main entrance to the building.
        f. Setback: None unless otherwise required.
        g. Illumination: The sign may be internally illuminated or the copy may be electronically illuminated and shall meet the standards of Section 28.3.B. The sign may only display the current listing of movies and their times. No other advertising message is allowed. The sign shall be turned off one (1) hour after closing of theater.Figure 28-8. Theater Sign
        [IMAGE: <28-8.png>]
    11. Time and Temperature Signs 
        a. Definition: An electronically controlled sign that provides the current time and/or temperature.
        b. Quantity: One (1) per development project.
        c. Area of Sign: A time and temperature sign may be a component of a monument style sign. Wall signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
        d. Height: Not to exceed the roofline of a building.
        e. Location: On private property and shall not be located within six hundred (600) feet of another time and temperature sign, not including an analog mounted on a wall.
        f. Illumination: Shall meet the standards of Section 28.3.B.
    12. Under-Canopy Sign 
        a. Definition: A wall-mounted or hanging sign which identifies the business name and/or logo. Under-canopy signs shall be consistent in color, shape, design, and materials, if the development has an approved sign criteria or master sign program. An under-canopy sign shall be located entirely under a covered porch, walkway, extended roof or similar structure and is solely for directing pedestrian traffic.
        b. Quantity: One (1) per tenant space.
        c. Area of Sign: Four (4) square feet.
        d. Height: A minimum clearance of seven (7) feet shall be maintained beneath the sign and shall not extend above a roofline of the building.
        e. Location: The sign shall be in front of the tenant space it is identifying and shall be suspended from a roof overhang above a walkway or porch, or may be perpendicular to the street and attached to the fascia of the building.
        f. Illumination: Shall be nonilluminated.
    13. Wall Sign 
        a. Definition: Any sign which is fastened, attached, connected, or supported in whole or in part by a building or structure other than a sign structure which is supported wholly by the ground with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall.
            i. A wall sign shall consist of individual character letters (pan channel or reverse pan channel).
            ii. Only individual logos may utilize cabinet sign type with a translucent sign face.
            iii. Wall signs may include the name of the business, a trademarked logo, tagline, and modifiers, if needed, to further clarify the goods or services available on the premises.
        b. Quantity:
            i. No more than two (2) elevations may contain a wall sign.
            ii. If a single tenant occupies an end unit or entire freestanding building, there may be signs on three (3) elevations, but only two (2) elevations may have illuminated wall signs.
            iii. “End unit” refers to the end unit of a building in the final phase of a development.
        c. Area of Sign: For building elevations containing wall signs, a sign may be:
            i. Twenty-four (24) square feet, with no single wall sign containing more than one (1) square foot of sign for each linear foot of building frontage, for a maximum sign area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
            ii. Wall signs for building elevations further than three hundred (300) feet from the street may contain no more than one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet of sign area for each linear foot of frontage, for a maximum sign area of two hundred (200) square feet.
            iii. Where businesses do not possess individual frontages, each may maintain an individual sign; however, the maximum wall sign square footage shall not be exceeded.
            iv. Taglines are not to exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the actual area of the main wall sign, as permitted in this section.
            v. May not project more than eight (8) inches from the wall on which the sign is mounted.
        d. Height: No wall sign shall extend above the roofline of a building.
        e. Location: Shall only be placed on the building elevations or at the main entrance of a business which the sign identifies.
        f. Illumination:
            i. Individual letters may be nonilluminated, halo illuminated or internally illuminated.
            ii. Cabinet-type signs shall only emit light through the logo.
            iii. Taglines may be halo or internally illuminated and shall only emit light through a translucent material over cut out letters or characters.
            iv. The standards of Section 28.3.B shall apply.
        g. Changeable copy standards for wall signs:
            i. Uses are limited to the following:
                a) Private schools.
                b) Religious institutions.
                c) Theaters. See subsection B.10 of this section.
                d) Time/temperature. See subsection B.11 of this section.
            ii. Quantity: One (1) allowed as an integrated part of a wall sign if changeable copy is not used on a monument sign.
            iii. Size: Changeable copy portion of the sign, including frame, shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the proposed sign area.
            iv. Illumination: Internal.
            v. Design:
                a) Changeable copy may not be changed electronically.Figure 28-9. Wall Sign
                [IMAGE: <28-9.png>]
    14. Window Signs 
        a. Definition: Any form of advertisement and/or identification associated with the business that is affixed to the interior or exterior of a window, or placed immediately behind a window so as to inform or attract attention to the public outside of the building and/or tenant space. Window signs are divided into five (5) types of signs:
            i. Business Name: Signs that identify the name of the business.
                a) Area of sign: Maximum two (2) square feet.
                b) Quantity: Maximum of one (1) sign for any one (1) business and/or tenant space. For businesses that are corner tenants or individual properties having two (2) street frontages, the same shall apply on both sides.
                c) Location: The business name sign shall be located on the entrance door to the establishment. If an entrance door cannot be utilized, then the sign may be located where it will not interfere with any other sign types, under this provision.
                d) Illumination: Business name shall be not illuminated except as provided in subsection B.14.a.iv.d of this section.
            ii. Business Hours of Operation: Signs that identify the business is open and/or closed for operation.
                a) Area of Sign: Hours of operation shall not exceed a maximum of one (1) square foot.
                b) Quantity: Maximum of one (1) sign for any one (1) business and/or tenant space. For businesses that are corner tenants or individual properties having two (2) street frontages, the same shall apply on both sides.
                c) Location: The hours of operation shall be located on the entrance door to the establishment. If an entrance door cannot be utilized, then the sign may be located within another area that will not interfere with any other sign types, under this provision.
                d) Illumination: Business hours shall not be illuminated.
            iii. Sign Band: A thin band which stretches the overall length of the windows of a building front and/or tenant space and displays either the name of the business or logo in multiple successions.
                a) Area of Sign: A sign band shall not exceed a maximum of one (1) foot in height by the overall length of the building frontage and/or tenant space.
                b) Quantity: A maximum of one (1) sign band per window.
                c) Height: The sign band shall be no higher than the midpoint of the overall height of the windows from grade.
                d) Illumination: Sign band shall not be illuminated.
                e) Additional Requirements:
                    1) The band may include additional text, logos, or graphics that relate to the business within.
                    2) Copy may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total band length.
            iv. Display Area: An area for the purpose of displaying miscellaneous items such as posters, menus, promotional items or the like which pertain to the business itself, in a defined location and may include illumination. Window displays such as mannequins, three (3) dimensional figures, clothing and the like, which do not contain advertisement, shall not be considered a window type sign as described above.
                a) Area of sign: Maximum of six (6) square feet.
                b) Quantity: Maximum of one (1) display area for any one (1) business and/or tenant space. For businesses that are corner tenants or individual properties with two (2) street frontages, may have one (1) display area per frontage. Businesses and/or tenants with building frontage in excess of forty (40) feet may have one (1) additional display area.
                c) Location: The display area shall be located on the first immediate window to the right or left of the entrance door. For tenants having a corner space, the display area shall be located so as to not interfere with visibility pertaining to safety issues or interfere with any other sign types under this provision.
                d) Illumination: A display area containing illumination shall meet the following standards:
                    1) Quantity: A maximum of one (1) display area containing illumination is allowed per business regardless of length of store front or corner location. A maximum of one (1) illuminated sign is allowed in the (1) one display area.
                    2) Location: On The first immediate window to the right, left or top of the primary entrance door only. Illuminated display areas shall not be located on the sides or rear of buildings.
                    3) Type: Internal or exposed neon. Sign shall not be externally illuminated or incorporate LED lighting.
                    4) Hours: Sign may only be turned on at 5:00 a.m. and shall be turned off at 11:00 p.m.
                    5) Movement: The sign shall not flash, blink, rotate, move or contain animation.
                e) Color: All window signs shall utilize colors that are compatible with the architectural design of the building. Fluorescent or iridescent colors shall not be allowed.
            v. Open/Closed Sign: A sign that identifies if the business is open or closed.
                a) Quantity: Maximum of one (1) for any one (1) business and/or tenant space per street frontage.
                b) Illumination: Open/closed sign may be illuminated. Open/closed sign containing illumination shall meet the following standards:
                    1) Combinations: If the open/closed sign is part of or attached to a larger graphic or sign it is considered a display area and shall meet the standards of illuminated display area.
                    2) Hours: Sign may only be turned on at 5:00 a.m. and shall be turned off at 11:00 p.m.
                    3) Movement: The sign shall not flash, blink, rotate, move or contain animation.
            vi. General Requirements for All Window Signs:
                a) Permits are required for all window signs except for business name/hours of operation and open/closed signs.
                b) No additional permits will be required to continually change the display area as long as the location of the original permitted area has not changed.
                c) Any off-site advertisement displayed in a window is strictly prohibited unless otherwise specified in this chapter.Figure 28-10. Sample illustration showing placement of window signs
                [IMAGE: <28-10a.png>]
                [IMAGE: <28-10b.png>]
                Example of a display area containing multiple signs. Only one (1) sign in a single display area can be illuminated.
((O)19-06, Amended,  07/31/2019; (O)18-08, Amended,  05/16/2018; (O)17-02, Amended,  02/15/2017; (O)16-05, Amended,  04/06/2016; (O)15-08, Amended,  05/20/2015)
C. Permanent Signs within a Residential Zoning District 
The following permanent signs shall be allowed within a Residential District:
    1. Entryway Signs 
    Refer to subsection B.4 of this section.
    2. Kiosk Signs 
    Refer to subsection B.5 of this section.
    3. Monument and wall signs for religious institutions, private schools and public institutions are permitted in residential districts subject to Town approval. ((O)18-08, Amended,  05/16/2018; (O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011)

Section 28.6 Temporary Signs
A. Requirements for All Temporary Signs 
    1. Any sign that penetrates the ground is subject to blue stake requirements.
    2. Temporary signs shall not obscure, be attached to or mimic public traffic control devices, signage, or appurtenances.
    3. Any damage to public or private property caused by signs placed within the right-of-way shall be the sole responsibility of the sign owner.
    4. Standards for temporary sign materials are provided in Section 28.3.A.4, General Sign Requirements. ((O)16-09, Amended,  09/07/2016)
B. Temporary Signs in a Commercial/Industrial Zoning District 
The following temporary sign types shall be allowed within a Commercial and/or Industrial District:
    1. Banner 
        a. Requirements for All Banners 
            i. Definition: Any sign of light-weight fabric or similar material that is temporarily mounted to a building or is freestanding.
            ii. Design Standards 
                a) Installation: All banners shall be securely anchored to the wall and/or parapet wall of the building where the business is located or, if freestanding, attached to a solid perimeter frame that matches the banner color. The frame shall be anchored by posts with eyelets fastening the banner to the frame at two (2) foot maximum spacing, or in such a manner that the banner is taut and does not fold over. Banners shall not be hung from another sign structure, landscaping, utility pole, or similar structure.
                b) Materials: Banners must be made of durable mylar, nylon fabric, or similar material.
                c) Banner lettering, images and background colors may be any color, including black or white, except fluorescent or iridescent colors.
                d) Lettering shall be neat and legible copy.
        b. New Business Banner 
            i. A banner may be utilized for the purpose of a new business opening or change of ownership to promote a new business. For seasonal or special event banner signs, see subsections B.1.c and d of this section.
            ii. Quantity: One (1) banner per street frontage, per business. No more than two (2) banners shall be issued to any one (1) new business.
            iii. Area of Sign: Maximum sixty-four (64) square feet.
            iv. Height: Not to exceed the roofline of a building.
            v. Location: Must be installed on the site and/or tenant space of the business.
            vi. Duration: Banners are allowed for a period of thirty (30) days. One (1) extension for an additional thirty (30) days may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, due to extenuating circumstances. A written request must be submitted prior to the first thirty (30) day expiration. No more than one (1) extension may be granted in a calendar year.
            vii. Removal: A banner must be removed after thirty (30) days or if permanent signage has been installed prior to the expiration of a new business banner.
        c. Seasonal or Event Banner 
            i. Definition: A seasonal or event banner may be used to advertise a seasonal or special event in any Commercial/Industrial Zoning District.
            ii. Quantity: One (1) freestanding sign per street frontage and/or one (1) wall sign. A business is allowed a maximum of four (4) permits per calendar year.
            iii. Area of Sign: Maximum sixteen (16) square feet for a freestanding sign and maximum twenty-four (24) square feet for a wall-mounted banner.
            iv. Height: Not to exceed four (4) feet from grade for a freestanding sign. Wall-mounted signs shall not exceed the roofline of a building.
            v. Location: On private property where the event is taking place and/or the merchandise is being sold.
            vi. Setback: None unless otherwise required.
            vii. Duration: Each permit shall not exceed thirty (30) days.
        d. Three-Day Special Event Banner 
            i. Definition: A banner may be permitted on the day(s) of a special event, but shall not be used to advertise any event that exceeds three (3) days in duration.
            ii. Quantity: One (1) per street frontage. Not to exceed four (4) permits per calendar year.
            iii. Area of Sign: Maximum sixty-four (64) square feet.
            iv. Height: Maximum four (4) feet from grade for a freestanding sign. Wall-mounted signs shall not exceed the building roofline.
            v. Location: On private property where the event is taking place and/or the merchandise is being sold.
            vi. Setback: None unless otherwise required for public safety purposes.
    2. Construction/Development Sign 
        a. Definition: A construction sign may only contain the names of the architects, engineers, contractors, or similar artisans, as well as the owners, financial supporters and similar individuals or firms associated with the project.
        b. Quantity: One (1) per street frontage. No one (1) development may have more than one (1) construction sign on a single street frontage.
        c. Area of Sign: Maximum thirty-two (32) square feet.
        d. Height: Not to exceed eight (8) feet from grade.
        e. Location: On the property that is being developed.
        f. Setback: None unless otherwise required for public safety purposes.
        g. Removal: All signs must be removed upon the completion of ninety-five percent (95%) of the development, or within three (3) years from date of permit issuance, whichever comes first.
    3. Flags 
        a. Definition: Any flag containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of government or a political entity. All national and state flags shall be allowed.
        b. Quantity: Two (2) flag poles for each development and/or individual property.
        c. Flag Size: The length of the flag shall be no greater than one-quarter (1/4) of the height of the flag pole.
        d. Flag Pole Height: No greater than 1.25 times the height of the nearest primary building.
        e. Location: Permitted in any zoning district and only on private property.
        f. Setback: Located so that the flag does not overhang public right-of-way or create a public safety hazard.
        g. Additional Requirements 
            i. A building permit for the flag pole shall be obtained.
            ii. A site plan shall be submitted for review of location and adequate setbacks.
            iii. The use of flags for the purpose of advertising or with intent to advertise is strictly prohibited unless otherwise specified by this Chapter.
    4. Real Estate, Lease, Rent and For Sale Signs 
        a. Definition: Any sign pertaining to the sale, rent, or lease of the premises or portion of a premises. The sign may be freestanding or wall-mounted, single- and/or double-faced.
        b. Quantity: One (1) sign per street frontage.
        c. Area of Sign: Maximum sixteen (16) square feet.
        d. Height: Not to exceed eight (8) feet from grade.
        e. Location: Upon the property that is being sold, rented or leased.
        f. Setback: None unless otherwise required.
        g. Permit: Sign permits for real estate, lease, rent, and for sale signs are valid for one (1) year. The permit may be re-issued in one (1) year increments.
        h. Removal: Must be removed within seven (7) days upon the sale, rent, or lease of the property or expiration of the sign permit.
    5. Seasonal Signs 
        a. Definition: Seasonal signs may include decorations, holiday lights, garland, or similar treatment oriented toward a holiday event. Holiday banners are allowed in accordance with subsection B.1.c of this section, Seasonal Banners. Seasonal signs and decorations shall be temporarily displayed for traditionally accepted civic, patriotic, or religious holidays.
        b. Location: On private property and shall not be displayed in such a manner as to constitute a traffic hazard.
        c. Removal: Must be removed within ten (10) days of the subject holiday.
        d. Additional Requirements: A permit is required for all event-related signage under this Chapter. A permit is not required for any other seasonal decoration.
    6. Road Construction Sign 
        a. Definition: Temporary business identification signage to enhance visibility of properties with commercial, multifamily or religious institutions during road construction projects.
        b. Applicability: Areas that will be directly impacted by a road construction project as determined by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator.
        c. Type:
            i. Sign may be a banner or rigid material such as wood, metal or similar material.
            ii. Single or double faced.
            iii. Copy may be modified after issuance of permit within the parameters set forth in the code.
            iv. Any change in sign location will require a new permit.
            v. Size of copy must be approved by the Town Engineer to assure safety.
        d. Quantity:
            i. One (1) sign for the commercial property per street frontage impacted by the road construction.
            ii. If frontage is greater than six hundred (600) feet and there is more than one (1) entrance to the development, a second sign is permitted.
            iii. If frontage is greater than eight hundred (800) feet, one (1) additional sign may be installed.
        e. Area of sign:
            i. Thirty-two (32) square feet for a commercial property with one (1) to four (4) owners or business lessees.
            ii. Sixty-four (64) square feet for a commercial property with five (5) or more owners or business lessees.
        f. Height: Ten (10) feet.
        g. Location: On private property where the business is located.
        h. Setback: None, unless additional area is required for utility or road work. Town Engineer must determine if proposed location is safe and does not interfere with construction.
        i. Illumination: None.
        j. Color: Lettering and background may be any color except fluorescent or iridescent.
        k. Duration: Length of time the sign is permitted will be determined by the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator and shall not exceed substantial completion of the road construction project.
        l. The Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be permitted to administratively approve modifications to road construction signage if each of the following criteria have been satisfied:
            i. There are unique circumstances due to road design or construction.
            ii. The proposed changes do not have a greater overall impact than the allowed sign type.
            iii. The proposed changes are based on existing standards from an allowed sign type in the zoning code.
    7. Balloon(s) 
        a. Definition: An airtight bag made of thin rubber or other lightweight material inflated with air or lighter-than-air gas that is anchored to the ground, a building or structure with ropes, a post, wires and/or string to attract attention to the public.
        b. Use: Allowed for a new business opening or change of ownership to promote a new business.
        c. Quantity: Unlimited.
        d. Area of Sign: Maximum eighteen (18) inches tall and standard round balloon shape.
        e. Height: Not to exceed eight (8) feet in height (eight (8) feet includes balloon and tethering device) or shall not exceed a cumulative height of fifteen (15) feet from grade if the balloon is attached to a permanent structure such as a wall or monument sign. Balloons shall not be attached to the roof of a building.
        f. Location: On private property where the business is located.
        g. Duration: Maximum of five (5) consecutive days from the date of grand opening or issuance of sign permit related to change of ownership.
        h. Color: Balloon and copy may be any color.
        i. Illumination: None.
        j. Additional Requirements 
            i. Balloons shall not interfere with sight visibility or vehicular and/or pedestrian access and shall be secured at all times.
            ii. Balloons shall be kept under control at all times and not allowed to be released into the sky.
            iii. Littering laws as detailed in Town Code Article 9-4 shall apply to any balloon released into the sky and/or allowed to deflate onto the ground.
    8. A-Frame Signs 
        a. Use: Intended to direct pedestrian traffic and shall not be solely oriented toward vehicular traffic.
        b. Quantity: One (1) per business.
        c. Area of Sign: Maximum six (6) square feet per side. Maximum of two (2) sides.
        d. Height: Not to exceed forty-two (42) inches.
        e. Location: On private property where the business is located within a commercial development with shared parking and access or a single parcel.
        f. Additional Requirements 
            i. Placement of sign shall allow for a four (4) foot unobstructed pathway for pedestrians.
            ii. The sign shall not be placed in such a manner as to attract vehicular traffic from public roads (Figure 28.11).
            iii. The sign shall not be displayed in a manner that will create a public safety hazard.
            iv. Access ramps or vehicular sight lines shall not be obstructed.
            v. Landscaping shall not be removed, altered or damaged by the placement of the signs.
        g. Illumination: None.
        h. Hours: During operating hours of the associated business.
        i. Design:
            i. The sign shall be self-supporting and not be attached to railings, posts, fencing or other structures.
            ii. Carts, wheels or other devices that will make the A-frame mobile shall not be attached to the sign.
            iii. Attachments such as flags, pennants, balloons or additional signs shall not be affixed to the A-frame.
            iv. The sign appearance shall be professional and may not contain cloth or paper surfaces.
            v. The sign shall be neat and legible.Figure 28.11. A-Frame Sign Locations
            [IMAGE: <28-11.png>]
((O)17-08, Amended,  10/18/2017; (O)16-09, Amended,  09/07/2016; (O)15-08, Amended,  05/20/2015; (O)14-14, Amended, )
C. Temporary Signs in a Residential Zoning District 
The following temporary signs shall be allowed within a residential zoning district.
    1. Flags (Refer to subsection B.3 of this section, Flags)
    2. Model Home Banners 
        a. Definition: Banners for a model home may be utilized for the sole purpose of a sales event or to identify a new model home. Three (3) day, seasonal or event banners are permitted at model homes in accordance with subsections B.1.c and d of this section.
        b. Quantity: One (1) banner per model home.
        c. Area of Banner: Maximum thirty-two (32) square feet.
        d. Location: Shall be on private property where the model home complex is located. The banner may be wall-mounted or freestanding.
        e. Height: A banner attached to the model home shall not extend above the roofline. A freestanding banner shall not exceed five (5) feet from grade.
        f. Setback: None for a freestanding banner unless otherwise specified for public safety purposes.
        g. Duration: The banner shall be mounted only on Saturdays and Sundays for one hundred four (104) days. The banner may be permitted for an additional sixteen (16) days for the purpose of opening the model home or model home complex.
        h. Removal: The banner may be placed not more than one (1) day before the advertised event, and must be removed within one (1) day after the event.
    3. Model Home Complex or Custom Home Lot Sales Office Signs 
    In addition to model home banners (subsection B.2 of this section), the following types of signs are permitted for model home complexes or custom home lot sales offices:
        a. Model Home On-Site Signs 
            i. Definition: Individual model units may have a single model identification sign and/or an informational sign for the model home complex or custom home lot sales office, and a directional sign to direct people to available parking at, or near, the model home/custom home sales office. Seasonal event and model home banners are permitted for model home complexes or home lot sales offices in accordance with subsection B.2.c of this section, Construction/Development Signs, subject to the standards of subsection A.4 of this section.
            ii. Quantity: One (1) identification sign for model home units, one (1) construction/development sign, and one (1) parking lot directional sign.
            iii. Area of Signs: Individual model units maximum four (4) square feet. Model home complex/custom home lot sales office maximum sixteen (16) square feet. Parking lot directional sign maximum six (6) square feet.
            iv. Height: Individual model units maximum three (3) feet; informational model home complex/custom home lot sales office maximum five (5) feet; parking directional sign maximum three (3) feet from grade.
            v. Location: Within the model home complex/custom home lot sales office and shall be located so as to not interfere with the flow of traffic or within a sight visibility triangle. The parking directional sign shall be located at the driveway entrance to the designated parking area. Signs may be freestanding, wall-mounted, or integrated into an awning type structure.
            vi. Removal: All signs must be removed within seven (7) days after the closing of the sales office or model home office.
        b. Model Home Off-Site Signs (Interior and Exterior to the Subdivision) 
        The following off-site signs are allowed interior to a subdivision:
            i. Off-Site within the Subdivision 
                a) Definition: Signs within a subdivision which direct traffic to the model home complex or custom home lot sales office.
                b) Quantity: The number of signs allowed is based on the number of intersections or changes of direction of subdivision streets, as approved and deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or Town Engineer.
                c) Area of Sign: Maximum one and one-half (1-1/2) feet by two (2) feet, or three (3) square feet.
                d) Height: Maximum allowable height thirty (30) inches.
                e) Location: An interior, off-site sign shall be located along streets within the subdivision. Such signs shall be located on private property with the permission of the property owner.
                f) Setback: None unless otherwise required.
                g) Removal: All signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the closure of the sales office or model home office.
    4. Model Home Complex Flags 
        a. Definition: Individual flags, attached to freestanding poles that may be multi-colored and/or contain the corporate logo for a model home complex sales office.
        b. Quantity: Maximum of four (4) poles/flags.
        c. Area of Flag: Maximum fifteen (15) square feet.
        d. Height: Flag poles shall not exceed twenty (20) feet from grade.
        e. Location: Flag poles may be located within the model home complex or parking area, subject to Town Engineer approval.
        f. Setback: Minimum five (5) feet from the property line or determined by the Town Engineer.
        g. Removal: All flags and flag poles must be removed within seven (7) days after the closing of the model home office.
        h. Additional Requirements 
            i. A building permit must be obtained for flag poles.
            ii. Flag poles may not be illuminated.
    5. On-Site Subdivision Signs 
        a. Definition: The sign shall identify a development in progress and may include: the name of the development and/or subdivision; the name and phone number of the developer or agent; price range, residential type, and number of units to be available and essential contact information for the developer or agent. All other associated agencies or firms may be displayed on the sign, such as the engineer, architects, or firms providing financing, and principal contracting firms.
        b. Quantity: One (1) freestanding sign per subdivision. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve a second on-site subdivision sign if deemed necessary.
        c. Area of Sign: Maximum forty (40) square feet.
        d. Height: Maximum of ten (10) feet. The height may be increased to twelve (12) feet by approval of the Planning and Zoning Administrator if visibility of the sign is obstructed.
        e. Location: Must be located at the access point on private property with the permission from the property owner.
        f. Setback: None unless otherwise required for public safety purposes.
        g. Removal: Within seven (7) days of the sale of one hundred percent (100%) of the lots of the subdivision or one hundred eighty (180) days after closure of sales office, whichever comes first. Signs may remain on unsold lots in accordance with subsection C.6 of this section.
    6. Real Estate, Lease, Rent, and For Sale Signs 
        a. On-Site Signs 
            i. Definition: Signs to advertise existing individual single-family residences for sale, lease, or rent. The sign may be a single or double-faced, freestanding sign.
            ii. Quantity: One (1) for each street frontage which abuts the property.
            iii. Area of Sign: Four (4) square feet.
            iv. Height: Maximum of six (6) feet from grade. The Planning and Zoning Administrator may approve heights up to ten (10) feet, if warranted.
            v. Location: Only on the lot or site of the dwelling offered for sale, lease, or rent.
            vi. Setback: None unless otherwise required.
            vii. Permit: Sign permits for real estate, lease, rent, and for sale signs are valid for one (1) year. The permit may be re-issued.
            viii. Removal: Within seven (7) days upon the sale, lease, or rent of the property. ((O)19-06, Amended,  07/31/2019; (O)12-04, Amended,  03/07/2012; (O)11-24, Amended,  10/05/2011; (O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011)

Section 28.7 Permanent Signs on Public Property
A. Permitted Permanent Signs on Public Property 
+-------------+--------------+--------------+---------+---------+--------------+------------+-----------------+---------------+
|  Sign Type  |   Location   |   Quantity   |  Size   | Maximum | Illumination |  Duration  |     Permit      |  Additional   |
|             |              |              |         | Height  |              |            | Required/Permit |   Standards   |
|             |              |              |         |         |              |            |      Type       |               |
+-------------+--------------+--------------+---------+---------+--------------+------------+-----------------+---------------+
| Kiosk       | Right-of-way | Per the      | Panels: | Base 8' | None         | Until      | Yes: ROW        | Per contract  |
|             | of an        | contract     | 8" wide |         |              | less       | permit          |               |
|             | arterial     | approved     | by 4'   |         |              | than       |                 |               |
|             | or collector | by the       | long    |         |              | 3 placards |                 |               |
|             | street       | Town         | Base:   |         |              | are on     |                 |               |
|             |              |              | 5' wide |         |              | the sign   |                 |               |
+-------------+--------------+--------------+---------+---------+--------------+------------+-----------------+---------------+
| Monument    | Right-of-way | One of       | Refer to Section 28.5.B.4,       | N/A        | Yes:            | Refer         |
| or Entryway | of a         | the signs    | Entryway sign, or 28.5.B.7,      |            | • License       | to subsection |
|             | major        | allowed      | Monument sign                    |            | agreement       | B of          |
|             | or minor     | by Section   |                                  |            | • Council       | this          |
|             | arterial     | 28.5.B.4     |                                  |            | approval        | section.      |
|             | road         | or 28.5.B.7  |                                  |            | • Sign          |               |
|             | as defined   | may be       |                                  |            | permit          |               |
|             | in the       | located      |                                  |            | • ADOT          |               |
|             | Town’s       | in the       |                                  |            | approval        |               |
|             | General      | right-of-way |                                  |            | if applicable   |               |
|             | Plan         | of each      |                                  |            |                 |               |
|             |              | street       |                                  |            |                 |               |
|             |              | frontage     |                                  |            |                 |               |
+-------------+--------------+--------------+---------+---------+--------------+------------+-----------------+---------------+
B. Monument or Entryway Sign Standards for Location in the Right-of-Way 
    1. Location Standards 
        a. A right-of-way depth of at least one hundred (100) feet shall be required between the paved surface of the road (including turn lane and shoulder) and the subject property line. Areas where the right-of-way depth changes for drainage ways, bridges and similar structures shall not be included in the one hundred (100) foot minimum.
        b. Sufficient evidence shall be provided demonstrating that sign locations normally allowed by the Zoning Code do not provide effective and safe wayfinding as detailed in the intersection site distance detail of the Town of Oro Valley’s Subdivision Street Standards and Policies Manual.
        c. The one hundred (100) foot depth requirement, between the paved surface and the subject property line, may be reduced to not less than twenty (20) feet if the following conditions apply:
            i. The vehicular speed of the road combined with the clear zones and adequate visibility defined by the Town’s sight visibility triangle criteria are met.
            ii. The intersection sight distance table demonstrates the sign could not be safely seen. Self-imposed conditions, such as built structures built on the site, will not qualify for a reduction of the distance requirement.
        d. The sign shall be located no more than fifty (50) feet from either side of an entrance to the property associated with the sign.
        e. No electronic message boards shall be placed on a sign in the right-of-way.
    2. Upon satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator that the sign has met all safety and location requirements, the request will be forwarded for review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council, in addition to the required license agreement, for placement in the right-of-way. ((O)19-06, Substituted,  07/31/2019)

Section 28.8 Temporary Signs on Public Property
+-----------------+--------------+--------------+------------+-----------+------------------+----------------------+
| Size (Maximums) |   Location   |   Quantity   |  Maximum   | Duration  |   Permit Type    |      Applicable      |
|                 |              |              |   Height   |           |     Required     |      Standards       |
|                 |              |              | from Grade |           |                  |                      |
+-----------------+--------------+--------------+------------+-----------+------------------+----------------------+
| 4 square        | Right-of-way | 1 per change | 30"        | 7:00 a.m. | Right-of-way     | Refer to subsections |
| feet            |              | of direction |            | to 7:00   | permit 3-day,    | A through            |
|                 |              |              |            | p.m.      | 120-day,         | E and G of           |
|                 |              |              |            |           | annual           | this section         |
+-----------------+--------------+--------------+------------+-----------+------------------+----------------------+
| 9 square        | Designated   | 1 per sign   | 3' 6"      | N/A       | No               | Refer to subsections |
| feet            | sign zones   | zone         |            |           |                  | A and D through      |
|                 | only         |              |            |           |                  | G of this            |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | section              |
+-----------------+--------------+--------------+------------+-----------+------------------+----------------------+
| 16 square       | Right-of-way | 4 at any     | 5'         | 16 days   | Yes: ROW permit  | A sign 5 square      |
| feet            |              | given time   |            |           | and installation | feet or less         |
|                 |              |              |            |           | request          | will not             |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | require installation |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | by the Town.         |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | Also refer           |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | to subsections       |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | A through            |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | E  and G             |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | of this section      |
+-----------------+--------------+--------------+------------+-----------+------------------+----------------------+
| Sign walker     | Right-of-way | N/A          | N/A        | 8:00 a.m. | No               | Refer to subsections |
| 20 square       |              |              |            | to 5:00   |                  | B.1.a, B.1.c         |
| feet maximum,   |              |              |            | p.m.      |                  | and B.1.d            |
| 4 square        |              |              |            |           |                  | of this section      |
| feet minimum    |              |              |            |           |                  | Sign walker          |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | per the standards    |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | of the Arizona       |
|                 |              |              |            |           |                  | State Statute        |
+-----------------+--------------+--------------+------------+-----------+------------------+----------------------+
A. General Requirements for All Temporary Signs in the Right-of-Way 
    1. A sign that penetrates the ground is subject to Blue Stake verification.
    2. Temporary signs shall not obscure, be attached to or mimic public traffic control devices, signage, public property or appurtenances.
    3. Any damage to public or private property caused by signs placed within the right-of-way shall be the sole responsibility of the sign owner.
    4. Standards for temporary sign materials are provided in Section 28.3.A.4, General Sign Requirements.
    5. Any sign that would require installation by the Public Works Department is also subject to installation fees.
    6.  Signs that require a permit must have the permit number written on the sign.
B. Location 
    1.  Signs shall not be placed:
        a. Within a median.
        b. On a sidewalk, multi-use path or pedestrian access ramp.
        c. In a construction zone.
        d. In any area that may cause or create a traffic hazard or obscure any sight distances and must maintain the required “clear zone” as approved by the Town Engineer.
        e. No signs may be placed in a right-of-way controlled by the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT).
C. Setback 
    1. Temporary signs shall be placed a minimum of ten (10) feet from the paved surface of the roadway.
        a. If a sidewalk, multi-use path or trail is located within that ten (10) foot setback, the sign must be placed along the outside edge of the sidewalk, multi-use path or trail without projecting over the said trail/path.
    2.  Temporary signs placed next to a street with a speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less may:
        a. Be placed no closer than five (5) feet from paved surface of roadway.
        b. If a sidewalk, multi-use path or trail is within the five (5) foot setback, the sign must be placed along the outside edge of the sidewalk, multi-use path or trail without projecting over the said trail/path.
D. Illumination 
    1. None.
E. Design 
    1. May be single- or double-faced.
    2. Must be clear and legible.
    3. Shall be neat and professional in appearance.
    4. May include H-frame, I-frame and A-frame sign types.
F. Designated Sign Zone Requirements 
    1. Temporary sign zones as established by the Town are three hundred (300) to five hundred (500) square feet in size and no more than two (2) zones may be located at or near the intersection.
        a. Within the Town Hall Complex: Such zone shall be no greater than two hundred (200) square feet. Moreover, temporary sign zones shall not be located within one hundred fifty (150 feet) of any entrance to the Town Hall Complex.
        b. At or near Town parks: temporary sign zones shall not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any entrance to Town parks.
        c. Approved temporary sign zones are depicted on the “Temporary Sign Zone Map.”
G.  Signs protected by the Arizona Revised Statutes shall be allowed within the limits of the State Statute. ((O)19-06, Enacted,  07/31/2019)

Section 28.9 Temporary Public and Quasi-Public Signs
A. Definition 
Announcement signs, along with special event type signs, shall be allowed for religious institutions, schools, community centers and any other public or institutional buildings within a commercial or residential district. Signs may be freestanding and/or wall-mounted, made of paper, cardboard, plastic, or fabric. Banners used for public and quasi-public purposes shall comply with Sections 28.6.B.1.a and c, Banners. All copy, color, and design shall not adversely affect the order, amenity, or residential enjoyment of the neighborhood.
B. Quantity 
Each institution is allowed one (1) wall sign and one (1) announcement sign per street frontage. Each institution may also apply for one (1) wall and one (1) freestanding, special event sign per street frontage.
C. Area of Sign 
A religious institution wall-mounted temporary sign shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet. A religious institution announcement sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. Other public institutions shall be allowed a temporary wall sign of thirty (30) square feet and an announcement sign of twenty-four (24) square feet. Institutional special event signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet.
D. Height 
All wall-mounted signs shall not exceed the roofline of a building. All freestanding signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet from grade. All special event signs shall not exceed a maximum height of six (6) feet from grade.
E. Location 
All signs shall be placed on private property. Special event signs shall be located on the premises of the institution or organization having the event.
F. Setback 
None unless otherwise specified.
G. Additional Requirements 
    1. Any sign may be single- or double-faced.
    2. No sign shall be allowed to illuminate.
    3. All signs shall be soundly constructed and neat in appearance.
    4. The application for a public or quasi-public sign shall include a statement and diagram noting the nature of the special event and shall indicate the location, size, copy, and colors of the proposed sign.
    5. A permit for a public or quasi-public sign shall be valid for no more than two (2) weeks. No more than three (3) permits shall be issued to any institution or organization in a calendar year.
H. Removal 
Any signs announcing a special event shall be removed within one (1) day after the event is completed. ((O)19-06, Renumbered,  07/31/2019; (O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011. Formerly 28.8)

Section 28.10 Prohibited Signs
A. Prohibited Permanent and Temporary Signs 
The following permanent and temporary signs shall not be allowed on any property or public right-of-way and are prohibited unless otherwise specified within this chapter.
    1. Billboards;
    2. Electronic message centers, except as provided by Sections 28.5.B.7, 9, 10 and 11;
    3. Exposed neon signs, except as provided by Section 28.5.B.14;
    4. Flashing lights;
    5. Garage sale signs, except as provided by Section 28.8;
    6. Inflatable signs, except as provided by Section 28.6.B.7;
    7. Marquee signs;
    8. Moving/animated signs; except barber-type animated signs are allowed for barbershops during business hours only;
    9. Obscene signs;
    10. Off-site advertising on public property;
    11. Off-site signs;
    12. Pennant signs;
    13. Portable signs (sandwich board, etc.), except as provided in Section 28.6.B.8;
    14. Projecting signs;
    15. Roof signs;
    16. Search lights;
    17. Signs attached to any physical public property;
    18. Signs in the median;
    19. Vehicle signs. ((O)19-06, Renumbered,  07/31/2019; (O)18-08, Amended,  05/16/2018; (O)16-09, Amended,  09/07/2016; (O)15-08, Amended,  05/20/2015; (O)12-04, Amended,  03/07/2012; (O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011. Formerly 28.9)

Section 28.11 Exempted Signs
A. Code Limitations 
    1. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the erection, construction and maintenance of the following:
        a. Official traffic, street identification, or roadway improvement signs.
        b. Fire or police signs, signals, or devices to alert the public of safety hazards.
        c. Markings of the State of Arizona and/or Town of Oro Valley or other authorized agency.
        d. Official notices as required by law.
B. Exempted Permanent and Temporary Signs 
    1. The following signs shall be exempt from the application and permit regulations of this Chapter, although an electrical or building permit may be required:
        a. Address Identification Signs: Signs which display numerals, street names, drives, circles, or similar information which gives direction to residents, buildings, complexes, apartments, commercial sites, tenants spaces or other locations.
        b. Governmental signs for identification of public agencies such as traffic, public transit, and public information.
        c. Historical Marker: A sign locating and identifying a historical interest or site.
        d. Informational/service signs including official notices of court; public office and legal notices posted for Town meetings; as well as safety-related informational signs located on service station pumps.
        e. Interior Signs: Signs which are displayed within a concealed area such as a tenant space or building and cannot be seen from the exterior by the public.
        f. Memorial Sign: A sign, table, or plaque memorializing a person, event, or site.
        g. Noncommercial signs on private property that are not related to business or commerce and are no more than nine (9) square feet in area and three (3) feet in height.
        h. Residential Signs: Name and address of occupants.
        i. Traffic Sign: A sign used solely to define and streamline the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic so as to minimize congestion and promote safety.
        j. Warning Signs: Warning and instructional signs such as “No Trespassing” shall be exempt from permits and shall not be installed on utility poles or similar structures. ((O)19-06, Renumbered,  07/31/2019; (O)11-07, Enacted,  03/16/2011. Formerly 28.10)

CHAPTER 29 NONCONFORMING USES

Sections:
Section 29.1 Continuance of Nonconforming Use
Section 29.2 Change to Another Nonconforming Use
Section 29.3 Abandonment or Ceased Use of Nonconforming Building or Land
Section 29.4 Alteration of Building or Land
Section 29.5 Destruction of Nonconforming Building or Land
Section 29.6 Use in Violation of Previous Zoning Regulations
Section 29.7 Expansion of Legal Nonconforming Uses

Section 29.1 Continuance of Nonconforming Use
The lawful use of a building or land existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of this Code for such building or land and such use may be continued providing only reasonable repairs and alterations are made, subject to the limitations found in this Code.

Section 29.2 Change to Another Nonconforming Use
If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building or land, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same, or of a more restricted, classification, subject to a use permit. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or land has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use.

Section 29.3 Abandonment or Ceased Use of Nonconforming Building or Land
In the event that a nonconforming use is abandoned or ceased for a period of six (6) consecutive months or is superseded by a conforming use, any future use thereof shall be in conformity with this chapter.

Section 29.4 Alteration of Building or Land
No existing building or land designed, arranged or intended for or devoted to a use not permitted under the regulations of this Code for the district in which such building or land is located shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such building and such enlargement, extension, reconstruction and structural alterations and further use hereof conform in every respect with the regulations specified by this ordinance for such district in which said building or land is located, provided nothing herein shall prohibit any reasonable repairs or alterations in a building or land used for such existing purposes.

Section 29.5 Destruction of Nonconforming Building or Land
If, at any time, any building or land in existence or maintained at the time of the adoption of this ordinance which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located shall be destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of the public enemy to the extent of 50 percent of its value as determined by three (3) competent appraisers, then and without further action by the Town Council, the said building and the land on which said building was located or maintained shall, from and after the date of such destruction, be subject to all the regulations specified by this Code for the district in which such land and building are located.

Section 29.6 Use in Violation of Previous Zoning Regulations
Nothing in this Code shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval of the continuance of the use of a building or land in violation of zoning regulations in effect at the time of the effective date of this ordinance.

Section 29.7 Expansion of Legal Nonconforming Uses
A. Purpose 
These provisions provide for the orderly expansion of nonconforming commercial structures and uses to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. This Section is intended to allow the reasonable expansion of commercial structures and uses which were legal nonconforming uses in the County or which became nonconforming by reason of their annexation into the Town of Oro Valley, and to establish the criteria under which they may be continued or expanded.
B. Status of Existing Uses 
Any use or activity conducted contrary to the Town of Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised or other development regulations on the effective date of annexation, and constituting a legal nonconforming use under the town regulations, shall be entitled to be considered a legal nonconforming use under this code.
An existing legal nonconforming commercial use of a portion of a nonconforming commercial use in areas zoned C-1, C-2, or C-N may be expanded with the same type of nonconforming use, subject to the granting of a Use Permit (Section 22.4) after a noticed public hearing, and if all of the following findings are made:
    1. That the amount of expansion does not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the existing building devoted to the existing nonconforming use. Incremental expansions, cumulatively, shall not exceed the 50 percent provision.
    2. That the nonconforming expansion shall be for the same legal use as the existing legal nonconforming use.
    3. That the legal nonconforming use is existing and has not been vacant or discontinued for a period of three (3) or more calendar months.
    4. That the expansion complies with development requirements including, but not limited to, setbacks applicable to the use for new construction, bicycle and motor vehicle parking regulations, and landscaping and screening requirements.
    5. That the expansion area adjoins the land area where the nonconforming use is located.
C. Time Limitations on Expansion Rights 
The expansion of legal nonconforming commercial uses permitted under this Section shall be allowed only until the later of two (2) years after the date this ordinance was adopted or two (2) years after the date the property where the nonconforming commercial use is located was annexed into the Town.

CHAPTER 30 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
Section 30.1 Enforcement
Section 30.2 Fees and Penalties

Section 30.1 Enforcement
A. Duties 
It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Administrator to enforce this Code. He shall receive requests for building permits, verify conformance with this Code before such permits are issued, provide for the issuance of permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of this Code are complied with. He shall, when requested by the Town Council or when the interests of the municipality so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this Code and render written reports on the investigations. For the purpose of enforcing compliance with the law, he shall issue notices or orders as may be necessary.
EXCEPTION: Section 27.9 of this ordinance, pertaining to grading regulations, may be enforced by the Community Development Director (acting as the Planning and Zoning Administrator) and, for violations within the Town right-of-way, the Town Engineer, or a designee appointed by either of these officials.
B. Rules 
For carrying into effect its provision, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may adopt rules consistent with this ordinance.
C. Inspections 
Building inspections shall be made by the Building Official or a duly appointed assistant.
D. Records 
    1. The Town shall keep careful and comprehensive records of permits issued, inspections made, reports rendered and notices or orders issued. The Town shall retain on file copies of all papers in connection with building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence.
    2. All such records shall be open to public inspection at reasonable hours, but shall not be removed.

Section 30.2 Fees and Penalties
A. Fees 
Fees shall be required for all application processes described herein. The Town shall adopt a fee schedule and related policies by resolution. All fees specified must be provided by the applicant upon submittal of an application or as determined by the Planning and Planning and Zoning Administrator.
B. Penalty for Violation 
Any person, firm or corporation whether as principal, owner, agent, tenant or otherwise who violates, disobeys, omits or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance (Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised) shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as proscribed in the penalty schedule adopted by the Town or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Injunction 
    1. If any building or structure is constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Town, or any owner or tenant of real property in the same contiguous zoning district as the violation in question, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings:
        a. To prevent the unlawful grading, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;
        b. To prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land;
        c. To prevent any illegal act, conduct business or use in or about the premises; or
        d. To restrain, correct or abate the violation.
    2. When any such action is instituted by an owner or tenant, notice of such action shall be served upon the municipality at the time suit is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Town Clerk.
    3. In any such action or proceeding, the court with jurisdiction thereof has the power and, in its discretion, may issue a restraining order or a preliminary injunction as well as a permanent injunction upon such terms and under such conditions as will do justice and enforce the purpose of this ordinance.

CHAPTER 31 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular; the word “building” shall include the word “structure,” the word “lot” shall include the word “plot”; the word “may” is permissive and the word “shall” is mandatory, further, the word “or” shall mean “either” and the word “and” shall mean “in conjunction with.” Zone shall mean district.
Abutting 
The condition of two (2) adjoining properties having a common property line or boundary including cases where two (2) or more lots adjoining only a corner or corners, but not including cases where adjoining lots are separated by a street or alley.
Access or Access Way 
The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this ordinance.
Access Drive 
The drive that allows vehicles ingress and egress from a site.
Access Road 
A road within one (1) mile of the grading site, designated on the approved grading plan, and used during grading, for the transport of grading equipment, hauling of fill and other equivalent traffic to and from the grading site.
Accessory Building 
A building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of a dominant use by the occupants of the main building or by their non-paying guests and employees.Building Heights for Accessory Buildings
Accessory Use 
A use customarily subordinate to the main use of the lot or building.Land Use for a Distribution CenterFood Trucks
Acre 
A land area measuring forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
Active Restoration 
The process of taking specific and intentional actions to re-establish natural processes, vegetation, and habitat of an ecosystem. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Adjacent 
The condition of being near to or close to, but not necessarily having a common dividing line (e.g., two (2) properties that are separated only by a street or alley shall be considered as adjacent to one another).
Adjusted Gross Acreage 
The total acreage contained within a development, less acreage in required arterial streets, drainageways, and existing permanent land uses.
AEZ 
An abbreviation for the Airport Environs Zone as established by the Compatible Use Zone Map.
Agricultural Building 
A structure designed and constructed to only house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, live-stock, or other horticultural products. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated, or packaged; nor shall it be a place used by the public.
Aircraft 
An airborne vehicle capable of carrying at least one (1) person and shall include, but not be limited to, airplanes, helicopters, rotorcraft, gliders, hang-gliders, motorized or non-motorized balloons, dirigibles, and blimps.
Airport/Airstrip 
An area which is used, or is intended to be used, primarily for the takeoff and landing of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used, for airport buildings or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways and tie-down areas, hangars and other accessory buildings.
Alley 
A public way, which affords only a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. An alley line shall mean the centerline of an alley right-of-way as determined by the Town Engineer.
Alteration 
A change, addition, or modification in construction, structure, or occupancy.
Amateur Radio Operator 
A Federally licensed member of the amateur radio service, which is a voluntary, noncommercial communication service, particularly with respect to providing emergency communications.
Amendment 
A change in the wording, context, or substance of this code, an addition or deletion or a change in the district boundaries or classification upon the district map which imposes any regulation not heretofore imposed or removed or modifies any such regulations heretofore imposed.
Analogous Use 
A use which is substantially similar to the permitted uses.
Ancillary 
Uses, whether permitted or conditional, subordinate or secondary to primary, permitted land uses.
Animal Services 
A service providing for the care and well-being of animals or pets, which may include veterinary services (including ancillary short-term boarding and lodging), pet grooming, and the sale of pets and pet-related products.
Animation 
The movement or the optical illusion of movement of a design, or pictorial segment, including the movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity.
Antenna 
A system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals. Any device, including DBS satellite dishes, used to receive signals from direct broadcast satellites (DBS); multi-channel multi-point distribution providers (MMDS); and television broadcast stations (TVBS).
Antenna, Ground-Mounted 
An antenna with its supports placed directly on the ground.
Apartments 
A residential use which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
Approval 
Written notice by the Town accepting the design, progress or completion of work.
Approved Plan 
The most current plan which bears the authorized signature of review and acceptance by the Town.
Approved Testing Agency 
A testing lab equipped to perform and certify the tests required by this code and whose testing operations are controlled and monitored by a civil engineer.
Area Lighting 
Lighting designed primarily to illuminate an area of a development and may coincidentally illuminate one (1) or more sign faces.
Art Gallery 
An establishment for the display and/or sale of fine art, crafts, photography, or other art-related work.
Artifact 
An object which is a product of human modification, or objects which have been transported to a site by people. In this Town, artifacts over fifty (50) years are protected by Section 27.10.
Artist 
An individual generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional, full-time practitioner of the visual arts, as judged by the quality of that professional practitioner’s body of work, education, experience, past commissions, exhibition record, publications, and production of artwork. ((O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)08-23, Enacted,  12/03/2008)
Arts and Culture Use 
A use providing display or collection of historical, artistic, literary, and/or scientific, or other similar objects for public appreciation, including museums or art galleries. Cultural uses may include an ancillary restaurant or gift shop.
Assisted Living Home 
A dwelling unit used as a primary residence for ten (10) or fewer residents who receive supervisory care services, personal care services or directed care services on a continual basis. ((O)15-16, Enacted,  11/08/2015)
Assurances 
Monies or third party agreement with an agency authorized to do business in the State of Arizona guaranteeing the performance on the installation of all required improvements.
Attached 
Structural roof components, of the same type and color of roofing material, that joins, ties or connects one structure to another. ((O)18-15, Enacted,  10/03/2018)
Average Cross Slope 
The calculated average of slopes across a lot or parcel, not including slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%).
Balcony 
A portion of a building projecting into the required yard with a floor height of not less than four (4) feet above grade.
Bank 
See “Financial Services.”
Bar 
An establishment possessing a series 6 or series 7 liquor license and primarily serving alcoholic beverages to the public for consumption on the premises.
Barn 
A building used for the storage of farm products, feed and farm equipment and the housing of farm animals.
Base Zoning Dwelling Count 
The maximum number of minimum lot size dwellings permitted on a parcel of land. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Basement 
The portion of a building underground and having at least one-half (1/2) of its height measured from its floor to its ceiling below grade. A basement shall be counted as a story if the vertical distance from grade to its ceiling is more than two (2) feet.
Bicycle Parking Facility 
A structure that provides temporary placement for bicycles.
Class 1:
A facility designed for temporary storage of an entire bicycle and its components and accessories and to provide protection against inclement weather, the extreme heat of the desert climate, and theft. The facility may include bicycle lockers, check-in facilities, monitored parking, restricted access parking, or other means which provide the above level of security as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
Class 2:
The facility provides a stationary object enabling the operator to lock the bicycle frame and both wheels with a user-provided U-shaped lock or a cable and lock.
Bicycle Parking Space 
An area designated within a facility for the use of an individual bicycle.
Block 
A piece or parcel of land or group of lots entirely surrounded by public streets, streams, railroads or parks or a combination thereof.
Boardinghouse or Lodging House 
A structure(s) used for multiple human occupancy where individuals do not have common access to all living, eating, kitchen, and storage areas within said structure(s).
Borrow 
Earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading a site.
Brushing 
The selective removal of vegetation.
Buffer Area 
Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, beams or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one (1) use or property from another.
Buffer Yard 
A yard containing only native desert or landscaping, including organic and inorganic materials, for the purpose of providing separation between adjacent land or along roadways.
Buildable Area 
The area where a building can be placed after the designation of natural open space.
Building 
A structure for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind with the exception of doghouses, play houses and similar structures. Each portion of a building separated by dividing wall or walls without openings may be deemed as a separate building for the purpose of issuing building permits.
Building Frontage 
The maximum dimension of the building front project to a straight line parallel to the street.
Building Height 
The vertical distance of a structure.
    Slopes Less Than Six Percent 
    The vertical distance measured from the grade found along the outside walls of a building to the highest point of the building, excluding any chimney.
    Slopes Greater Than Six Percent 
    The maximum vertical distance measured from natural grade to the highest point of the building directly above, excluding any chimney.
Building Height Contour Line 
The area located at the building height permitted by Oro Valley zoning above the existing pre-development grade and parallel to the contour of the existing pre-development grade.
[IMAGE: <OroValley31-61.png>]
Building Line 
A line where no building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be erected, constructed, or otherwise established any closer to the street right-of-way line.
Building-Mounted Antenna 
An antenna that is attached to the walls of, or integrated into, buildings, religious institution steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, parapets, penthouses, fire towers, tanks, and water towers, or other structures. ((O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
Building Segment 
A portion of a building which has a single finish floor elevation.
Building Site 
The area of a building together with associated parking areas and open space required by this code. A building site may encompass more than one (1) lot.
Business Frontage 
The lineal distance of the building space occupied by the particular business projected to a straight line parallel to the face of the building in which the main entrance into that particular business is located.
Car Wash 
See “Vehicle Wash.”
Carport 
An accessory building or portion of a main building with one (1) side totally open and one (1) or more partially open sides designated or used for the parking of motor vehicles. Enclosed storage facilities may be provided as part of a carport.
Cellar 
The portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is seventy-five percent (75%) or more below grade and is not habitable space.
Cemetery 
A parcel of land or structure dedicated to, and at least a portion of which is being used for, the interment of human or animal remains. A cemetery may include crematories, mausoleums, and columbaria.
Character 
A letter, number, logo (as defined in this Chapter) or symbol.
Clearing 
The substantial removal of vegetation by manual or mechanical means.
Collocation 
The use of a single mount and/or site by more than one (1) wireless communications service provider.
Commission 
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Oro Valley unless the context indicates otherwise.
Communication Studios 
An establishment used for the creation, development and/or broadcast of radio or television programs or products, not including towers or communication facilities.
Communications Nuisance 
A use which creates interference with radio communications and electronic navigational aids or devices, including instrument landing systems, for aircraft using the airport.
Conceptual Architectural Design Plan 
The conceptual architectural elevations prepared in accordance with this Code and an element of the conceptual design review process. ((O)11-15, Enacted,  05/18/2011)
Conceptual Design Review 
The concurrent review and approval process for conceptual site plan, conceptual landscape plan, conceptual public artwork plan and conceptual architectural plan by Town staff, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Town Council. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Enacted,  05/18/2011)
Conceptual Design Review Submittal 
The conceptual design review submittal package consisting of the conceptual site plan, conceptual landscape plan, conceptual architectural design plan and the conceptual public art plan submittals. ((O)11-15, Enacted,  05/18/2011)
Conceptual Public Artwork Plan 
The conceptual art plan prepared in accordance with Section 27.3.G and an element of the conceptual design review process. ((O)11-15, Enacted,  05/18/2011)
Conceptual Site Plan 
The conceptual plan for a residential or non-residential development, including the items required in Section 22.9.D and as specified by current Town policy. ((O)11-15, Enacted,  05/18/2011)
Conditional Approval 
An affirmative action by the Board of Adjustments, Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council indicating that approval will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of certain specified stipulations. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
Conditional Use Permit 
See “Use Permit.”
Condominium 
An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of said real property together with the right of exclusive occupancy of a unit located thereon.
Conservation 
The use and management of land to eliminate waste and maximize efficiency of use while yielding the highest sustainable benefit to present generations and maintaining the natural resources in such a state that they remain biologically viable and they can provide for the benefit of future generations. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Conservation Easement 
An easement delineating an area that will be kept in its natural state.
Construction Drawings 
All documents required for construction that depict all elements of the final layout and design at construction-level detail. The construction drawings include the final site plan based on the approved conceptual site plan, as well as the native plant preservation, salvage and mitigation plan and landscape, irrigation, and buffer yard plans, final public art plans, final architecture plans, building plans and improvement plans. ((O)11-15, Enacted,  05/18/2011)
Convenience Markets 
A convenience use store less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet where food and drink, which may include packaged alcoholic beverages, are sold primarily for consumption off premises.
Convenience Use 
A use by which the method of operation produces a moderate or high level of traffic and impacts on surrounding uses. The following are considered convenience uses:
    1. Gas stations
    2. Drive-thru uses, not including banks
    3. Convenience markets
    4. Vehicle (car) washesOro Valley Town Center PAD Convenience Use requirements
Corral Fence 
A fence-type structure consisting of vertical posts and horizontal members and so constructed that seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the vertical surface is open. Chain link or other similar types of wire fences are not intended to be included in this definition and shall be classified as a fence or wall.
Council 
The common Town Council of the Town of Oro Valley.
Covered Porch 
An exterior covered structure attached to a building, including associated roof eaves or overhangs, that is supported by posts or columns and is open on three (3) sides. ((O)18-15, Enacted,  10/03/2018)
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) 
A multidisciplinary approach to deterring criminal behavior through environmental design. The environ- mental design should encourage desirable behavior and functionality. CPTED emphasizes surveillance, access control, and definition of ownership. ((O)11-05, Enacted,  04/20/2011)
Cul-de-Sac 
A street with no outlet which terminates in a circular right-of-way. Cul-de-sacs shall be developed in accordance with the Oro Valley Subdivision Street Standards.
Cultural Resource 
A prehistoric or historic site or object having historical, architectural, archaeological, or community importance, including artifacts, records, and material remains related to such property or resource. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Cultural Resource Professional 
An archaeologist, architect, architectural historian or historian who meets the minimum professional qualifications established by the Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualification Standards. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Cultural Resources Survey 
An activity with the purpose of locating and identifying cultural resources without causing any disturbance of the ground. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Custom Home Subdivision 
A subdivision in which all homes are designed individually and no model homes are constructed.
Cut 
Vertical removal of earthen material.
Dangerous Activity, Hazard or Obstruction 
An activity, structure, vegetation or other use which is dangerous to persons or aircraft using the airport or which is an obstruction or hazard to air navigation.
Day Care 
A public or private establishment providing care and supervision for five (5) or more children not related to the proprietor.
Dedication 
Is a conveyance of fee simple or property rights to Oro Valley or another public agency.
Density 
A ratio of the number of dwelling units to the gross land area unless otherwise stated.
Density-Based Land Uses 
Those land uses of a residential nature.
Desert Varnish 
A black or brown shiny crust on rocks, which consists mainly of iron and manganese oxides.
Design Review 
The complete two (2) stage process of development review, including all elements, requirements, reviews, approvals and processes related to conceptual design review and final design review by the Planning and Zoning Commission, staff and Town Council. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Enacted,  05/18/2011)
Developer 
An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication, trust or other legal entity, or representative thereof, that files the application and initiates proceedings for the development of land in accordance with the provisions of Sections 22.5 and 22.9 and the developer need not be the owner of the property.
Development Committee 
The personnel designated to meet with a developer during the development plan, subdivision, and platting process.
Disability 
A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of a person’s major life activities, impairs their ability to live independently or a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current use of, nor addiction to, a controlled substance.
Distillery 
A building or establishment with a series 18 liquor license that produces distilled spirits, as defined by the Arizona State Liquor Board, including brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, cognac or other similar spirits.
District 
A zone as shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of Oro Valley for which there are uniform regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings.
District Map 
The official zoning map of the Town of Oro Valley, which is a part of the zoning ordinance of the Town of Oro Valley.
Drainage Swale 
A designed invert that collects site drainage and directs it to a point of discharge.
Drive-Thru Use 
A use which has a drive-thru lane as a functional component of the business.
Driveway 
The principal access route from a roadway to the lot’s primary off-street parking area.Grading requirements for driveway improvements
Dwelling 
A building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential purposes.
     Multiple  
    A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families.
     Single-Family  
    A building designed for occupancy by one (1) family.
     Two-Family (Duplex) 
    A building designed for occupancy by two (2) families.
Dwelling Unit 
A building, or portion of a building, arranged, designed or used as living quarters, including bathroom and kitchen facilities, sleeping and living areas, for a family.
Easement 
A grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation, or persons for specific uses and purposes and is so designated.Front Lot Line for Lindbergh Drive Property
Emergency 
An unforeseen event requiring prompt action.
Encroachment 
To go into or over a specified line such as a setback. ((O)18-15, Enacted,  10/03/2018)
Engineering Plan 
Plans, profiles, cross sections, and other required details for the construction of public improvements prepared by a registered engineer in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and in compliance with standards of design and construction approved by the Town Council.
Entertainment at Bars, Restaurants or Private Clubs 
An activity intended for entertainment, including live musicians, disc jockeys, musical or artistic performances, etc.
Envelope, Development 
The sum of the areas of the permit holder’s land to be graded, including the building envelope, accessory buildings, and areas of related parking, driveways, swimming pools, walls and other accessory structures, but excluding individual sewage disposal systems.
     Commercial Building  
    The main building and all attached roofed structures.
     Residential Building  
    A dwelling unit and all attached roofed structures, including carports or patio ramadas.
Environmentally Sensitive Lands 
Lands that contribute to the aesthetic character of the immediate area, such as unique or heavy plant, tree or cacti growth or species, including, but not limited to, those lands restricted by additional overlay districts.
Environmentally Sensitive Open Space (ESOS) 
Lands designated as permanent, natural open space in accordance with the requirements of Section 27.10. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Equipment Building or Structure 
An accessory building or structure used to house necessary equipment used by communication providers at a facility.
Erosion 
The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice.
Exaction 
A condition placed on land development requiring dedication of infrastructure and/or real property that is necessary to serve a proposed development and is imposed on a parcel of land for the purpose of mitigating the anticipated negative impacts and infrastructure needs created by the development.
Excavation 
The mechanical, manual, blasting, or other such means for removal of earth material.
Exception 
A parcel of land that is within the boundaries of the subdivision but is not owned by the subdivider.
Exposed 
The result of causing something to be open to view.
Extension 
A portion of a building that may or may not have a location on the ground that projects out from a building. ((O)18-15, Enacted,  10/03/2018)
Family 
A person living alone, up to but no more than ten (10) persons unrelated to each other by blood, marriage or legal adoption, living together in a dwelling unit existing solely as a single housekeeping unit, with common access to all living, eating, kitchen and storage areas within the dwelling unit.
Farm 
An area used for the production of farm products.
Fascia 
A parapet-type wall used as part of the facade of a flat-roofed building and projecting from the building face immediately adjacent thereto.
Fill 
The vertical addition of earthen material.
Filter Fabric 
A woven or non-woven water-permeable material generally made of synthetic products, such as polypropylene, used in stormwater management and erosion and sediment control applications to trap sediment or prevent the clogging of aggregates by fine soil particles.
Final Design Review 
The review and approval process for construction drawings, including final site plan and/or final plat, and subject to approval by Town staff and Town Council for final plats. ((O)11-15, Enacted,  05/18/2011)
Final Inspection 
Field inspection conducted by the Town prior to project acceptance of release of assurances.
Final Plat Approval 
An unconditional approval of the final plat by the Town Council, as evidenced by certification on the plat by the Mayor and constitutes authorization to record a plat.
Financial Services 
An establishment providing management or exchange of money, assets or other fiduciary services, including banks, credit unions, savings and loans, mortgage and/or title companies.Oro Valley Town Center PAD Convenience Use requirements
Fitness Center 
A place or building where exercises and related activities are performed for the purpose of weight control and/or physical fitness.
Flag 
A fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity.
Floodplain 
The relatively flat areas or low lands adjoining the channel of a watercourse, or areas where drainage is or may be restricted by manmade structures which have been or may be covered partially or wholly by floodwater.
Floor Area Ratio 
The ratio of gross building floor area to the net lot area of the building site.
Food Processing 
A use engaged in the production of food products.
    Artisanal 
    A use engaged in the production of food products intended for consumption off premises for sale directly to individual consumers.
    Large Scale 
    A use engaged in the production of food products intended for wholesale distribution to licensed retailers.
Food Truck 
See “Mobile Food Unit.” ((O)18-14, Amended,  10/03/2018)
Freestanding 
A structure which is not attached to any other structure or portion of a structure. Structures, which are linked by pedestrian walkways, are deemed to be freestanding. Freestanding shall also apply to sole uses on an individual parcel.
Frontage 
All property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or, if the street is a dead end, then all of the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street, including property fronting on a cul-de-sac.
Full Cutoff (FCO) Light Fixture 
A light fixture which is installed or designed to emit no direct uplight above the horizontal.
Funeral Services 
An establishment engaged in the preparation and/or burial of the dead, including funeral chapels, crematoriums, and mortuaries.
Garage, Parking 
See “Vehicle Storage Facility.”
Gas Station 
A convenience use engaged in the sale and distribution of fuel for motor vehicles.
General Aviation 
The operation of non-commercial aircraft, including storage (hangars), maintenance and airstrips.
General Plan 
The General Plan of the Town of Oro Valley, or any part thereof, as adopted by the Town Council and as hereinafter amended.
Golf Course 
A facility other than a miniature golf course for the playing of golf at which there may be a clubhouse including restrooms and locker rooms. A golf course may provide additional services customarily furnished, such as swimming, outdoor recreation and related retail sales that may include a restaurant and cocktail lounge if approved as a part of the required use permit.
Golf Safety Net 
A structure made of netting material supported by vertical poles, which is erected for the purposes of protecting life and property from errant golf balls.
Government Services 
A use engaged in providing services to the general public and recognized as a political subdivision of the State, including City or Town agencies, emergency services, fire services, school districts, etc.
Grade 
The elevation of the ground surface, paving, or sidewalk.
    Existing 
    The actual, current ground surface before the issuance of a grading permit.
    Finished 
    The final grade conforming to the approved plan.
    Natural 
    The topographic configuration of land, prior to any grading or disturbance of the site.
    Rough 
    The stage at which grading substantially conforms to the approved grading plan.
Grading 
The initial clearing, brushing or grubbing, and subsequent excavating or filling of a site.
Grading Permit 
An official document issued by the Town authorizing the grading activity specified by the grading permit conditions.
Grading Permit Conditions 
The specifications and requirements of the approved grading plan, soils report, or other documents necessary for grading permit approval.
Grand Opening 
The introduction, promotion or announcement of a new business, store, shopping center, or office, or the announcement, introduction or promotion of an established business changing ownership.
Grocery Store 
An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of food products including packaged goods, produce and meat products, which may include on-site food preparation such as bakeries, delis and other related services.
Gross Floor Area 
Is the sum of the gross areas of the several floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls separating two (2) buildings. Gross floor area shall not include:
    a. Underground parking space
    b. Uncovered steps
    c. Exterior balconies
Gross Land Area 
The area of a parcel of land excluding all streets and alleyways in existence at the time the development plan is submitted. Those portions of such parcels which subsequently may be designated as streets or alleyways, whether dedicated or not, shall be included in the determination of gross land area.
Grubbing 
The removal of trees and other large plants including their roots.
Guest House 
An attached or detached accessory building used to house guests of the occupants of the principal building. A guest house providing kitchen facilities shall be considered a dwelling unit.
Guest Ranch 
A ranch that provides lodging and activities to guests.
Habitat 
The place or type of site where a plant or animal naturally or normally grows and lives.
Halo Illumination 
Illumination produced by recessing a light source inside a hollow character with an open back or within the mounting surface. An outline glow around the characters is created by this light reflecting off the background to which the characters are attached.
Health Studio or Health Spa 
See “Personal Services.” ((O)06-06, Amended,  04/19/2006)
Heliport 
An area that is used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters and may include any or all of the areas of buildings which are appropriate to accomplish these functions.
High-Rise Building 
A building that exceeds thirty (30) feet in height as defined herein.
Hillside Conservation Area 
Land area designated for conservation of natural slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%). ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Hillside Development Zone 
An area providing additional regulations for hillside development.
Hillside Development Zone Subdivision 
A subdivision or that portion of a subdivision located within the Town’s Hillside development zone.
Hillside View Conservation Area 
The visually significant slopes and ridges of the site designated as environmentally sensitive open space. Visually significant slopes and ridges are identified by the Scenic Resources category of the ESL regulations. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Home Occupation 
Business or commercial activity that is conducted from property zoned for residential use. ((O)16-11, Amended,  09/07/2016)
Hospital 
A facility for the general and emergency treatment of human ailments with bed care including a sanitarium or clinic. ((O)15-16, Amended,  11/08/2015)
Hotel 
An establishment that offers temporary lodging in rooms, for less than one (1) month (30 days), that has interior common corridor access to rooms, may include a restaurant and accessory uses and services, including, without limitation, newsstands, gift shops, and similar incidental uses conducted entirely within the principal building.
Household Services 
An establishment providing repair or maintenance of residential goods or properties including appliance repair shop, pest prevention services, etc.
Human Burials 
Human remains, including human skeletal remains, cremations, and/or ceremonial objects and funerary objects.
Hydrological Study 
A report designed to show the effects of surface water on a specific area.
Illumination Nuisance 
A use which creates difficulty for pilots to distinguish between navigational lights or markers and other lights.
Improvements 
A street, sewer, electric, gas and water utilities, drainage and flood control facilities or any other improvement or structure including all necessary engineering, construction, and inspection costs for the same for which the Town of Oro Valley may ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation.
Incidental Retail Item 
An item customarily subordinate or directly related to the operation of a mobile food unit. ((O)18-14, Enacted,  10/03/2018)
Inspector 
A person authorized by the Town to perform inspection on grading work.
Institution 
A building or buildings occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use.
Institutional 
An organizational facility used for social, educational, or religious purposes such as a school, religious institution, hospital, or reformatory. ((O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
Integrated 
An element of a project that is an aesthetic or functional part of a structure or design. The integrated element is not intended to appear as an added or attached feature of the overall project. ((O)18-08, Enacted,  05/16/2018)
Irrigation Facility 
Canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates, pumps, and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery, and drainage of irrigation water and the construction, operation and maintenance thereof.
Irrigation System 
An underground watering system, which consists of heads, valves, pipes, etc., used for the sole purpose of sustaining and promoting plant life.
Kennel 
A use where six (6) or more dogs or cats are bred, boarded, and/or trained, not including ancillary pet boarding.
Land Division, Minor 
A division of improved or unimproved land for the purpose of financing sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into one (1) or more lots, not including any division of land defined as “subdivision.”
Landscape 
A combination of trees, shrubs, flowers, or other horticultural elements, decorative stonework, paving, screening or other architectural elements designed to enhance the visual amenity of a property and/or to provide a screen to mitigate any objectionable aspects that may detrimentally affect adjacent land.
Landscape Island 
A landscaped area defined by a header and/or curb commonly found in a parking lot or cul-de-sac.
Landscape Screen 
An area of landscaping intended to provide a visual screen between adjacent areas.
Light Trespass 
The portion of the measurable light distribution that extends beyond the property line.
Linear Park 
See “Park, Linear.” ((O)11-05, Enacted,  04/20/2011)
Loading Space 
A permanently maintained space on the same lot as the main building accessible to a street or alley, which provides an area for delivery trucks and other similar activities to serve the building.
Long Term 
A period of time exceeding seven (7) days.
Lot 
A parcel of land created by a legal subdivision bounded on all sides by property lines of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, area, setbacks, and other areas as required by this code, with legal access to a public street.
    Corner 
    A lot adjoining two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
    Interior 
    A lot other than a corner lot or key lot.
    Key 
    A lot adjacent to a corner lot that shares its side lot line with the rear lot line of the corner lot and fronts on the street which forms the side boundary of the corner lot.
    Reverse Frontage 
    A lot having frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets. The front of the lot shall be considered facing the interior street.
Lot Area 
See “Net Lot Area.”
Lot Coverage 
The area of land that is covered by a building on a particular site.
Lot, Depth of 
The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot Lines 
The lines which form the boundary of a lot.
    Front 
    The line along the street on which the lot is addressed for residential lots, or the major street as determined by the Town Engineer for commercial lots.
    Rear 
    The line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
    Side 
    All lot lines not front or rear are side lot lines.Front Lot Line for Lindbergh Drive Property
Lot of Record 
A lot that is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Pima County Recorder; or parcel of land, the deed of which is recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
Lot Width 
The width of the lot determined as follows:
    a. If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these side lines;
    b. If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot at a distance equal to the required front or rear building setback line, whichever is the lesser. The axis of a lot shall be a line generally perpendicular to the fronting street, which divides the lot into two (2) equal parts.
Lumen 
A unit of light output from a source; used to measure the amount of light emitted by lamps.
Luminaire 
The complete lighting assembly, not including the support assembly.
Maintenance 
The replacing or repairing of a part of a sign made unusable, unsafe or unattractive by ordinary wear, tear or damage beyond the control of the owner or the repainting of an existing sign without changing the wording, location, composition or color of said sign.
Manufactured Home 
A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) feet or more wide or forty (40) feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent foundation and contains plumbing, heating, air cooling, and electrical systems.
Manufacturing 
The fabricating or assembling of materials into finished or partially finished products by hand or by the use of machinery.
Manufacturing Services 
An establishment whose primary business is the manufacturing of parts or materials into finished or partially finished products. These may include scientific analysis, laboratory or other similar uses.
    Heavy 
    A manufacturing service which may have a negative impact on adjacent properties and that does not comply with Section 25.1.B.17.
    Light 
    A manufacturing service which does not have a negative impact on adjacent properties in accordance with Section 25.1.B.17.
Mass Grading 
Grading of the subdivision building site, in its entirety, during the initial development process, as authorized by the approved plans.
Mature Trees 
Healthy, full-bodied trees with a shape characteristic of the species and of the following minimum sizes:
    Ten (10)- to twelve (12)-foot height by six (6)- to eight (8)-inch wide; or two (2)-inch single trunk caliper; or one (1) inch average trunk caliper for multiple trunk trees; or eight (8)-foot trunk height for palms.
Mechanical Equipment 
All devices, appliances, and apparatus involved in the maintenance of environmental conditions within a building or recreational structure, such as a swimming pool or spa. Mechanical equipment shall include HVAC units, air conditioners, pool heaters, pool filters, and pool circulation pumps, amongst others.
Medical Marijuana 
Marijuana used for a medical use as those terms are defined in A.R.S Section 36-2081.
    Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location 
    An enclosed facility, that does not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet of cultivation space, where a designated caregiver, as defined by A.R.S. Section 36-2801(5), cultivates marijuana if the designated caregiver’s registry identification card provides that the designated caregiver is authorized to cultivate marijuana. ((O)10-13, Enacted,  10/27/2010)
    Dispensary 
    A not-for-profit entity, defined in A.R.S. Section 36-2801(11), that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, sells or dispenses marijuana or related supplies and educational materials to cardholders. ((O)10-13, Enacted,  10/27/2010)
    Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Location 
    The additional location where marijuana is cultivated by a medical marijuana dispensary as referenced in A.R.S. Section 36-2804(B)(1)(b)(ii). ((O)10-13, Enacted,  10/27/2010)
    Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location 
    An enclosed facility, that does not exceed fifty (50) square feet of cultivation space for each location, where a qualifying patient, as defined by A.R.S. Section 36-2801(13), cultivates marijuana if the qualifying patient’s registry identification card states that the qualifying patient is authorized to cultivate marijuana. ((O)10-13, Enacted,  10/27/2010)
Medical Services 
An establishment providing medical care and/or treatment to patients.
    Inpatient 
    An establishment providing medical care and/or treatment to patients for one (1) or more nights, including hospitals or surgery centers.
    Outpatient 
    An establishment providing medical care and/or treatment to patients who are released and do not remain overnight, including urgent care facilities.
Mezzanine or Mezzanine Floor 
An intermediate floor placed in any room.
Microbrewery 
A building or use that has a series 3 liquor license and which produces beer in the amount between ten thousand (10,000) and three hundred thousand (300,000) gallons annually.
Minor Land Division 
A division of improved or unimproved land for the purpose of financing sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into one (1) or more lots. A minor land division shall not include any division of land defined as a “subdivision.”
Mobile Food Unit 
A food establishment that is licensed by this State, that is readily movable and that dispenses food or beverages for immediate service and consumption and other incidental retail items as defined in this section. ((O)18-14, Amended,  10/03/2018)
Mobile Home 
A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) feet or more in width or forty (40) feet or more in length, or when erected on site is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling.
Mobile Home Park 
A lot, tract, or parcel of land used or offered for use, in whole or in part, with or without charge, for parking of mobile homes or trailer coaches used for sleeping or household purposes.
Mobile Home Space 
A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home or trailer coach.
Model Home 
An unoccupied home intended for use as a representation for homebuyers of a particular home product.
Modifier 
A word describing uses and activities other than the business name.
Monitoring, Archaeological 
The observation after commencement of a disturbance to determine if archaeological resources exist in an area or, when such resources are known to exist, the observation, recording, and incidental recovery of site features and materials to preserve a record of the affected portion of the site. Monitoring is applicable in locations where sites or features may occur but are generally not expected to be of such importance, size or complexity as to require lengthy work or project delays for archaeological investigations.
Monopole 
A facility used exclusively for wireless communication facility mounts and is self-supporting with a single shaft of steel, concrete or wood. This does not include flagpoles.
Motel 
A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some or all of which have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building, with the garage or parking space located on the lot and designed, used or intended wholly, or in part, for the accommodation of automobile transients. Motel includes motor court, motor lodge and tourist court, but not a mobile home park.
Moving Services 
A use where trucks, trailers or other similar equipment intended for use in moving households or businesses is available for hire, purchase or rent.
Multiple Tenant Commercial Building 
A structure that houses or is intended to house a variety of separate commercial activities.
Native Vegetation 
Vegetation which is indigenous to the specific site or to areas contiguous to a parcel being developed.
Natural Cross-Slope 
The slope of the topographic configuration of land, graphically represented by contour lines, prior to any grading or other disturbance of the site.
Natural Grade 
The topographic configuration of land prior to any grading or other human disturbance of the site.
Net Floor Area 
The total floor area of a building measured from the interior faces of load-bearing walls excluding air shafts, stairwells, elevator shafts, restrooms, and mechanical equipment rooms.
Net Lighting Acre 
An acre of the remaining ground area after deleting all portions for proposed and existing public and private street rights-of-way within a development, parcel, or subdivision. If there are any E1 lighting zones on the property, then they shall also be excluded from the calculations of net lighting acre.
Net Lot Area 
The area included within lot lines after all right-of-way dedications have been made as required by the Town of Oro Valley.
Nonconforming Building 
A building or portion of which was lawful when established but does not conform to a subsequently established district or district regulations.
Nonconforming Lot 
A parcel of land having less area, frontage, or dimensions than required in the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use 
A building or land, lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this code or code amendment, that does not conform after passage of this code or code amendment with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Non-Density-Based Land Uses 
Those land uses of a non-residential nature.
Non-Ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation (NIER) 
Is electromagnetic radiation primarily in the visible, infrared, and radio frequency portions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Occupancy 
The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.
Office 
A building or part thereof, designed, intended or used for the practice of a profession, including medical, the carrying on of a business, the conduct of public administration, or, where not conducted on the site thereof, the administration of an industry, but shall not include a retail commercial use, any industrial use, financial institution, place of amusement, or place of assembly.
Office Park 
A group of offices planned and designed for the site on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with off-street parking and landscaping provided on the property as an integral part of the unit.
Open House 
A dwelling or office space that is for sale or for lease to which the public is invited for walk-in inspection.
Open Space 
An area meant to provide a natural or garden environment.
    Common 
    A landscape or natural open space, other than frontage open space, intended for use by all occupants of a development.
    Frontage 
    The landscaped or natural open space between the right-of-way line of a dedicated street and any perimeter structure(s) within the development except that this space may extend between structures or between a structure and a side property line to a depth of not more than one-half (1/2) the width of the opening.
    Landscaped 
    An area improved through the harmonious combination of natural desert growth with the introduction of trees, shrubs, and groundcover the purpose of which is to enhance the visual and aesthetic quality of any structure or development.
    Natural 
    A natural, completely undisturbed, desert area.
Outdoor Display 
An arrangement of merchandise sold on the property in such a way to give special prominence and designed to attract buyers. ((O)16-10, Enacted,  09/07/2016)
Outdoor Light Fixture 
An outdoor illuminating device, outdoor lighting or reflective surface, lamp or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination. Such devices include, but are not limited to:
    a. Parking lot lighting
    b. On-site circulation lighting
    c. Building and structural lighting
    d. Landscape lighting
    e. Recreational lighting
    f. Product display area lighting
    g. Building overhangs and open canopies
    h. Security lighting
Outdoor Storage 
The supply, stock of merchandise, materials or similar items accumulated in an area outside of the business. ((O)16-10, Enacted,  09/07/2016)
Outdoor Type Business 
A business, all or most of whose activities are conducted, or items displayed, in an open area.
Overlay District 
A zoning district that provides supplemental regulations to be applied in addition to those of the original zone, or provides for density transfers, or for coordinated development of several uses and shall include the Hillside Development Zone, Planned Residential Development District, and Planned Area Development District. Any applicable regulations superimposed by the Floodplain Management Code shall be in addition to the requirements of this zoning code.
Owner 
The person or persons holding title by deed to land or holding title as vendees under land contract or holding any other title of record.
Parapet Wall 
A wall extending above the plate line of a building.
Parcel 
An area within legally described boundaries under common ownership and capable of being separately conveyed. A lot within a subdivision is a parcel.
Park 
An area of land designated and used for recreation purposes.
    Linear 
    A park that has a much greater length than width.
    Private 
    An area of land designated and used for active and/or passive recreation intended for use by residents of the subdivision or complex in which the park is located.
    Public 
    An area of land designated and used by the public for active and/or passive recreation.
Parking Aisle 
The aisle on which vehicles are allowed access to the individual parking stalls and are characterized by slow speeds and high turning movements.
Parking Area 
A public or private land area designed and used for off-street parking.
    Private 
    A parking area for the private use of the owners or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located; this does not include parking on sidewalks or streets; this does include “reserved” designations.
    Public 
    A parking area available to the public, with or without compensation, used to accommodate clients, customers, employees, guests, or visitors.
Parking Bay 
A parking module consisting of one (1) or two (2) rows of parking spaces and the aisle from which vehicles enter and leave the spaces.
Parking Lot 
A parcel of land devoted to parking spaces as set forth by the parking standards of the Town of Oro Valley.
    Commercial 
    A lot available to the general public, who may be required to pay a charge or fee for said usage to the owner of the lot or his agent.
Parking Space 
The space for the parking of a vehicle within a public or private parking area.
Parking Structure 
A building designed for temporary storage of motor vehicles.
Party Wall 
A single common wall between two (2) adjacent units.
Patio Home 
An attached or detached single-family dwelling constructed with no side yard on one (1) side of the lot.
Pedestrian Way 
A public walk dedicated entirely through a block, from street to street, or providing access to a school, park, recreation area, or shopping center.
Pennant 
A lightweight fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, designed to attract attention.
Perimeter Roads 
The roads along the perimeter of buildings and at the ends of parking aisles where they abut property lines and provide customer drop-off and pickup as well as emergency access to the building.
Permitted Use 
A use specifically permitted or a use analogous to those specifically permitted.
Personal Services 
An establishment where individual services are provided, including, but not limited to, barber shops, salons, health/day spas including massage, dry cleaners and laundromats (not including industrial cleaners), and teaching studios.
Pet 
A non-hooved animal generally recognized as a domestic household animal.
Planning and Zoning Commission 
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Oro Valley.
Plant Nursery 
A place where young trees and/or other plants are raised for transplanting or for sale.
Plat 
A map of a subdivision:
    a. Final Plat shall mean a map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to an approved preliminary plat prepared by a registered civil engineer or a registered land surveyor in accordance with Section 22.9.D of this code.
    b. Recorded Plat shall mean a final plat bearing all of the certificates of approval required in Section 22.9.F of this code and duly recorded in the Pima County Recorder’s Office.
Plate Line 
The point at which the bottom of the main roof structure first touches or bears upon an external wall.
Political Subdivision 
A separate legal entity of the State, including counties, cities, school districts or public fire or emergency services, etc.
Preschool 
See “Day care.”
Preservation 
In the context of the environmentally sensitive lands conservation system, the attempt to maintain land in its current condition to protect the area from negative human influence. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Private Club 
An establishment, which may possess a series 14 liquor license, primarily organized for some common social purpose, including veterans of foreign wars, American Legion and other similar social organizations.
Prohibited Use 
A use not specifically permitted or a use analogous to those not specifically permitted.
Projection 
To jut out or hang over without supporting structural elements. ((O)18-15, Enacted,  10/03/2018)
Public Artwork 
Artwork that is accessible to the community and the general public. It may be privately funded and owned or it may be fully funded by public agencies for public benefit. Public artwork adds aesthetic appeal, draws visitors and improves the image of the Town. It entails the application of skill and taste by an artist in creating an original work of art. Privately funded and owned public artwork may not include: directional graphics or color-coded location indicators, mass-produced or standard “off-the-shelf” items, including playground equipment, fountains, or statuary, and most art reproductions. ((O)14-02, Amended,  01/15/2014; (O)08-23, Enacted,  12/03/2008)
Qualified Habitat Restoration Specialist 
A person with a minimum of a Bachelor’s degree in a natural resources-related field, and five (5) years of experience in the field of habitat biology. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Ranch 
An area of ten (10) or more contiguous acres that is used for the raising of livestock on a commercial basis.
Recreation Area 
A land area that is designated for recreation or contains specific facilities such as community recreational centers, pedestrian ways, swimming pools, picnic facilities, basketball and sport courts, playground equipment and exercise equipment.
    Active 
    An area delineated for formal activities, which may or may not require equipment and take place on a prescribed field. Active recreational areas include, but are not limited to, tennis, volleyball, bocce ball and other court games, baseball, soccer and other field sports, swimming pools, track and improved playground activity areas.
    Passive 
    An area delineated for activities that involve relatively inactive or less energetic activities, such as walking, sitting, picnicking, card games, checkers, and similar table games. Passive recreational areas also include natural open space, which contain nature walks and observation areas.
Recreational Building 
A building of which the primary use and function is for recreational activities.
Recreational Facilities 
A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise, and/or leisure-time activities.
Religious Institution 
A place of gathering or assembly with the primary purpose of religious worship. Typical religious uses include, but are not limited to, churches, synagogues, mosques and temples. ((O)07-33, Amended,  09/19/2007)
Resort 
A group or groups of buildings containing more than five (5) dwelling units and/or guest rooms and providing outdoor recreational activities, which may include golf, horseback riding, swimming, shuffleboard, tennis, and other similar activities, including associated lighting. A resort may furnish services customarily furnished by a hotel including a restaurant, bar, specialty retail shops, and convention facilities.
Restaurant 
An establishment primarily engaged in the serving of food to the public.
    Drive-In 
    A building or structure where food and drink are served for consumption on the premises by order from the service to a vehicular passenger outside the structure.
    Drive-Through 
    A building or structure where food and drink are served for consumption within the building or off the premises by order from vehicular passengers outside the structure including, but not limited to, services from an outdoor service window.
Retail 
A sale for any purpose in the form of tangible personal property.
    General 
    An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of goods or products to the end consumer, not including wholesale, manufacturing or other similar types of sales.
Retaining Wall 
A wall designed to withstand lateral and hydrostatic pressures and built to keep earth from sliding.
Revegetation 
Placement of living plant materials including, but not limited to, seed on sites or cut-and-fill slopes where the natural vegetation has been removed.
Ridge 
A topographic feature above sloped areas fifteen percent (15%) and greater that forms a crest or hilltop of at least eighty (80) feet in width. Ridges may include sloped areas as illustrated below.
[IMAGE: <31-285.png>]
((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Ring Road 
A road that typically provides unimpeded access to the parking aisles from the access drives and performs a collector function. A ring road is not primarily adjacent to the buildings except in service areas.
Rip-Rap 
A bed or wall consisting of stones placed in an irregular fashion.
    Grouted 
    Rip-rap that is held together with or placed in cementatious material.
Riparian Habitats 
Biological communities occurring in association with any spring, cienega, lake, watercourse, river, stream, creek, wash, arroyo, or other body of water, either surface or subsurface, or any channel having banks and beds through which water flows, at least periodically. Riparian habitats may be generally characterized or distinguished into three (3) classes, hydroriparian, mesoriparian, and xeroriparian, by a difference in plant species composition, or an increase in the size and/or density of vegetation, as compared to upland areas, as follows:
    a. Hydroriparian Habitats 
    Riparian habitats generally associated with perennial water- courses, with plant communities dominated by obligate or preferential wetland plant species, such as willow and cottonwood.
    b. Mesoriparian Habitats 
    Riparian habitats generally associated with perennial or intermittent flows, or shallow ground water, with plant communities dominated by species that may also be found in drier habitats, but contain some preferential riparian plant species, such as ash or netleaf hackberry. The mesquite bosque and sycamore/ash association are examples of this community type.
    c. Xeroriparian Habitats 
    Xeroriparian habitats are supported by intermittent or ephemeral stream flows. Typical species associated with this habitat type include mesquite, blue palo verde, desert willow, catclaw acacia, whitehorn acacia, desert hackberry, and ironwood. Actual species composition is typically a function of the extent and frequency of stream flow. Xeroriparian habitats are present along washes throughout the Town of Oro Valley.
    For the purposes of this classification system, xeroriparian habitats are further divided into the following subcategories:
        1. High Xeroriparian A Habitats 
        Generally associated with well-developed water- courses. The trees present are generally sixteen (16) feet to twenty (20) feet tall or taller. The vegetative volume per unit area within this habitat type is approximately 0.850 M3/M2 with much of the volume present within the dense over-story.
        The diversity of species is relatively greater than that associated with intermediate xeroriparian b and low riparian c habitat types. Mesquite, desert willow, blue palo verde, and desert hackberry are representative tree species within High Xeroriparian A Habitat areas.
        2. Intermediate Xeroriparian B Habitats 
        Typically occur along well-developed water- courses. The principal distinction between Xeroriparian A and Xeroriparian B Habitats is that of plant size (height, trunk size, and total vegetative volume). Trees in this habitat type generally range from six (6) feet to fifteen (15) feet tall. The under-story is often more extensive than Xeroriparian A Habitats due to a more open over-story canopy.
        Within Intermediate Xeroriparian B Habitats, the vegetative volume per unit area is typically 0.675 M3/M2. Mesquite, ironwood, blue palo verde, catclaw acacia, desert broom, and desert hackberry are representative of this habitat type.
        3. Low Xeroriparian C Habitats 
        Typically occur along minor watercourses and along the peripheral edges of major watercourses. The typical vegetative volume per unit area in this habitat type is between 0.500 and 0.675 M3/M2. Whitethorn acacia, catclaw acacia, desert creosote bush, bunchgrasses, and bursage are typically found within Low Xeroriparian C Habitats.
        4. Regional Drainageway 
        Not a single habitat type, but rather an aggregation of the habitat types described above distributed continuously along a regional drainage- way. The regional drainageway is significant in that it typically extends for lengths of several miles and may extend from the urbanized portions of the Town into large tracts of undeveloped public lands. Within the current boundaries of Oro Valley, this habitat feature occurs along the Canada del Oro Wash and Big Wash.
        The regional drainageway typically consists of patches of Xeroriparian A, B, and C.
        Habitats, separated by areas of sparsely vegetated or nonvegetated wash bottom all of which is within the undeveloped floodplain.
        The high habitat value associated with regional drainageways stems from their length (which can be uninterrupted for lengths of several miles), their width (which provides habitat areas that are relatively isolated from adjacent urban developments), and their configuration (which provides connections between various tributary channels and, in some instances, connections to tracts of preserved natural open space).
Scenic Resource Conservation Area 
Lands adjacent to designated scenic corridors where the land use and design requirements of the ESL scenic resources category apply. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
School 
A place of general instruction.
    Private 
    A place of general instruction, such as private academies, business schools or colleges that are not a charter school or part of a public school system.
    Public 
    A place of general instruction which are recognized by the Arizona Department of Education as a charter school or as part of a public school system.
Screen 
An opaque barrier designed and installed to conceal areas used for storage, refuse, mechanical equipment, parking or delivery service loading bays from street and public view, or to buffer adjacent uses.
Screen Wall 
An opaque wall at least six (6) feet in height located along the perimeter of a said use that abuts a residential use, the purpose of which is to minimize any impacts associated with contiguous or adjacent land uses. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
Sculptured Rock 
A soil stabilization treatment using a material, such as concrete or gunite, which is sculpted to resemble natural stone.
Self Storage 
An establishment providing temporary storage facilities to one (1) or more individuals as a primary use.
Senior Care Facility 
A health care facility providing single or multiple types of senior care, including independent living facilities or facilities defined and licensed by the State of Arizona as an assisted living facility, hospice in-patient facility, nursing care institution or similarly licensed facilities.Sanatoriums and Senior Care Facilities
((O)15-16, Enacted,  11/08/2015)
Setback 
The shortest straight line distance in feet from the nearest property or lot boundary to a main or accessory building, structure, sign or the like located on the same property or lot.Nakoma Sky Setback MeasurementCovered Porch in Front Setback
Sexually Oriented Business 
Classified as the following:
    a. Adult arcades;
    b. Adult bookstores, adult novelty shops or adult video stores;
    c. Adult cabarets;
    d. Adult motels;
    e. Adult motion picture theaters;
    f. Adult theaters;
    g. Adult vending machines;
    h. Escort agencies;
    i. Nude model studios; and
    j. Sexual encounter centers.
Refer to the Oro Valley Town Code Section 8-4-1 for further definition of the above listed classifications. ((O)06-06, Enacted,  04/19/2006)
Shared Access 
Shared ingress/egress points for vehicular circulation purposes.
Shopping Center 
A group of stores planned and designed for the site on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with common points of ingress and egress.
Short Term 
A time period no more than seven (7) days.
Short-Term Rental Property 
A building(s) of a residential character other than a hotel or motel compatible with the neighborhood offering temporary lodging for less than one (1) month (30 days).
Significant Vegetation (SV) 
Specific plant communities, and/or unique plant occurrences, and/or unique individual specimens that demonstrate, through the presence of certain criteria areas, special value to the Sonoran desert ecosystem:
    a. Plant community is an area of vegetation dominated by one (1) or more species. Climate, elevation, soil types and other factors ultimately determine the limits and boundaries of particular plant communities. Examples of a plant community dominated by one (1) species are desert grassland and creosote bush association, or a grove of trees, for example mesquite bosque. These communities can form almost pure stands of single species. Examples of co-dominant plant communities are cottonwood-willow and palo verde-saguaro association. Plant communities create an environment that is beneficial, unique, and/or valuable to the desert ecosystem.
    b. Unique plant occurrences are areas of vegetation that exist in contrast to the majority of the surrounding vegetative community due to either microclimates or availability of water sources. Examples are stands of ironwood trees or riparian areas.
    c. Unique plant refers to any native tree, shrub, or cacti with extraordinary characteristics such as, but not limited to, age, size, shape, form, canopy cover, or aesthetic value. An example may be crested saguaros, a rare, massive ancient tree, or tree with unusual shape.
Signs 
See Chapter 28 for definitions and requirements.
Site 
A land area designated for development as a single entity, exclusive of any public right-of-way or property, which consists of one (1) parcel or any number of contiguous parcels.
Site-Delivered Dwelling 
A dwelling that is not constructed on the site on which it is located. Site-delivered homes include prefabricated housing, manufactured housing, and mobile homes. Site-delivered homes do not include recreation vehicles.
Site Plan 
A plan drawing of an individual site (see definition, “Site”) including the layout of buildings, circulation system, parking, walls, landscaping, open space, and any other appropriate information as required by the Town of Oro Valley to provide adequate public review.
Site Resource Inventory 
A primary evaluative design tool upon which site design and salvage plans are based. The information contained in the site resource inventory shall be utilized for purposes of site planning and design, and shall describe and identify natural characteristics of the site, including areas of significant vegetation. Preservation of protected natural area and significant vegetation shall be a primary consideration.
Sleeping Unit 
A room or space arranged, designed or used as living quarters, with sleeping and living areas and bathroom facilities, without full kitchen facilities. ((O)09-05, Enacted,  06/17/2009)
Slope 
Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal; measured as a numerical ratio, percent, or in degrees. Expressed as a ratio, the first number is the horizontal distance (run) and the second is the vertical distance (rise), as 2:1. A 2:1 slope is a fifty percent (50%) slope. Expressed in degrees, the slope is the angle from the horizontal plane, with a ninety (90)-degree slope being vertical (maximum) and forty-five (45) degrees being a 1:1 or one hundred percent (100%) slope.
Slope, Exposed, Height of 
Vertical dimension of the exposed slope, measured from the top of the adjacent finished grade to the point where the cut or fill slope intercepts the natural grade.
Slope Interceptor Drain 
A drainage swale designed to collect and divert the flow of water.
Small Cell Wireless Facility 
A wireless facility that meets both of the following:
    a. All antennas are located inside an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of the antenna’s exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume.
    b. All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume, or fifty (50) cubic feet in volume if the equipment was ground-mounted before August 9, 2017. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume pursuant to this subdivision:
        i. An electric meter;
        ii. Concealment elements;
        iii. A telecommunications demarcation box;
        iv. Grounding equipment;
        v. A power transfer switch;
        vi. A cutoff switch;
        vii. Vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. ((O)18-02, Enacted,  01/17/2018)
Soil 
Naturally occurring deposits overlying bedrock.
Soils Engineer of Record 
A person whose discipline is soils engineering, who has prepared and sealed a geotechnical report for a specific property.
Soundproof 
A condition where no noise, to a reasonable person, would be discernible at the nearest property line.
Special Use 
A temporary use of a property for a special event, which may or may not be in compliance with the standards of the zoning district in which it is to be located. Said uses, which may be public or private, may include, but are not limited to, civic, philanthropic, educational, religious, sporting, and/or social events, fundraisers, or holiday sales, or any other special temporary use, as may be deemed analogous to these examples by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.Food Trucks
Sport Court 
A surface prepared for the purpose of playing sporting activities including tennis, basketball, volleyball, croquet, shuffleboard, bocce, pickle ball and/or other similar activities.
Stabilization 
Treatment with mitigation measures in accordance with the erosion or siltation resistance, or the structural strength, of a graded area.
Stable 
An area used for the storage and keeping of horses, mules or ponies.
    Commercial 
    An area of ten (10) or more contiguous acres containing a stable for horses, mules, or ponies that are hired, bred, shown, or boarded on a commercial basis. Commercial stables must meet the conditions of Section 25.1.B.4 of this Code.
    Private 
    A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses, mules, or ponies owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.
Stockpile 
The storage of uncompacted earth material.
Story 
That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
Street 
A street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, alley easement for access, viaduct or bridge and approaches thereto. A street includes the land between the right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved and may comprise pavements, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns.
    a. Arterial Route (principal arterial) 
    Those Interstate, State, or County highways, freeways, expressways, and major thoroughfares having regional continuity.
    b. Collector Street 
    Those streets providing the traffic movement within neighborhoods of the Town and between major streets and local streets and for direct access to abutting property.
    c. Local Street 
    Those streets providing direct access to residential, commercial, or other abutting land or for local traffic movements and connects to collector or major streets.
    d. Frontage Street 
    A local street parallel and adjacent to an arterial route which intercepts local streets and controls access to an arterial route.
    e. Cul-de-Sac 
    A short local street permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround.
    f. Alley 
    A public service way used to provide secondary vehicular access to properties otherwise abutting upon a street.Front Lot Line for Lindbergh Drive Property
Street Centerline 
The centerline of a street right-of-way as determined by the Town Engineer.
Street Line 
A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street (right-of-way).Front Lot Line for Lindbergh Drive Property
Structural Alterations 
A change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any complete rebuilding of a roof.
Structure 
A piece of work constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including a tent, vehicle, trailer coach, or mobile homes.
Structure, Temporary 
A piece of work that is readily movable and used or intended to be used for a period not to exceed ninety (90) consecutive days. Such structure shall be subject to all applicable property development standards for the district in which it is located.
Studio, Commercial or Fine Arts 
A studio used for professional work or the teaching of any form of commercial or fine arts.
Subdivider 
An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication, trust or other legal entity that files the application and initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of this code; and the subdivider need not be the owner of the property.
Subdivision 
Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into four (4) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land or any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by recorded plat which is divided into more than two (2) parts.
“Subdivision” shall also include any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing four (4) or more parcels in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or air space above the property shown on the plat are to be divided.
“Subdivision” shall not include the following:
    a. The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners if such sale or exchange does not create additional lots.
    b. The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership.
    c. The leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within a building or trailer park, nor to mineral, oil, or gas leases.
Survey 
An activity with the purpose of locating, identifying, and evaluating cultural or archaeological sites without causing any disturbance of the ground.
Swimming Pool 
A contained body of water used for swimming or bathing purposes either above ground level or below ground level with the depth of the container being more than eighteen (18) inches in depth or the area being more than thirty-eight (38) square feet.
    Private 
    A pool established or maintained on any premises by an individual for his own or his family’s use or for guests of the household.
    Public 
    A municipal, county, or commercial pool, admission to which may be gained by the general public with or without payment of a fee.
    Semi-Public 
    A membership pool or cooperative pool or a pool at an establishment such as a resort, motel, apartment building or other places where the primary business of the establishment is not the operation of swimming facilities and where admission to use the pool is included in consideration given for the primary use of the premises.
Technical and Professional Standards and Guidelines 
All aspects of the archaeological mitigation and data recovery efforts shall be conducted by a professional archaeologist using accepted professional standards and practices consistent with guidelines included in the Advisory Town Council on Historic Preservation 1980 Handbook; Guidelines for Recovery of Scientific, Prehistoric, Historic, and Archaeological Data: Methods, Standards, and Reporting Requirements (36 CFR 66, dated January 28, 1977); the Standards of Research Performance of the Society of Professional Archaeologists; and the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Archaeological Documentation (Federal Register, dated September 29, 1983).
Technical Services 
An establishment providing services to businesses or individuals of a technical nature, including mail service, printing, photocopying, and computer access centers.
Temporary Fencing 
A light, temporary barrier, as approved by the Town, that clearly and conspicuously delineates areas designated to remain undisturbed or that are to be protected during construction.
Temporary Lighting 
Lighting used for a limited duration; for example, holiday decorations, civic events, or construction projects.
Terrace 
A relatively level step construction in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.
Testing, Archaeological 
The limited subsurface excavation or remote sensing of a proposed disturbance (or portion thereof) to determine the potential, type, or extent of the archaeological site. Testing may include trenching and establishing archaeological excavation units and will include the screening of excavated material for artifact recovery.
Theater 
An establishment where primarily movies, shows or performances are shown or conducted, including movie theaters, playhouses and other performing arts centers.
Timeshare Plan 
A plan or program in which the use, occupancy, or possession of one (1) or more time-share units circulates among various persons for less than a sixty (60)-day period in any year, for any occupant. The timeshare plan includes both timeshare ownership plans and timeshare use plans, as follows:
    a. Ownership Plan 
    Any arrangement whether by tenancy in common, sale, deed, or other means whereby the purchaser receives any ownership interest and the right to use the property for a specific or discernible period by temporal division; and
    b. Use Plan 
    Any arrangement, excluding normal hotel operations, whether by membership agreement, lease rental agreement, license, use agreement, security or other means, whereby the purchaser receives a right to use accommodations or facilities, or both, in a timeshare unit for a specific or discernible period by temporal division, but does not receive an ownership interest.
Timeshare Unit 
The accommodations and related facilities which are the subject of a timeshare plan.
Tot Lot 
A small (typically less than one-half (1/2) acre) recreational area primarily intended for young children (ages eight (8) and under), with a primary emphasis on playground equipment and supporting amenities and infrastructure. ((O)11-05, Enacted,  04/20/2011)
Tower 
A facility used for wireless communication facility mounts and consists of more than a single shaft of steel or concrete.
Town 
The Town of Oro Valley.
Town Council 
The Town Council of the Town of Oro Valley.
Townhouse 
A dwelling with party walls and no side yards between abutting dwellings. ((O)18-12, Amended,  07/18/2018)
Transportation Plan 
A plan that provides for the development of a system of streets and highways including the location and alignment of existing and proposed thoroughfares, bicycle paths, frontage roads, and limited access to Oracle Road.
Treatment Plan 
A plan prepared by a qualified cultural resource professional for the preservation, data recovery, excavation, archiving, monitoring, adaptive reuse, curation, and/or documentation of one (1) or more significant archaeological resources, buildings, structures, sites, landscapes, or artifacts. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Turnover 
The number of different vehicles that park in a given space during an average day.
Unshielded Light Fixture 
A luminary without all of the shielding necessary to be defined as a full cutoff light fixture.
Usable Lot Area 
That portion of a lot usable for or adaptable to the normal uses made of residential property excluding any areas which may be covered by water, excessively steep or included in certain types of easements.
Use 
The purpose for which land or a building is occupied or maintained, arranged, designed or intended.
Use Permit 
A permit granted to a property owner by the Town Council to conduct a use allowed as a use in a zoning district subject to a use permit. A use permit may be granted in accordance with the provisions of Section 22.5.
Utilities 
Installations or facilities, underground or overhead, furnishing for the use of the public electricity, gas, steam, cable TV communication, water, drainage, sewage disposal or flood control owned and operated by any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized by State or municipal regulations. Utility or utilities may also refer to such persons, firms, corporations, departments, or boards as sense requires.
Utility Poles and Wires 
Poles, towers, structures, wire, cable, conduit, transformers and related facilities used in or as a part of the transportation or distribution of electric power or in the transmission of telephone, telegraph, or television communication.
Variance 
A modification of the literal provisions of this zoning code granted by the Board of Adjustment upon a finding that strict enforcement of the provisions would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property for which the variance is granted and not caused by the applicant for said variance.
Vehicle 
A device in, on or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn.
Vehicle Dealer 
An agency selling new or used motor vehicles and providing services commonly associated with motor vehicle sales.
Vehicle Repair 
All aspects of motor vehicle repair including, but not limited to, lubrication, tune-up, and preventive maintenance.
Vehicle Repair Facility 
A facility that provides for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.
Vehicle Storage Facility 
A facility whose primary purpose is the temporary storage of motor vehicles, including parking garages.
Vehicle Wash 
A convenience use for the cleaning and washing of motor vehicles including interior cleaning and vacuuming and waxing.
Veterinary Services 
An establishment where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.
Visibility Nuisance 
A use that creates a hazard to air navigation by reducing visibility.
Visually Significant Slopes 
Sloped areas of fifteen percent (15%) and greater visible from scenic corridors, public rights-of-way, public parks and all trails identified in the Oro Valley Trails Master Plan. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Volume 
The degree of sound intensity or audibility.
Volume, Building 
The volume of a building that occupies a particular site. Volume of a building shall be determined by multiplying the gross floor area of the individual floors by the height of that story.
Volume Ratio 
The ratio of building volume to the net lot area of the building site.
Wall 
A structure or device required or allowed by this code forming a physical barrier, constructed such that fifty percent (50%) or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air, and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. Where a masonry wall is specified, said wall shall be concrete block, brick, stone or other similar material and one hundred percent (100%) of the vertical surface shall be closed except for approved gates or other access ways.
    Masonry 
    A wall constructed of concrete block, brick, stone or other similar material, forming a physical barrier, constructed such that one hundred percent (100%) of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air, and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane, except for approved gates or other access ways.
    Solid 
    A wall forming a physical barrier, constructed such that one hundred percent (100%) of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air, and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane, except for approved gates or other access ways.
Warehouse 
A building or buildings used for the storage of goods of any type and where no retail operation is conducted.
Wholesale 
The sale of tangible personal property for resale by a licensed retailer and not the sale of tangible personal property for consumption by the purchaser.
Wildlife Permeable Development 
Residential development with a developed density of one (1) home per acre or less and fences and walls that are wildlife-friendly and do not impede the movement of wildlife between adjacent lots or between the development and adjacent open space areas. ((O)11-01, Enacted,  02/16/2011)
Wireless Communications Facility 
A facility for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals. Any device, including DBS satellite dishes, used to receive signals from direct broadcast satellites (DBS); multi-channel multi-point distribution providers (MMDS); and television broadcast stations (TVBS).
Yard 
Those required areas established by setbacks to provide an open space at grade level between a building and the adjoining lot lines unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein.
    Front 
    An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the main building, projected to the side lines of the lot. The front yard of a commercial corner lot is the yard adjacent to the major street as determined by the Town Engineer.Front Lot Line for Lindbergh Drive PropertyNakoma Sky Setback MeasurementCovered Porch in Front Setback
    Interior 
    The side yard adjacent to a common lot line.
    Rear 
    An open space on the same lot with a main building between the rear line of the main building and the rear line of the lot, as defined herein, extending the full width of the lot.
    Side 
    An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The side yard adjacent to a common lot line. ((O)16-16, Amended,  12/07/2016)

Appendixes

Addendum (A): Design Guidelines
[MEDIA: <https://orovalley.town.codes/ZC/media/AddendumA.pdf>]

Addendum (B): Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Specific Plan
View Analysis Criteria

Purpose
The Oracle Road Scenic Corridor Specific Plan seeks to protect significant views along the Oracle Road transportation corridor. The corridor is rich in scenic resources, including views to three (3) mountain ranges, views of foothills and prominent ridges, and views of riparian areas along the Cañada del Oro Wash.

View Categories
The view analysis criteria for the Oracle Road Specific Plan include five (5) categories of views, weighted according to their visual importance. The five (5) categories are:
• Background views of the Santa Catalina Mountains
• Background views of the Tortolita Mountains
• Background views of the Tucson Mountains
• Middle ground views of rolling hillsides and ridges
• Foreground and/or middle-ground views of the Cañada del Oro Wash

View Types Defined
Within each of these categories, there are several view types. The view types are defined as follows:
Significant panoramic background view - this view type consists of a view of an unobstructed or complete view of a large section of a mountain range. As a background, this scenery is set behind foreground and middle-ground views.
Uncompromised view - an uncompromised view provides a window, or "framed," visual access to a significant visual resource that is not compromised by structures or surface disturbance in the foreground or middle-ground.
View compromised by distant structures or surface disturbance - this type provides a window, or "framed" visual access to a significant visual resource that is compromised by structures or surface disturbance in the middle ground or near background.
View compromised by foreground utilities, signage, and structures - this type provides a window, or "framed" visual access to a significant visual resource that is compromised by above-ground utilities, structures, or surface disturbance in the foreground.

Parcels Subject to View Corridor Requirements
The following table provides weighted values for each of the view types within the five (5) view categories. All views across a subject parcel from the Oracle Road corridor shall be identified and assigned the corresponding numerical value. Any parcel which scores a value of seven (7) or more shall be subject to view corridor requirements.
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
|                         ORACLE ROAD SCENIC CORRIDOR SPECIFIC PLAN                         |
|                           VIEW ANALYSIS CRITERIA AND CHECKLIST                            |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
|                   View Classification                   | Weighted Points | Views Present |
|                                                         |                 | Across Site?  |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 1. | Background views of the Santa Catalina Mountains   |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | Significant panoramic background view              | 10              |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | Uncompromised view                                 | 9               |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by distant structures or surface  | 7               |               |
|    | disturbance                                        |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by foreground utilities, signage, | 6               |               |
|    | structures                                         |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 2. | Background views of the Tortolita Mountains        |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | Significant panoramic background view              | 9               |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | Uncompromised view                                 | 8               |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by distant structures or surface  | 6               |               |
|    | disturbance                                        |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by foreground utilities, signage, | 5               |               |
|    | structures                                         |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 3. | Background views of the Tucson Mountains           |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | Significant panoramic background view              | 7               |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | Uncompromised views                                | 6               |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by distant structures or surface  | 4               |               |
|    | disturbance                                        |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by foreground utilities, signage, | 3               |               |
|    | structures                                         |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 4. | Middle ground views of rolling hillsides and       |                 |               |
|    | ridges                                             |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | Uncompromised views                                | 5               |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by surface disturbances and/or    | 4               |               |
|    | structures                                         |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by foreground utilities, signage, | 2               |               |
|    | and/or structures                                  |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 5. | Foreground and/or middle-ground views of the       |                 |               |
|    | Cañada del Oro Wash                                |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | Uncompromised view of dense vegetative cover       | 4               |               |
|    | within the Cañada del Oro Wash                     |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by surface disturbances and/or    | 3               |               |
|    | structures                                         |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| •  | View compromised by foreground utilities, signage, | 1               |               |
|    | and/or structures                                  |                 |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
| TOTAL POINTS                                                              |               |
+----+----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
INSTRUCTIONS: Using photographic records of the views across the site from Oracle Road, identify the view classifications that are present. Enter the weighted point for each view classification in the right hand column. Total the weighted value for view protection on this property.

Addendum (C): Approved Native Plant List
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
|                     TABLE C-1: ORO VALLEY PROTECTED NATIVE PLANT LIST                      |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Latin Name                          | Common Name                       | Legal Protection |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Acacia greggii                      | Catclaw Acacia                    |                  |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Acacia constricta                   | Whitethorn Acacia                 |                  |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Carnegiea gigantea                  | Saguaro                           | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Carnegiea gigantea                  | Saguaro, crested form             | NPL-HS           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Castela emoryi                      | Crucifixion Thorn                 | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Celtis pallida                      | Desert Hackberry                  |                  |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Celtis reticulata                   | Netleaf Hackberry                 |                  |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Cercidium floridum                  | Blue Palo Verde                   | NPL-SA           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Cercidium microphyllum              | Foothills Palo Verde              | NPL-SA           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Echinocactus horizonthalonius       | Blue Barrel Cactus                | NPL/ESA-NPL/HS   |
| var. nicholii                       |                                   |                  |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Ferocactus wislezenii               | Fishhook Barrel                   | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Fourquieria splendens               | Ocotillo                          | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Mammillaria thornberi               | Thornber Clustered Pincushion     | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Opuntia fulgida var. fulgida        | Chain-fruit Cholla*               | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Opuntia phaeacantha var. discata*   | Desert or Engelmann Prickly-Pear* | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Olneya tesota                       | Ironwood                          | NPL-SA/HR        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Peniocereus greggii                 | Desert Night-blooming Cereus      | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Prosopis pubescens                  | Screwbean Mesquite                | NPL-HR/SA        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Prosopis velutina                   | Velvet Mesquite                   | NPL-HR/SA        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Tumamoca macdougalii                | Tumamoc Globeberry                | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Yucca elata                         | Soaptree Yucca                    | NPL-SR           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| Zizyphus obtusifolia var. canescens | Greythorn                         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
| KEY: NPL = Plants regulated by the Arizona Native Plant Law                                |
| HR = Harvest Restricted                                                                    |
| SR = Salvage Restricted                                                                    |
| SA = Salvage Assessed                                                                      |
| ESA = Plants protected by the Federal Endangered Species Act                               |
| HS = Highly Safeguarded                                                                    |
| * = See “2” below                                                                          |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------+
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| TABLE C-2: ORO VALLEY SUPPLEMENTAL PROTECTED NATIVE PLANT LIST (UNDER-STORY)                     |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Latin Name                          | Common Name                | Occurrence | Legal Protection |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Abutilon Incanum                    | Indian Mallow              | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Abutilon Parishii                   | Tucson Indian Mallow       | UC         | SR               |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Acacia Angustissima var. Hirta      | Fern Acacia                | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Acacia Constricta                   | White Thorn Acacia         | CW         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Acacia Greggii                      | Catclaw Acacia             | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Agave Chrysantra                    | Golden-Flowered Agave      | UC         | SR               |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Agave Palmeri                       | Palmer Agave               | UC         | SR               |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Ambrosia Ambrosioides               | Canyon Ragweed             | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Ambrosia Deltoidea                  | Triangleleaf Bursage       | CW         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Anemone Tuberosa                    | Desert Windflower          | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Anisacanthus Thurberi               | Thurber Desert Honeysuckle | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Astrolepis Cochisensis              | Cochise Scaley Astrolepis  | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Astrolepis X Integerrima            | Hybrid Cloak Fern          | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Astrolepis Sinuata                  | Wavy Astrolepis            | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Astrolepis Standleyi                | Standley Astrolepis        | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Baccharis Salicifolia               | Seep Willow                | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Baileya Multiradiata                | Desert Marigold            | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Calliandra Eriophylla               | Fairy Duster               | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Celtis Pallida                      | Desert Hackberry           | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Clematis Drummondii                 | Texas Virgin Bower         | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Clematis Ligusticifolia             | White Virgin’s Bower       | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Condalia Warnockii var. Kearneyana  | Kearney Condalia           | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Coursetia Microphylla               | Baby Bonnets               | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Crossosoma Bigelovii                | Bigelow Ragged Rock        | UC         |                  |
|                                     | Flower                     |            |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Dasylirion Wheeleri                 | Wheeler Dasylirion         | UC         | SR               |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Dichelostemma Pulchellum var.       | Small-Flowered Covena      | C          | SR               |
| Pauciflorum                         |                            |            |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Dodonaea Viscosa var. Angustifolia  | Hop Tree                   | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Echinocereus Fasiculatus var.       | Bundle Hedgehog Cactus     | C          | SR               |
| Fasiculatus                         |                            |            |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Encelia Farinoba                    | Brittle Bush               | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Ephedra Trifurca                    | Long-Leaved Joint-Fir      | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Eragrostis Intermedia               | Plains Lovegrass           | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Ericameria Laricifolia              | Turpentine Bush            | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Eriogonum Wrightii                  | Wright Buckwheat           | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Glandularia Gooddingii              | Goodding Verbena           | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Gossypium Thurberi                  | Desert Cotton              | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Hibiscus Coulteri                   | Desert Rose Mallow         | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Hymenoclea Monogyra                 | Burro Brush                | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Hymenoclea Salsola                  | Burro Brush                | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Hyptis Emoryi                       | Desert Lavender            | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Jatropha Cardiophylla               | Limberbush                 | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Justicia Californica                | California Chuparosa       | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Krameria Parvifolia                 | Range Ratany               | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Larrea Divaricata var. Tridentata   | Creosote Bush              | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Lycium Berlandieri var. Parviflorum | Berlandier Wolfberry       | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Lycium Fremontli                    | Fremont Desert Thorn       | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Marah Gilensis                      | Big Root                   | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Menodora Scabra                     | Yellow Menodora            | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Mimosa Biuncifera                   | Wait-a-Minute Mimosa       | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Mimulus Guttatus                    | Seep-Spring Monkey         | UC         |                  |
|                                     | Flower                     |            |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Muhlenbergia Porteri                | Bush Muhly                 | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Muhlenbergia Rigens                 | Deer Grass                 | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Opuntia Arbuscula                   | Pencil Cholla              | C          | SR               |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Opuntia Ffulgida var. Mammillata    | Smooth Chain-Fruited       | C          | SR               |
|                                     | Cholla                     |            |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Opuntia Kleiniae var. Tetracantha   | Four-Spined Pencil         | UC         | SR               |
|                                     | Cholla                     |            |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Opuntia Leptocaulis                 | Desert Christmas Cholla    | C          | SR               |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Opuntia Spinosior                   | Cane Cholla                | C          | SR               |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Opuntia Versicolor                  | Staghorn Cholla            | C          | SR               |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Pellaea Truncata                    | Spiny Cliff Brake          | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Penstemon Parryi                    | Parry Penstemon            | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Psilostrophe Cooperi                | Cooper Paper Flower        | CW         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Simmondsia Chinensis                | Jojoba                     | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Sporobolus Contractus               | Spike Dropseed             | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Sporobolus Cryptandrus              | Sand Dropseed              | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Sporobolus Wrightii                 | Sacaton                    | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Tiquilia Canescens                  | Shrubby Tiquilia           | UC         |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Trixis Californica                  | Trixis                     | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| Zinnia Acerosa                      | Desert Zinnia              | C          |                  |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
| (Oro Valley Occurrence: CW = Common Widespread, C = Common, UC = Uncommon)                       |
+-------------------------------------+----------------------------+------------+------------------+
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| TABLE C-3: ORO VALLEY APPROVED PLANT LIST (ALL AREAS)                                           |
| *See Bottom of List for Key to Symbols List Sorted Alphabetically by Botanical                  |
| Name                                                                                            |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Botanical Name               | Common Name             | Status       | Origin | Needs  | Hardy |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Abronia villosa              | Sand Verbena            | Gc, an       | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Acacia angustissima          | White Ball Acacia       | S            | SD     | 2      | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Acacia cavenia               | Cavenia Acacia          | T            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Acacia constricta            | Whitethorn Acacia,      | T, S*        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
|                              | Mescat                  |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Acacia eburnia               | Needle Acacia           | T            | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Acacia farnesiana           | Sweet Acacia            | T            | SD, CD | 2      | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Acacia greggii               | Cat’s Claw Acacia       | T, S         | SD, CD | 1-2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Acacia minuta               | Southwestern Sweet      | T, S, cl     | SD, CD | 2      |       |
| (smallii)                    | Acacia                  |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Acacia schaffneri            | Twisted Acacia          | T            | CD     | 1-2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Acacia smallii               | Sweet Acacia            | T            | SD, CD | 1-2    | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Acacia willardiana           | Palo Blanco             | T            | SD     | 1‑2    | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Agave americana              | Century Plant           | Sc           | CD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Agave colorata               | Agave                   | Sc           | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Agave filifera               | Agave                   | Sc           | CD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Agave huachucensis           | Huachuca Agave          | Sc           | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Agave lophantha              | Agave                   | Sc           | CD     | 2      |       |
| (univittata)                 |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Agave ocahui                 | Ocahui Agave            | Sc           | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Agave palmeri                | Palmer Agave            | Sc           | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Agave victoriae‑reginae      | Victoria Regina         | Sc           | CD     | 1‑2    |       |
|                              | Agave                   |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Agave vilmoriniana          | Octopus Agave           | Sc           | SD     | 1‑2    | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Aloysia gratissimma          | Fragrant Bush,          | S            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
|                              | Bee Brush               |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Aloysia wrightii             | Wright’s Oregano,       | S            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
|                              | Lemon Verbena           |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Ambrosia (Franseria)         | Triangle‑Leaf           | S            | SD     |        |       |
| deltoidea                    | Bursage                 |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Ambrosia (Franseria)         | White Bursage           | S            | SD     | 1      |       |
| dumosa                       |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Anisacanthus thurberi        | Desert Honeysuckle      | S            | SD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Antigonon leptopus          | Queen’s Wreath          | V, cl        | SD     | 2‑3    | (t)   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Asclepias linaria            | Pine‑Leaf Milkweed      | S            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Asclepias subulata           | Desert Milkweed         | A            | SD     | 2      | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Aster bigelovii              | Aster                   | an           | SD     | 1      | (t)   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Aster tanacetifolius         | Aster                   | an           | SD, CD | 1      | (t)   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Atriplex canescens           | Four‑Wing Saltbush      | S            | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Atriplex hymenelytra         | Desert Holly            | S            | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Atriplex lentiformis         | Quail Bush              | S            | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Atriplex lentiformis         | Brewer Saltbush         | S            | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
| breweri                      |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Atriplex polycarpa           | Desert Saltbush         | S            | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Bahia absinthifolia          | Desert Daisy            | p, cl        | SD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Baileya multiradiata         | Desert Marigold         | p, cl*       | SD, CD | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Bothriochloa barbinodis      | Cane Beardgrass         | Gr, cl       | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Buchloe dactylodes           | Buffalo Grass           | Gr           | CD     | 2-3    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Bursera microphylla          | Elephant Tree           | T            | SD     | 2,1    | (t)   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Caesalpinia (Poinciana)     | mexicana                | Mexican Bird | S, cl* | CD     | 2     |
|                              |                         | of Paradise  |        |        |       |
|                              |                         | (Yellow)     |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Calliandra eriophylla        | Fairy Duster,           | S, cl        | SD     | 1      |       |
|                              | False Mesquite          |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Carnegiea gigantea           | Saguaro                 | C            | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cathostecum erectum          | False Grama             | Gr, cl       | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Celtis pallida               | Spiny or Desert         | S            | SD, CD | 1‑2    |       |
|                              | Hackberry               |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Celtis reticulata           | Netleaf or Western      | T            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
|                              | Hackberry               |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cephalophyllum               | Red Spike Ice           | Gc, Sc, cl   |        | 2      |       |
| ‘Red Spike’                  | Plant                   |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Cercidium Hybrid            | Desert Museum           |              |        | 1-2    |       |
|                              | Palo Verde              |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Cercidium floridum          | Blue Palo Verde         | T, cl        | SD     | 2‑3    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cercidium microphyllum       | Littleleaf or           | T, cl        | SD     | 1      |       |
|                              | Foothill Palo           |              |        |        |       |
|                              | Verde                   |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cercidium praecox            | Palo Brea               | T, cl        | SD     | 2      | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cercidium sonorae            | Sonoran Palo Verde      | T, cl        | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Chilopsis linearis          | Desert Willow           | T, S, cl     | SD, CD | 2‑3    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cissus incisa                | Desert Grape Ivy        | V            | CD     | 1‑2    | I     |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cissus trifoliata            | Desert Grape Ivy        | V            | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Condalia warnockii           | kearneyana              | Condalia     | S      | SD, CD | 1     |
| var.                         |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cordia parvifolia            | Littleleaf Cordia       | S, cl        | SD, CD | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Cupressus arizonica          | Arizona Cypress         | T            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Dasylirion acrotriche        | Green Desert Spoon      | A            | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Dasylirion wheeleri          | Sotol, Desert           | A            | SD, CD | 1      |       |
|                              | Spoon                   |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Digitaria californica        | Arizona Cottontop       | Gr           | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Dodonaea viscosa             | Hopbush                 | S            | SD, CD | 1‑2    | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Echinocactus grusonii        | Golden Barrel           | C, cl        | SD     | 1-2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Echinocereus spp.            | Hedgehog, Rainbow       | C, cl        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
|                              | Cactus                  |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Encelia californica          | California Brittlebush  | S, cl        | SD     | 1‑2    | sh    |
|                              | (Green)                 |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Encelia farinosa             | Brittlebush             | S, cl        | SD     | 1‑2    | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Euphorbia antisyphilitica    | Wax Plant, Candelilla   | S            | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Euphorbia myrsinites         | Euphorbia               | Gc           |        | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Fallugia paradoxa            | Apache Plume            | S            | SD     | 2,1    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Ferocactus spp.              | Barrel Cactus           | C, cl        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Forestiera neomexicana       | Desert Olive            | S            | SD     | 1,2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Fouquieria splendens         | Ocotillo                | A, cl        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Gossypium harknessii         | Gossypium               | S, cl        | SD     | 2      | (t)   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Haplopappus (Ericameria)     | Turpentine Bush         | S, cl        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
| laricifolius                 |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Hesperaloe funifera          | Giant Hesperaloe        | A            | CD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Hesperaloe parviflora        | Red Yucca, Red          | A, cl        | CD     | 1‑2    |       |
|                              | Flowered Hesperaloe     |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Hibiscus coulteri            | Yellow Hibiscus,        | S            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
|                              | Coulter’s Hibiscus      |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Hilaria berlangeri           | Curly Mesquite          | Gr           | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Hilaria mutica               | Tobosa Grass            | Gr           | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Hilaria rigida               | Big Galleta Grass       | Gr           | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Jatropha cardiophylla        | Limberbush              | S            | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Jatropha dioica              | Jatropha                | S, cl        | CD     | 1      | (t)   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Justicia (Beloperone)       | Chuparosa               | S, cl        | SD     | 2-3    | (t)   |
| californica                  |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Larrea tridentata            | Creosote Bush,          | S, cl        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
| (divaricata)                 | Greasewood              |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Leucaena retusa              | Golden Leadball         | T, S, cl     | CD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Lupinus arizonicus           | Lupine                  | an, cl       | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Lupinus sparsiflorus         | Desert Lupine           | an, cl       | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Lupinus succulentus          | Arroyo Lupine           | an, cl       | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Lycium exsertum              | Lycium                  | S            | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Lycium fremontii             | Wolfberry               | S            | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Lysiloma candida            | Palo Blanco             | T, S         | SD     | 2,3    | (t)   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Lysiloma thornberi          | Feather Tree            | T, S         | SD     | 2‑3    | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Mamillaria spp.              | Mamillaria Cactus       | C, cl        | SD, CD | 1-2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Mascagnia macroptera        | Yellow Orchid           | V, cl        | SD, CD | 2‑3    | sh    |
|                              | Vine                    |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Maytenus phyllanthoides      | Mangle Dulce            | S            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Melampodium leucanthum       | Blackfoot Daisy         | Gc, p, cl    | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Merremia aurea              | Yellow Merremia         | V, cl        | SD     | 2‑3    | (t)   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Mimosa biumcifera           | Wait-a-Minute           | S            | SD     | 2-3    |       |
|                              | Bush                    |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Mimosa dysocarpa             | Velvetpod               | S, cl        | SD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| *Muhlenbergia                | Bush Muhlenbergia,      | Gr           | SD     | 3‑4    |       |
| dumosa                       | Bamboo Muhly            |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Muhlenbergia emersleyi       | Bullgrass               | Gr, cl       | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Muhlenbergia porteri         | Bush Muhly              | Gr, cl       | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Nolina bigelovii             | Beargrass               | A            | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Nolina matapensis            | Tree Beargrass          | A, T         | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Nolina microcarpa            | Beargrass               | A            | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Nolina parryi                | Parry’s Beargrass       | A            | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Olneya tesota                | Desert Ironwood,        | T            | SD, CD | 1      | (sh)  |
|                              | Tesota                  |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Opuntia spp.                 | Prickly Pear,           | C            | SD, CD | 1      |       |
|                              | Cholla                  |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Pappophorum mucronulatum     | Pappusgrass             | Gr           | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Pedilanthus macrocarpus      | Slipper Flower          | A, Sc, cl*   | SD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Penstemon baccharifolius     | Cutleaf Penstemon       | p, cl        | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Penstemon barbatus           | Beardtongue Penstemon   | p, cl        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Penstemon eatoni             | Eaton’s Penstemon       | p, cl        | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Penstemon parryi             | Parry Penstemon         | p, cl        | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Penstemon pseudospectabilis  | Canyon Penstemon,       | p, cl        | SD     | 1      |       |
|                              | Mohave Beardtongue      |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Penstemon superbus           | Superb Penstemon        | p, cl        | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Pithecellobium               | Texas Ebony             | T            | CD     | 2      | sh    |
| flexicaule                   |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Pithecellobium               | Tenaza                  | T            | CD     | 2      | sh    |
| pallens                      |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Prosopis glandulosa          | Honey or Texas          | T#           | CD     | 2      |       |
| glandulosa                   | Mesquite                |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Prosopis pubescens           | Screwbean Mesquite      | T            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Prosopis velutina            | Velvet Mesquite         | T#           | SD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Psilostrophe cooperi         | Paper Flower            | p, cl        | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Rhus microphylla             | Littleleaf Sumac        | S, cl        | CD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Rhus ovata                   | Sugar Bush, Sugar       | S            | SD     | 2      |       |
|                              | Sumac                   |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Rhus virens                  | Evergreen Sumac         | S, cl        | CD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Ruschia uncinatus            | Ruschia                 | Sc, Gc       |        | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Sambucus mexicana            | Mexican Elderberry      | T            | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Senna covesii                | Desert Senna            | P, cl        | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Senna wislizenii             | Cassia, Shrubby         | S, p, cl     | SD, CD | 2      |       |
|                              | Senna                   |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Simmondsia chinensis         | Jojoba, Goat Nut        | S            | SD     | 1‑2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Sphaeralcea spp.             | Globe‑Mallow            | P, cl        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Sporobolus contractus        | Spike Dropseed          | Gr           | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Sporobolus wrightii          | Sacaton                 | Gr           | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Stenocereus (Lemaireocereus) | Organ Pipe Cactus       | C            | SD     | 1      | (t)   |
| thurberi                     |                         |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Stipa neomexicana            | New Mexico Feathergrass | Gr           | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Trucklers crinita            | Two-Feather Trichloris  | Gr           | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Trichocereus spp.            | Trichocereus Cactus     | C            |        | 1-2    |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Tridens muticus              | Slim Tridens            | Gr           | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Vauquelinia californica      | Arizona Rosewood        | S, T#        | SD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Verbesina encelioides        | Crown Beard             | an, cl       | SD, CD | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Viguiera deltoidea           | Golden Eye              | p, cl        | SD     | 2      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Vitex agnus‑castus           | Chaste Tree, Monk’s     | T, S, cl     |        | 2      |       |
|                              | Pepper                  |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca aloifolia              | Spanish Bayonet         | A            | SD     | 1      |       |
|                              | Yucca                   |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca baccata                | Banana Yucca            | A            | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca brevifolia             | Joshua Tree             | A            | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca carnerosana            | Giant Dagger Yucca      | A            | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca elata                  | Soaptree Yucca          | A            | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca glauca                 | Small Soapweed          | Sc           | U.S.A. | 1      |       |
|                              | Yucca                   |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca rigida                 | Blue Dagger Yucca       | A, cl        | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca rostrata               | Beaked Yucca            | A            | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca schottii               | Mountain Yucca          | Sc           | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca treculeana             | Tree Yucca              | A            | CD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Yucca whipplei               | Our Lord’s Candle       | A            | SD     | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Zinnia acerosa               | Desert Zinnia           | P, cl        | SD, CD | 1      |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Zinnia grandiflora           | Rocky Mountain          | P, cl        | CD     | 2      |       |
|                              | Zinnia                  |              |        |        |       |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Zizyphus obtusifolia         | Greythorn               | S, T         | SD     | 1      | sh    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------+--------+-------+
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| TABLE C-4: ORO VALLEY APPROVED PLANT LIST (COURTYARDS AND NORTH OR EAST BUILDING                         |
| ELEVATIONS ONLY)                                                                                         |
| *See Bottom of List for Key to Symbols List Sorted Alphabetically by Botanical                           |
| Name                                                                                                     |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Botanical Name             |                         | Status      | Origin         | Needs      | Hardy |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia abyssinica          | Abyssinian Acacia       | T           | Africa         | 3          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia aneura              | Mulga                   | T           | Australia      | 2          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia berlandieri         | Guajillo                | S, T        | CD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia crasspedocarpa      | Waxleaf Acacia          | T, S        | Australia      | 1          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia cultriformis        | Knife‑Leaf Acacia       | T, S        | Australia      | 2          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia notabilis           | Acacia                  | S           | Australia      | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia redolens            | Prostrate Acacia        | S, Gc       | Australia      | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia rigidula            | Black Brush Acacia      | S, T        | CD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| *Acacia salicina           | Weeping Wattle          | T, cl       | Australia      | 2          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| *Acacia saligna            | Wattle Tree             | T           | Australia      | 1‑2        | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Acacia stenophylla         | Pencilleaf Acacia       | T           | Australia      | 1‑2        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Aloe barbadensis           | Barbados Aloe           | Sc, cl      | Africa         | 2‑3        | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Aloe ferox                 | Cape Aloe               | Sc, cl      | Africa         | 2‑3        | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Aloe saponaria             | Mediterranean           | Sc, cl      | Africa         | 2‑3        | sh    |
|                            | Aloe                    |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Atriplex nummularia        | Old Man Saltbush        | S           | Australia      | 1          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Atriplex semibaccata       | Australian Saltbush     | S           | Australia      | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Berberis harrisoniana      | Barberry                | S           | SD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Berberis trifoliata        | Agritos                 | S           | SD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Bougainvillea              | Bougainvillea           | V, S, cl    | Brazil         | 3          | (t)   |
| spp.                       |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Brachychiton populneus     | Bottle Tree             | T           | Australia      | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Brahea (Erythea)           | Mexican Blue Palm       | T           | SD             | 2‑3        |       |
| armata                     |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Buddleia marrubifolia      | Wooly Butterfly         | S, cl       | CD             | 2-3        |       |
|                            | Bush                    |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Caesalpinia (Poinciana)    | Yellow Bird of          | S, cl*      | Argentina      | 1-2        |       |
| gilliesii                  | Paradise                |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| *Caesalpinia pulcherrima   | Red Bird of Paradise    | S, cl*      | Caribbean      | 3          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| *Calliandra californica    | Red Fairy Duster,       | S, cl       | SD             | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Baja Fairy Duster       |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| *Calliandra peninsularis   | Red Calliandra,         | S, cl       | SD             | 2‑3        | sh    |
|                            | Baja Fairy Duster       |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Callistemon citrinus       | Lemon Bottlebrush       | T, S, cl    | Australia      | 3          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Calylophus hartwegii       | Calylophus              | Gc, cl      | CD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Campsis radicans           | Common Trumpet          | V, cl       | SD, CD         | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Creeper                 |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Carpobrotus edulis         | Ice Plant               | Gc, Sc, cl, | Africa         | 3          | (t)   |
|                            |                         | Africa      |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Cassia artemisioides       | Wormwood Senna,         | S, cl       | Australia      | 2‑3        | sh    |
|                            | Feathery Cassia         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Cassia nemophila           | Green Cassia            | S, cl       | Australia      | 2          |       |
| (eremophila)               |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Cassia phyllodinea         | Silvery Cassia          | S, cl       | Australia      | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Cassia wislezenii          | Shrubby Cassia          | S, cl       | Australia      | 2-3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Centaurea cineraria        | Dusty Miller            | p, cl       | Mediter-ranean | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Cercis canadensis          | Mexican Redbud          | T, S        | CD             | 3          |       |
| var. mexicana              |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Cereus peruvianus          | Peruvian Cereus         | C           | South America  | 1-2        | sh    |
| ‘Monstrosus’               |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Chamaerops humilis         | Mediterranean           | T           | Spain          | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Fan Palm                |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Convolvulus cneorum        | Bush Morning Glory      | S, Gc, cl*  | Mediter-ranean | 1‑2        |       |
|                            |                         | Medit.      |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Convolvulus mauritanicus   | Ground Morning          | Gc, cl      | Africa         | 3          | sh    |
|                            | Glory                   |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Cordia boissieri           | Anacahuita, Texas       | T, S, cl    | CD             | 2‑3        | sh    |
|                            | Olive                   |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Cupressus glabra           | Smooth Bark Cypress     | T           | SD             | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dalbergia sissoo           | Rosewood                | T           | India          | 3          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dalea bicolor              | Silver Dalea            | S           | SD             | 2‑3        |       |
| var. argyrea               |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dalea formosa              | Feather Dalea           | S           | SD, CD         | 2-3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dalea frutescens           | Black Dalea             | S, cl       | CD             | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dalea greggii              | Trailing Indigo         | Gc          | CD             | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Bush                    |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dalea psorothamus          | Smoke Tree              | S, T        | CD, SD         | 2-3        |       |
| spinosus                   |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dalea pulchra              | Indigo Bush             | S, cl       | SD             | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dalea versicolor           | Indigo Bush, Dalea      | S, cl       | SD             | 3          |       |
| var. sessilis              |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dimorphotheca              | African Daisy,          | An, cl      | South Africa   | 4          |       |
| sinuata                    | Cape Marigold           |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dyssodia acerosa           | Dogweed                 | Gc, p, cl   | SD, CD         | 2-3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Dyssodia pentachaeta       | Dyssodia                | Gc, an, p,  | SD,CD          | 2‑3        | I     |
|                            |                         | c           |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Echinopsis spp.            | Easter Lily,            | Sea Urchin  | C, cl          | S. America | 1     |
|                            |                         | Cactus      |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Ephedra nevadensis         | Ephedra                 | S           | SD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Eremophila decipiens       | Emu Bush                | S, cl       | Australia      | 1          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Eucalyptus campaspe        | Silver Gimlet           | T           | Australia      | 2‑3        | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Eucalyptus formanii        | Eucalyptus              | T           | Australia      | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Eucalyptus leucoxylon      | White Iron Bark         | T, cl       | Australia      | 2          |       |
| (rosea)                    |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Eucalyptus microtheca      | Tiny Capsule Eucalyptus | T           | Australia      | 1‑2        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Eucalyptus polyanthemos    | Silver Dollar           | T           | Australia      | 2          |       |
|                            | Gum                     |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Eucalyptus rudis           | Desert Gum              | T           | Australia      | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Eucalyptus spathulata      | Swamp Mallee            | T           | Australia      | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Euphorbia rigida           | Gopher Plant            | A, Sc, cl*  | Africa         | 2          |       |
| (biglandulosa)             |                         | Africa      |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Feijoa sellowiana          | Pineapple Guava         | T, S, cl    | S. America     | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Ficus pumila               | Creeping Fig            | GC, V       |                | 3,4        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Gazania rigens             | Copper King Gazania     | Gc, cl      | Africa         | 3-4        |       |
| ‘Copper King’              |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Gazania rigens             | Treasure Flower         | Gc, cl      | Africa         | 3‑4        |       |
|                            | Gazania                 |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Gazania rigens             | Trailing Gazania        | Gc, cl      | Africa         | 3‑4        | (t)   |
| leucolaena                 |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Geoffreya (Gourleia)       | Chilean Palo Verde      | T, cl       | S. America     | 1          |       |
| decorticans                |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Hyptis emoryi              | Desert Lavender         | S           | SD             | 3          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Juniperus deppeana         | Alligator Bark          | T           | SD, CD         | 3          |       |
|                            | Juniper                 |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Justicia candicans         | Red Jacobinia           | S, cl       | SD             | 3          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Justicia spicigera         | Mexican Honeysuckle,    | S, cl       | SD             | 3          | sh    |
|                            | Firecracker Bush        |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Lantana camara             | Bush Lantana (many      | S, cl*      | N. America     | 3‑4        | (t)   |
|                            | cultivars)              |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Lantana montevidensis      | Trailing Lantana        | Gc, cl*     | S. America     | 3‑4        | (t)   |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Leucophyllum spp.          | Texas Ranger (all       | S, cl       | CD             | 2          |       |
|                            | cultivars)              |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Linum grandiflorum         | Scarlet Flax            | Gc, an, cl  |                | 3          |       |
| Rubrum                     |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Linum lewisii              | Blue Flax               | an, cl      | SD, CD         | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Macfadyena unguis‑cati     | Cat’s Claw Vine         | V, cl       | America        | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Malephora crocea           | Croceum, Ice Plant      | Gc, Sc, cl  |                | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| *Mascagnia lilacina        | Lavender Orchid         | V, cl       | CD             | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Vine                    |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Muhlenbergia rigens        | Deer grass              | Gr          | SD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Muhlenbergia rigida        | ‘Nashville’ TM          | Gr, cl      | SD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Myoporum parvifolium       | Myoporum                | Gc          | Australia      | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Myrtus communis            | Twisted Myrtle          | S#          | Mediter-ranean | 3          |       |
| ‘Boetica’                  |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Myrtus communis            | Dwarf Myrtle            | S           | Mediter-ranean | 3          |       |
| ‘Compact’                  |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Nandina domestica          | Heavenly Bamboo         | S, cl       |                | 3          |       |
|                            | (many cultivars)        |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Oenothera berlandieri      | Mexican Evening         | Gc, cl      | CD             | 3          |       |
| (speciosa childsii)        | Primrose                |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Oenothera caespitosa       | Tufted Evening          | p, cl       | SD             | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Primrose                |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Oenothera stubbei          | Chihuahuan Primrose,    | Gc, cl      | CD             | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Baja Primrose           |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Olea europaea              | Swan Hill Olive         | T           | Mediter-ranean | 3          |       |
| ‘Swan Hill’                |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Oryzopsis hymenoides       | Indian Ricegrass        | Gr          | SD, CD         | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Osteospermum fruticosum    | Trailing African        | Gc, cl      | Africa         | 3‑4        | sh    |
|                            | Daisy                   |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Passiflora foetida         | Passion Flower          | V           | SD             | 3          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pentzia incana             | Karoo Bush              | Gc          | Africa         | 1‑2        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Phoenix canariensis        | Canary Island           | T           |                | 3          |       |
|                            | Date Palm               |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Phyla nodiflora            | Lippia                  | Gc, cl      |                | 3‑4        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pinus edulis               | Piñon Nut Pine          | T           |                | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pinus eldarica             | Afghan Pine             | T#          | Asia           | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pinus monophylla           | Singleleaf Piñon        | T           | Mojave         | 2          |       |
|                            | Pine                    |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pinus pinea                | Italian Stone           | T           | Mediter-ranean | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Pine                    |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pinus roxburghii           | Chir Pine               | T           | Asia           | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pistacia atlantica         | Mt. Atlas Pistache      | T           | Africa         | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pistacia chinensis         | Chinese Pistache        | T, cl       | Asia           | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pistacia terebinthus       | Pistache Hybrid         | T, cl       |                | 3          |       |
| x integerrima              | terebinthus x           |             |                |            |       |
|                            | integerrima             |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pistacia vera              | Pistachio               | T           | Asia           | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pithecellobium             | Mexican Ebony           | T           | SD             | 3          |       |
| mexicanum                  |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Pittosporum phillyraeoides | Willow Pittosporum      | T           | Australia      | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Prosopis (S. Amer.         | Thornless Mesquite      | T#          | S. America     | 2          |       |
| hybrid)                    | (S. Amer. Hybrid)       |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Prosopis alba              | Argentine Mesquite      | T#          | S. America     | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Prosopis chilensis         | Chilean Mesquite        | T#          | S. America     | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Punica granatum            | Pomegranate             | S, T, cl    | India          | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Quercus arizonica          | Arizona White           | T           | SD, CD         | 3          |       |
|                            | Oak                     |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Quercus emoryi             | Emory Oak               | T           | SD, CD         | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Quercus ilex               | Holly Oak               | T           |                | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Quercus suber              | Cork Oak                | T*          | Mediter-ranean | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Quercus virginiana         | Heritage Live           | T           | SE U.S.A.      | 3          |       |
| ‘Heritage’                 | Oak                     |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Rosa banksiae              | Lady Banks Rose,        | S, Gc, V    |                | 3          |       |
|                            | Tombstone Rose          |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Rosmarinus officinalis     | Bush Rosemary           | S, cl       | Mediterranean  | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Rosmarinus officinalis     | Dwarf or Trailing       | Gc, cl      | Mediterranean  | 2-3        |       |
| ‘Prostratus’               | Rosemary                |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Ruellia californica        | Ruellia                 | S, cl       | SD             | 3          | (t)   |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Ruellia peninsularis       | Ruellia                 | S, cl       | SD             | 3          | (t)   |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Salvia chamaedryoides      | Blue Sage               | S, p, cl    | CD             | 2‑3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Salvia clevelandii         | Cleveland Sage          | S, cl       |                | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Salvia columbariae         | Chia                    | An, cl      | SD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Salvia farinacea           | Mealy Blue Sage         | S, cl       | CD             | 3‑4        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Salvia greggii             | Texas Red Salvia,       | S, cl       | CD             | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Autumn Sage             |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Salvia leucantha           | Mexican Bush Sage       | S, cl       | CD             | 2-3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Salvia mohavensis          | Mohave Sage             | S, cl       | SD             | 2          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Salvia splendens           | Scarlet Sage            | S, cl       | CD             | 2-3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Santolina chamaecyparissus | Lavender Cotton         | S, Gc       | Mediter-ranean | 2-3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Santolina virens           | Green Santolina         | Gc, S, cl   | Mediter-ranean | 3‑4        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Sapindus saponaria         | Soapberry               | T*          | SD, CD         | 3-4        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Senecio cineraria          | Dusty Miller,           | P, cl*      |                | 3          |       |
|                            | Silver Plant            |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Senna lindheimeriana       | Senna                   | S           | CD             | 4          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Sesuvium verrucosum        | Sea Purslane,           | Gc          | Africa         | 2          | (t)   |
|                            | Ice Plant               |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Sophora secundiflora       | Mescal Bean, Texas      | S, T, cl*   | CD             | 2‑3        |       |
|                            | Mountain Laurel         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Sophora arizonica          | Arizona Sophora         | S, T, cl*   | SD             | 2-3        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Sporobolus airoides        | Alkali Sacaton          | Gr          | SD, CD         | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Tecomaria capensis         | Cape Honeysuckle        | S, cl       | Africa         | 4          | sh    |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Tagetes lemmoni            | Mountain Marigold       | p, cl       | SD             | 3‑4        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Tecoma stans var.          | Trumpet‑Bush            | S, cl       | SD, CD         | 2-3        | sh    |
| angustata                  |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Teucrium chamaedrys        | Prostrate Germander     | Gc, p       | Mediter-ranean | 2‑3        |       |
| (prostratum)               |                         |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Teucrium fruticans         | Bush Germander          | S           |                | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Ungnadia speciosa          | Mexican Buckeye         | T, cl       | CD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Verbena gooddingii         | Goodding Verbena        | p, cl       | SD             | 3‑4        |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Verbena peruviana          | Peruvian Verbena        | p, cl       | S. America     | 4          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Verbena tenuisecta         | Moss Verbena,           | p, cl       | S. America     | 3          |       |
| (pulchella)                | Fineleaf Verbena        |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Yucca recurvifolia         | Pendulous or Curveleaf  | A           | U.S.A.         | 2          |       |
| (pendula)                  | Yucca                   |             |                |            |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Zauschneria californica    | Hummingbird Trumpet     | Gc, cl      | SD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
| Zauschneria latifolia      | Hummingbird Flower      | S           | SD             | 3          |       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-------------+----------------+------------+-------+
+----------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                       KEY TO SYMBOLS                                       |
+----------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| STATUS                     | T - TREE                                                      |
|                            | S - SHRUB                                                     |
|                            | A - ACCENT PLANT                                              |
|                            | GC - GROUNDCOVER                                              |
|                            | C - CACTUS                                                    |
|                            | SC - SUCCULENT (OTHER THAN CACTI)                             |
|                            | V - VINE                                                      |
|                            | GR - ORNAMENTAL GRASS                                         |
|                            | AN - ANNUAL                                                   |
|                            | P - PERENNIAL                                                 |
|                            | CL - SEASONAL COLOR (SHOWY FLOWERS, FALL COLOR OR BERRIES)    |
+----------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| ORIGIN                     | CD - Chihuahuan Desert Region - (broadly interpreted          |
|                            | to include a large area of north central and northwest        |
|                            | Mexico, southwest Texas, southern New Mexico and extreme      |
|                            | southeast Arizona.)                                           |
|                            | SD - Sonoran Desert Region - (broadly interpreted to          |
|                            | include the arid and semi-arid areas of northwest Mexico,     |
|                            | southeast California and most of Arizona south of the         |
|                            | Mogollon Rim.)                                                |
|                            | (Note: Chihuahuan and Sonoran Desert Regions annotated        |
|                            | by Matt Johnson, Native Plant Society.)                       |
+----------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| APPROXIMATE WATERING NEEDS | 1 - No supplemental irrigation once established.              |
| (depending on soil and     | 2 - Once a month during the growing season once established.  |
| climate conditions)        | 3 - Twice a month during the growing season once established. |
|                            | 4 - Once a week during the growing season once established    |
+----------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| HARDINESS                  | sh - Semi-hardy -- some dieback in a hard frost               |
|                            | (t) - Tender (may be severely damaged or killed in a          |
|                            | hard frost)                                                   |
|                            | * - Toxic; may be harmful if eaten. (For more information     |
|                            | call Arizona Poison Control Center at (520) 626-6016.)        |
|                            | # - Exceptions to the nomenclature in Hortus III.             |
|                            | I - Invasive -- may spread and intrude into natural           |
|                            | areas.                                                        |
+----------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
((O)09-20, Amended,  11/04/2009)

Addendum (D): Oro Valley Approved Revegetation Seed Mix
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SHRUBS: at least 4 species and minimum of 5 PLS/acre                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ambrosia deltoidea, Triangle-leaf Bursage (P,C)                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Acacia constricta, Whitethorn Acacia (P,W)                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Atriplex canescens, A. polycarpa, or A. lentiformis, Salt Bush (P,C)*       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Calliandra eriophylla, Fairy Duster (P,C/W)                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Celtis pallida, Desert Hackberry (P,C/W)                                    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Encelia farinosa, Brittlebush (P,C/W)                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Haplopappus laricifolius [=Ericameria laricifolia], Turpentine Bush (P,C,W) |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Larrea tridentata [=L. divaricata], Creosote (P,W)                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SMALL PERENNIALS: at least 4 species and minimum of 5 PLS/acre              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bahia absinthifolia, Desert Bahia (P,C)                                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Baileya multiradiata, Desert Marigold (P,C/W)                               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Cassia [= Senna] covesii, Desert Senna (P,W)                                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Datura wrightii, Sacred Datura (P,W)                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Isocoma tenuisecta, Burrowwed (P,C/W)                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Glandularia [=Verbena] gooddingii, Goodding's Verbena (P, C/W)              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Psilostrophe cooperi, Paper Flower (P,C/W)                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sphaeralcea ambigua, Desert Globemallow (P,C,W)                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Zinnia pumila, Desert Zinnia (P, C)                                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| PERENNIAL GRASSES: at least 4 species and minimum of 5 PLS/acre             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Aristida purpurea, Purple Three-Awn (P,W)                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Aristida ternipes, Spidergrass (P,W)                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bothriochloa [=Andropogon] barbinodis, Cane Beardgrass (P,W)                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bouteloua curtipendula, Side-Oats Grama (P,W)                               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bouteloua rothrockii, Rothrock Grama (P,C/W)                                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Digitaria californica, Arizona Cottontop (P,W)                              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Eragrostis intermedia, Plains Love Grass, (P,W)                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Erioneuron pulchellum, Fluffgrass (P,C)                                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Heteropogon contortus, Tanglehead (P,W)                                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Leptochloa dubia, Green Sprangle Top (P,W)                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Muhlenbergia porteri, Bush Muhly (P,W)                                      |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pappophorum mucronulatum, Pappus Grass (P,W)                                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Setaria macrostachya, Plains Bristlegrass (P,W)                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sporobolus airoides, Alkali Sacaton (P,W)                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sporobolus cryptandrus, Sand Dropseed (P,W)                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ANNUAL HERBS AND GRASSES: at least 4 species and minimum of 5 PLS/acre          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Allionia incarnata, Trailing Windmills (A,C)                                    |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bouteloua aristidoides, Needle Grama (A,W)                                      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bouteloua barbata, Six Weeks Grama (A,C)                                        |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Datura discolor, Sacred Datura (A,W)                                            |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Erigeron divergens, Spreading Fleabane (A,W)                                    |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Eschscholtzia mexicana, Mexican Poppy (A,C)                                     |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Evolvulus arizonicus, Arizona Blue Eyes (A,C)                                   |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Hymenothrix wislizenii (A,W)                                                    |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Kallstroemia grandiflora, Arizona Poppy (A,W)                                   |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Lesquerella gordonii, Bladderpod (A,C)                                          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Lupinus arizonicus, Arizona Lupine (A,W)                                        |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Lupinus concinnus, Bajada Lupine (A,W)                                          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Lupinus sparsiflorus, Desert Lupine (A,W)                                       |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Nama hispidum, Purplemat (A,C)                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Orthocarpus purpurascens, Owlclover (A,C)                                       |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pectis papposa, Dogweed (A,C)                                                   |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Penstemon parryi, Parry's Penstemon (P,A,C/W)                                   |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Penstemon subulatus, Scarlet Buglar (P,A,C/W)                                   |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Plantago insularis, Indian Wheat (A,C)                                          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Proboscidea parviflora, Devil's Claw (A,W)                                      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Salvia columbariae, Chia (A,C)                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sphaeralcea coulteri, Globemallow (A,C)                                         |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Tidestromia lanuginosa, Wooly Tidestromia (A,W)                                 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| TOTAL: AT LEAST 16 SPECIES and 20 PLS/ACRE                                      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| A = Annual;                                                                     |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| P = Perennial;                                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| C = Germinates and thrives in the cool season;                                  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| W = Germinates and thrives in warm season;                                      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| C/W = Germinates and thrives in cool/warm seasons.                              |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| (Note: The cool season in Oro Valley runs September through March, and the warm |
| season is from March through October. There is an overlap of seasons.)          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *any combination of these species, but not more than 1.5 PLS/acre total         |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
((O)09-20, Amended,  11/04/2009)

Addendum (E): Prohibited Plant List
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1. Any species of tree or shrub whose mature height may reasonably be expected         |
| to exceed 25 feet, with the exception of those indigenous plants, listed in            |
| Addendum “C,” which may naturally exceed 25 feet.                                      |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2. Olive trees (Olea europaea), will be prohibited for reasons of their profuse        |
| production of allergy-producing pollen. However, the “Swan Hill Olive” and the         |
| “Wilson Hill Olive” varieties may be used due to its no-flowering non-pollen-producing |
| status.                                                                                |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3. Fountain Grass (Pennisetum setaceum) will be prohibited as a defined weed           |
| with the potential to spread throughout the Town and become a fire hazard.             |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4. Common Bermuda Grass (Cynodon dactylon) will be prohibited as a defined weed        |
| and for its profuse production of allergy-producing pollen.                            |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5. Mexican Palo Verde (Parkinsonia aculeata) will be prohibited as harborer of         |
| pests and for its ability to spread throughout the Town, thereby altering the          |
| present natural desert.                                                                |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6. Mulberry Trees (Morus) will be prohibited as noxious pollen producers.              |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7. Desert Broom (Baccharis sarothroides) will be prohibited as a defined weed          |
| with the potential to spread throughout the Town.                                      |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 8. Buffelgrass (Pennisetum ciliare) will be prohibited as a defined weed and           |
| fire hazard with the potential to spread throughout the Town.                          |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9. Red Brome (Bromus rubens) will be prohibited as a defined weed and fire hazard      |
| with the potential to spread throughout the Town.                                      |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10. Lehmann Lovegrass (Eragrostis) will be prohibited as a defined weed with           |
| the potential to spread throughout the Town.                                           |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11. Malta starthistle (Centaurea melitensis) will be prohibited as a defined           |
| weed with the potential to spread throughout the Town.                                 |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12. Sahara (African) mustard (Brassica tournefortil) will be prohibited as a           |
| defined weed with the potential to spread throughout the Town.                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13. Saltcedar (Tamarix ramosissima and aphylla) will be prohibited as an invasive      |
| tree with the potential to spread throughout the Town.                                 |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14. African Sumac (Rhus lancea) will be prohibited as an invasive tree with the        |
| potential to spread throughout the Town.                                               |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15. Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima) will be prohibited as an invasive tree        |
| with the potential to spread throughout the Town.                                      |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
((O)09-20, Amended,  11/04/2009)

Addendum (F): Oracle Road Architectural Design Illustrations
[MEDIA: <https://orovalley.town.codes/ZC/media/AddendumF.pdf>]

Addendum (G): ESL Resource Science Specifications and Definitions

1. Methodology for Mapping
The following methodology is utilized in mapping riparian area boundaries within the Town of Oro Valley:
a. Hydroriparian includes any drainage with perennial surface water regardless of plant species composition; Mesoriparian includes any drainage without perennial surface water but any of the following species: Arizona Walnut (Juglans major), Fremont cottonwood (Populus fremontii), Gooding willow (Salix gooddingii), Arizona sycamore (Platanus wrightii), Arizona ash (Fraxinus velutina), netleaf hackberry (Celtis reticulata), or seep willow (Baccharis salicifolia); Xeroriparian includes any drainage with intermittent/ephemeral flow but not containing the above indicator species; Xeroriparian areas will have a representative vegetation volume of 0.500 m3/m2 or greater.
b. The lateral riparian boundary is a contiguous line along the canopy margins of the predominant overstory vegetation species parallel to a riparian area, where the lateral distance between canopy margins of individuals of the predominant plant species is less than two times the height of the tallest individuals. Where the distance between canopy margins parallel to the channel are greater than two times the height of the tallest individuals, the boundary is considered to be the top of bank of the channel.
c. Boundary between Meso and Xeroriparian habitat types -- any gap between Mesoriparian indicator species of 1,000 ft or greater will indicate a transition to xeroriparian. Mesoriparian boundary will be at indicator species’ canopy.
d. In braided riparian systems where ‘islands’ may occur, these are included as part of the riparian area. Islands more than 200 feet wide, or whose surface elevation is significantly higher than surrounding channels, are not included.
e. Because of natural variability, not all areas within mapped riparian areas will support the overall representative vegetation volume. Additionally, mapped riparian areas may include areas without representative vegetation volume, but do contribute to regional riparian system functions (e.g. drainage connectivity, sediment and nutrient transport, channel meander, etc.).
f. Riparian areas disconnected hydrologically from downstream riparian areas by human disturbance or impacts are not included.
g. The criteria for determining an upstream starting point (headwaters) of Riparian Areas with representative vegetation volume is where a discernible channel with an ordinary high water mark begins.
h. Vegetation volume within a riparian area will be determined using Pima County Regional Flood Control District Technical Procedure 116: Quantitative Methods for Regulated Riparian Habitat Boundary Modifications and On-Site Vegetation Surveys.

2. Special Status Species Habitat
Special Status Species Habitat is comprised of the following:
a. Breeding, foraging, cover, and dispersal habitat for common and special-status species as designated by Pima County at the time of adoption of this ordinance.
b. Wildlife habitat includes all areas identified as Significant Vegetation, Rock Outcrops and Boulders, Riparian Areas, Distinct Habitat Resources or Major and Minor Wildlife Linkages.
c. Pima County Conservation Land System Biological Core and Important Riparian Areas.
d. Nature Conservancy Conservation Target #18 (Tortolita Mountains).
e. Priority Conservation Areas (PCAs) for Priority Vulnerable Species.
f. Designated Critical Habitat for ESA Threatened and Endangered species.
g. Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan Priority Vulnerable Species (AZ WFSC, and ESA T&;E).
h. Habitat for threatened and endangered species, if designated, is to be regulated by State and Federal law.

3. Criteria Utilized to Refine Pima County SDCP Designated Multiple Use Areas
Lands were retained in Resource Management Areas by applying the following:
a. Adjacent to Protected Open Space: Land areas that are adjacent to or have connectivity to publicly or privately protected open space area or preserves.
b. Abut or connected to Riparian Areas: Land areas that directly abut or have connectivity to mapped riparian areas and floodplains.
c. Wildlife Permeable Areas: Land areas that are committed to or directly abut wildlife permeable development as defined in Section 31.
d. Minimum Size Thresholds: Resource Management Areas shall meet the following minimum size thresholds:
    i. One (1) acre when abutting other resource areas, open space areas, preserves, or riparian areas. The cumulative area of the parcel(s), resource areas, open space areas, preserves, or riparian areas must be 20 acres or larger.
    ii. 20 acres on a single or multiple parcels when not abutting resource areas, open space areas, preserves, or riparian areas.
e. Developed areas: Exclude graded areas of active development and areas developed at a density of greater than one home per acre.

Addendum (H): Scenic Resources Area Design Guidelines

1. Purpose
Design guidelines seek to implement the adopted land use goals of the community with regard to community design within Scenic Resource areas. The purpose includes:
To ensure the built environment conserves environmentally sensitive resources in accordance with the adopted General Plan,
To promote community development that is aesthetically pleasing and compatible with the natural surroundings,
To maintain the value of the Town’s scenic and environmentally sensitive resources, and
To minimize disturbance to the natural environment.

2. Design Review and Approval Procedures
The baseline for design guidance is contained in the OVZCR, Addendum A, Design Guidelines. These Scenic Resource Design guidelines supplement Addendum A and are intended as a flexible addition to the development requirements set forth in Section 27.10.D.3.f, Scenic Resources Category, for general land development use types along scenic corridors and within public park viewsheds.
These guidelines apply to any development in all three Tiers of the Scenic Resource Category as specified in Section 27.10.D.3.f.iii, Scenic Resources Applicability. Procedures for applying these guidelines are included in Section 27.10.D.2.f.vi.

3. Design Guidelines
Review of all site plans and subdivision plats in scenic corridor areas should consider the following particulars. Site Planning and Architectural guidelines are expected to be met for the approval of a subdivision plat or commercial site plan.
Employment/Institutional guidelines are in addition to consideration of Commercial guidelines for employment/institutional site plans in scenic corridor areas. Proposed resort developments are to be evaluated according to General Plan, Specific Plan and overlay district criteria to assure project excellence.
a. Site Planning 
    i. General 
        a. Incorporation of natural elements such as boulders, native rock or designing to blend structures with natural washes or existing stands of vegetation is highly desirable.
        b. Include subdued lighting for entries, signage and parking areas.
        c. Provide pathway links to interior residential neighborhoods or planned recreational trails.
        d. Include Integration of structures, pedestrian paths with natural earthforms.
        e. Parking or maneuvering should not be located in required minimum setback.
        f. Structures should be used to screen access or frontage roadways parallel to scenic corridors. Earthen berms should comply with adopted rainwater harvesting requirements.
    ii. Residential 
    The following site design expectations are to be met for the approval of any subdivision plat or site plan:
        a. Street patterns and/or landscaping are to be provided consistent with safe traffic visibility and design practice to screen views of rights-of-way perpendicular to scenic corridors.
        b. Walls enclosing individual lots, residential clusters, or multi-family structures are to be located at the setback line of perimeter landscaped buffer areas or maintained setback tracts.
        c. Pathway linkages are to be provided within the development and connecting with pathways, trails, or bike lanes paralleling the scenic corridor.
        d. Except where specific view corridor preservation is intended, curvilinear street patterns and/or landscaping are to be provided to screen views of rights-of-way perpendicular to Oracle Road consistent with safe traffic visibility and design practice.
        e. Maintain views from residences to mountain vistas, major washes, and native vegetation.
        f. Provide structure spacing to permit views and focus on stands of vegetation.
        g. Utilize subdued or managed lighting.
        h. In sloped areas provide screening of structural support piers.
        i. Provide shared roadway access.
    iii. Commercial 
        a. Rear and side setbacks adjacent to residential districts should include berms and/or walls, augmented with landscaping achieving opaque screening to a height of not less than 8 feet. Berming shall comply with Town landscape requirements for rainwater harvesting.
        b. No loading, storage, outdoor activity (except as expressly permitted in the underlying district), or display of merchandise visible from scenic corridors, intersecting arterials or adjacent residential neighborhoods.
        c. Pathway linkages to be provided to adjacent properties where appropriate and within multi-use developments.
        d. Clustering structures as a central “outcropping” visible when approaching the development on entry driveways, with principal parking areas (majority of spaces) screened by structures from scenic corridors or adjacent arterials.
        e. Access driveways should be spaced 660 feet apart.
        f. Provide shared roadway access.
    iv. Employment and Institutional 
        a. Adjacent to residential districts, setbacks of the residential district are to be met or exceeded, and to include a masonry wall with landscaping as augmentation.
        b. No outdoor storage visible from Oracle Road or adjacent residential neighborhoods.
        c. Provide pathway links to internal recreation facilities and external pathways and routes.
        d. Maintain view corridors through the site.
        e. No parking or access driveways within required setbacks.
    v. Resort Development 
        a. Open vistas are characteristic of this use type; walls and enhanced vegetation are to be utilized for screening functions.
        b. Clustering of structures is oriented away from the perimeter of the site and view corridors, providing a central “outcropping”.
        c. Keeping principal structure on lower slopes, not exceeding ridge heights.
        d. Maintaining wide sight angles beyond structures is preferred.
        e. Casitas should be deployed to create residential scale.
        f. Emphasis should be placed on existing vegetation to accent principal buildings and plazas.
        g. Vehicular circulation ways are minimized.
        h. Pathway linkages, particularly to encourage resort guests’ and residents’ use of the Corridor path systems, are to be established for access to and from the principal resort structure.
        i. Include visible display of open space and recreational features, such as golf courses.
        j. Maintain open expanses to preserve adjacent neighborhood views.
        k. Structures should be grouped well away from view corridors.
        l. Low-lying building profiles should be utilized.
        m. Views through the site should be preserved.
b. Architectural Design 
    i. General Design 
        a. Buildings constructed in scenic corridors and park viewsheds should be low and of colors, materials and textures, which blend with natural desert vegetation, leaving large areas of open space between developments. Buildings that are visible from scenic corridors should seem to be a part of, or in, the landscape rather than appearing to be an imposition on the site. The buildings should follow the natural contours of the existing topography.
        b. Building Colors 
            a) Building colors should relate to one another and the natural environment on the basis of pigment, color value, and/or intensity. In scenic corridors, earth tones and pastels are encouraged, especially in areas of high visibility. Desert/mountain colors that blend with the natural background are encouraged.
            b) In areas upslope from scenic corridors, darker, geologic colors to blend with mountain slopes.
            c) In locations upslope from the ultimate scenic corridor roadway right-of-way, richer, earthtone or geologic colors and rougher textures are preferred, especially those which complement background views; downslopes, darker earth colors with more dense landscaping clusters.
            d) Color schemes should avoid jarring juxtapositions with primary colors.
            e) In more private area, away from scenic corridors, homeowners and business owners are permitted more freedom in color selections.
            f) Bright colors should not be visible from scenic corridors or other public rights-of-way.
            g) Foreground colors should harmonize and blend with existing vegetation, natural rock/earth forms or built background.
        c. Include architectural detailing on all structure facades.
    ii. Residential 
    Review of all residential developments other than individual, detached, single-family home construction shall consider the following criteria to assure design consistency with Scenic Resource intent and character:
        a. Building heights should be varied, preferably mixing one and two-story homes to enable views across the site from the scenic corridor right-of-way.[IMAGE: <AddendumH-1.PNG>]
        b. Consistent, finished rooftop treatments, without visible roof-mounted equipment.
        c. Noise Mitigation should be addressed by masonry construction, double-paned windows, and limited window openings and recreational yard uses facing scenic corridors.
        d. Structural screening of access or frontage roads and parking visible from scenic corridors, and structural integration with terrain, such as building lower floors into slopes.
        e. Thematic architectural detailing should be included.
    iii. Commercial 
        a. Building heights should be varied to enable views across the site from the scenic corridor right-of-way.[IMAGE: <AddendumH-2.PNG>]
        b. Structural height restricted to 1:4 (from natural grade) relative to width.
        c. Principal structures are constructed of rough masonry, slump block, or similar materials; board and batten, untreated concrete block or metal buildings are discouraged.
        d. Moving appurtenances should not be visible from scenic corridors or other public rights-of-way.
        e. Rooflines are preferred to be horizontal; others are permissible.
        f. Architectural detailing includes rough-cut stone accents, recessed window treatments, and vertical elements in visible walls of greater than 50 feet in length.
    iv. Employment/Institutional 
        a. Structural height is limited to a ratio of 1:3 relative to width.
        b. Provide enhanced native landscape along frontage.
        c. Include rougher building material textures.
    v. Resort 
        a. Provide distinctive architecture blending with the Sonoran Desert context.
        b. Include creative use of light and shade in plazas.
        c. Extensive use of natural materials (rough native stone, wood) is preferred.
        d. Consideration of split-level entry from parking areas.
        e. Mission-style, Santa Fe, or Territorial architecture is appropriate.
        f. Include landscaped focal points.
c. Vegetation Preservation and Screening Guidelines 
Vegetation Preservation: Innovative site planning and architectural treatments, which preserve and incorporate the maximum number of existing trees, Corridor Character Vegetation, and shrubs is encouraged in concert with compliance with native plant preservation requirements.

Addendum (I): Hillside Development Zone

I. Hillside Development Zone in Effect Prior to Implementation of the Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance on 7/19/11 (formerly codified in Section 24.2)
A. Introduction 
This ordinance seeks to implement the adopted planning goals of this community with regard to public safety, conservation of resources, community design and open space and recreation.
Oro Valley is surrounded by mountains. These mountainous areas exhibit steep slopes which may contain unstable rock and soils. Development on potentially unstable soils or rock can be hazardous to life and property. Development in these areas should utilize construction methods which ensure slope stabilization and minimize soil erosion.
Further, Oro Valley’s rolling desert terrain, containing peaks, ridges and drainageways, is a valuable scenic resource which should be preserved. Significant peaks and ridges should be protected in order to preserve the Town’s unique visual setting, promote its economic well-being, and encourage tourism. Regulating the intensity of development according to the natural characteristics of hillside terrain, such as steepness of slope, significant vegetation and landforms and soil stability and existing drainage patterns, will allow for sensible development in hillside areas while minimizing the physical and visual impact of such development.
B. Purpose 
This zone provides for the reasonable use of hillside areas and related lands while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare by:
    1. Determining whether certain types of soil conditions exist (such as loose or easily eroded soils, or rocky soils), and utilizing appropriate engineering technology to result in stable slopes during and subsequent to development.
    2. Reduction of water runoff and changes in the natural drainage patterns, soil erosion, and rock slides by minimizing grading and requiring revegetation.
    3. Permitting intensity of development compatible with the natural characteristics of hillside terrain, such as steepness of slope, significant landforms, soil suitability, and existing drainage patterns.
    4. Preservation of the scenic quality of the desert and mountain environment through the retention of significant peaks and ridges in their natural state.
    5. Reduction of the physical impact of hillside development by encouraging innovative site and architectural design, minimizing grading and requiring restoration of graded areas.
    6. Provision of safe and convenient vehicular access by encouraging development in the less steeply sloped terrain.
    7. Promoting cost-efficient public services by encouraging development in the less steeply sloped terrain, thereby minimizing service extensions and utility costs, and maximizing access for all necessary life safety services.
C. Applicability 
The provisions of the Hillside Development Zone (HDZ) apply to development in the areas listed below:
    1. Sloped Areas 
        a. Any parcel with an average cross slope of 15 percent or containing slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater. Methods of analyzing slope are given in Section24.2.K.
        b. Any parcel containing sloped areas of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater where the sloped area is greater than fifty (50) feet in any horizontal direction or greater than seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet vertically.
    2. Previously Approved Subdivisions 
    Any recorded subdivision plat approved in compliance with the Pima County Hillside Development Zone regulations may be developed in compliance with the conditions and stipulations as approved. If the plat is resubdivided after the effective date of this ordinance, September 17, 1993, it must comply with all provisions of the Oro Valley HDZ currently in effect.
    3. Exceptions 
        a. The HDZ regulations shall apply to all property described in Section24.2.C except where the development standards prevent the reasonable utilization of property as determined by the Board of Adjustment through the approval of a variance. All HDZ applicability appeals shall be heard by the Board of Adjustment in conformance with the variance procedures established in Section 21.6.
        b. The HDZ regulations do not apply to the paving of an existing driveway located on property with HDZ applicability.
        c. Lots within existing, approved subdivisions on the effective date of this ordinance, and subdivision plats which have been submitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
D. Permitted Uses 
Any use permitted by the underlying zone is allowed.
E. Review Required 
All development will require subdivision plat or development plan approval, in accordance with the Oro Valley Zoning Code Revised, prior to the granting of a permit for grubbing, grading, excavation, or construction.
F. Development Criteria 
The following development criteria apply to all parcels that are affected by this zone. Any parcel created must meet slope/size requirements of Table 24-1. All development is subject to the Oro Valley Grading Ordinance.
    1. Single-Family Residential Development 
        a. This paragraph applies to an existing parcel where no land division has occurred, nor is land division proposed, since the adoption of this ordinance. The average cross slope (ACS) is calculated for the entire parcel. If the ACS is 15 percent or greater, Columns A and D of Table 24-1 apply.
        b. This paragraph applies to any parcel of property or lot where land division is proposed or has occurred since the adoption of this ordinance. The average cross slope is calculated for the parcel prior to land division. If the ACS is 15 percent or greater, columns A and C of Table 24-1 apply. Natural open space may be designated on the parcel in accordance with Section24.2.G, to reduce the ACS percentage. Such natural open space will be excluded from the ACS calculation, but will be included in the land area for the parcel.
            i) If a subdivision plat is required, all 25 percent or greater slopes (as defined in24.2.C.1.b) within the proposed lots, except for those within natural open space areas, are delineated. These sloped areas then determine the design of the development according to the following criteria.
                a) Where the areas of 25 percent or greater slope are located outside the buildable area, the minimum lot size requirements of the underlying zone apply. The buildable area may be redefined by the applicant to exclude areas of steeper slope in order to comply with this requirement. Grading may occur only within the buildable area and access to the buildable area. Grading for roadway or driveway access shall not cross a 25 percent or greater sloped area unless no alternative routes exist. Driveway clearing and grading may be no wider than 30 feet.
                b) Where the buildable area contains areas of 25 percent or greater slope, the minimum size required for that proposed lot is 43,560 square feet unless a greater size is required by the underlying zone. The amount of grading permitted is the amount indicated in Column D of Table 24-1, based on the area of the lot, Column B.
            ii) If a subdivision plat is not required, the land area of each parcel created must comply with Columns A, B and D of Table 24-1.
    2. Multi-Family Residential Development 
        a. All grading is subject to the provisions of the Oro Valley Grading Ordinance.
        b. The ACS is calculated for the entire parcel. If the ACS is 15 percent or greater, columns A, B, C, and D of Table 24-1 apply.
        c. Natural open space may be designated on the parcel, in accordance with Section24.2.G to reduce the ACS percentage. Such natural open space will be excluded from the ACS calculation, but will be included for density calculation. If the ACS of the remaining portion of the parcel, after natural open space designation is:
            i) Less than 15 percent and contains no areas of 25 percent or greater slope, 100 percent of that portion may be graded.
            ii) Less than 15 percent, but contains areas of 25 percent or greater slopes, no more than 80 percent of that remaining portion may be graded.
            iii) Fifteen percent or greater, columns B, C, and D of Table 24-1 apply, based on the entire area of the parcel.
    3. Non-Residential Development 
        a. All grading is subject to the provisions of the Oro Valley Grading Ordinance.
        b. The ACS is calculated for the entire parcel. If the ACS is 15 percent or greater, columns A, B, and D of Table 24-1 apply.
        c. Natural open space may be designated on the parcel, in accordance with Section24.2.G, to reduce the ACS percentage. If the ACS of the remaining portion of the parcel is:
            i) Less than 15 percent and contains no areas of 25 percent or greater slope, 100 percent of that portion may be graded.
            ii) Less than 15 percent, but contains areas of 25 percent or greater slope, no more than 80 percent of that remaining portion may be graded.
            iii) Fifteen percent or greater, Columns B and D of Table 24-1 apply, based on the entire area of the parcel.
    4. Mixed Development 
    When a mix of development is proposed; i.e., a combination of residential, commercial, office, or industrial land uses, each use must meet all criteria for that development, as required by this section.
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    |          A          |               B               |             C             |        D        |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | Average Cross Slope | Minimum Area* (Acres/Dwelling | Density* (Dwellings/Acre) | Maximum Grading |
    |                     |         or Structure)         |                           |  (Percentage)   |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    |                          Less Than 15 as Permitted by Underlying Zoning                           |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 15.0-15.9           | 1.00                          | 1.00                      | 40.0            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 16.0-16.9           | 1.00                          | 1.00                      | 40.0            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 17.0-17.9           | 1.25                          | .80                       | 32.0            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 18.0-18.9           | 1.37                          | .73                       | 29.2            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 19.0-19.9           | 1.50                          | .67                       | 21.3            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 20.0-20.9           | 2.00                          | .50                       | 20.0            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 21.0-21.9           | 2.25                          | .44                       | 17.7            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 22.0-22.9           | 2.50                          | .40                       | 16.0            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 23.0-23.9           | 3.50                          | .29                       | 13.3            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 24.0-24.9           | 4.50                          | .22                       | 11.9            |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 25.0-25.9           | 6.00                          | .17                       | 9.3             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 26.0-26.9           | 7.00                          | .14                       | 9.3             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 27.0-27.9           | 8.60                          | .12                       | 9.3             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 28.0-28.9           | 10.40                         | .09                       | 9.3             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 29.0-29.9           | 12.80                         | .08                       | 9.3             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 30.0-30.9           | 16.00                         | .06                       | 8.8             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 31.0-31.9           | 23.50                         | .04                       | 6.7             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 32.0-32.9           | 31.00                         | .03                       | 6.7             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | 33.0 and Greater    | 36.00                         | .027                      | 4.0             |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
    | * Or as permitted by underlying zoning, whichever density is less.                                |
    +---------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------+
G. Natural Open Space 
Natural open space (see Chapter 31 for definition) may be designated on any parcel, subject to the following criteria:
    1. Development other than hiking trails will not be permitted within the legally described boundaries of natural open space in the Hillside Development Zone. Access roads, other than driveways, are not permitted within natural open space.
    2. Natural open space will be delineated in a surveyable manner on the preliminary and final plats of a subdivision, or on the development plan, and shall be designated by legal description on a document recorded with the Pima County Recorder.
    3. Natural open space may be designated as a deed restricted portion of a privately owned lot, or as a separate land parcel. This parcel may be under the ownership of a homeowner’s association, or deeded to any organization willing to accept responsibility for the perpetual preservation of the natural open space, subject to approval and acceptance by the Town of Oro Valley.
    4. To protect natural open space, covenants which run with the land will be provided in favor of the Town of Oro Valley and all owners with record interest in the natural area.
    5. If natural open space is designated on parcels four (4) acres or more, at least one (1) such natural open space area shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) acres in size.
H. Hillside Site Improvement Standard 
    1. Building Height 
        a. As permitted by the underlying zone. If the building also falls within the boundaries of other overlay zones, the more restrictive of the requirements applies. In order to eliminate large amounts of cut and fill, segments of buildings may be designed at varying elevations according to the slope of the land. For parcels with HDZ applicability per this section, building height shall be measured using a building height contour line (as defined in Chapter 31, Building Height Contour Line).
        b. A variance to maximum building height may be approved by the Board of Adjustment. If a variance is granted, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall review any residential structure up to the maximum height of the zoning and may approve said structure if such approval provides a better method of building to the land and is no more detrimental to adjacent properties than strict adherence to the development standards of the underlying district would allow. Such variance, as granted by the Board of Adjustment, shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 21.6. Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or Town Engineer review and approval shall be required prior to the issuance of any grading or building permits in accordance with Section 22.7.
        c. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review any commercial structure over eighteen (18) feet in the HDZ and may recommend approval of said structure to the Town Council if such approval provides a better method of building to the land and is no more detrimental to adjacent properties than strict adherence to the development standards of the underlying district.
    2. Site Improvement Standard 
    All proposed site work (see Site definition in Chapter 31), including grading, shall comply with the Development Standards contained in the Grading Ordinance.
    3. Color 
    All exposed exterior walls and roofs of structures, retaining walls and accessory structures shall utilize the predominant natural colors found on the parcel. Satellite dishes shall be earth tone or black. White is not permitted. In HDZ zones, in residential zoning districts, colors may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. In commercial zoning districts, Planning and Zoning Commission approval of colors is required. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017)
I. Maintenance and Protection 
The Planning and Zoning Administrator may, prior to recordation of a subdivision plat or issuance of building permits, require measures, such as covenants, assurances, or homeowner’s associations, as are necessary to ensure the long-term maintenance of slope control measures.
J. Enforcement 
    1. The developer and/or property owner shall be responsible for the following:
        a. Submitting average natural cross slope and sloped area analyses, certified by a qualified registrant, for review and verification by the Town Engineer or his/her designee.
        b. Surveying, staking, and inspection of the property by a qualified registrant to determine compliance with the provisions of this Section.
        c. On-site enforcement by certifying to the Town Engineer that the development complies with Section 24.2 Hillside Development Zone during the period of development.
    2. If violation of any provision of the Hillside Development Zone occurs, the property owner shall be responsible for bringing the violation into compliance with the requirements of this zone. This may require restoration of the site as closely as possible to its original undisturbed condition, topography, and vegetation, in order to remove the violation.
K. Slope Analysis Standard 
    1. Average Cross Slope Analysis 
    The Average Cross Slope (ACS) of a site shall be determined by a qualified registrant in the following manner:
        a. The site is depicted on a topographic map of the existing terrain, prior to any grading, grubbing, clearing, excavation, or modification, utilizing a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals 100 feet, with the following contour intervals:
            i) For sites less than five (5) acres, a contour interval of two (2) feet;
            ii) For sites five (5) acres and greater, a contour interval of two (2) feet or five (5) feet.
        b. The length of each contour line contained within the site boundaries on the map is measured by means of a mechanical device such as a map wheel or digitizer. This actual length is converted to scale length in feet. For example, at a scale of one (1) inch equals 40 feet (1" = 40'), a contour line with an actual map length of six and one-half (6 1/2) inches represents a line 260 feet long (6.5 x 40 = 260).
        c. The sum of the lengths (L) of all contour lines is multiplied by the contour interval (I) in feet.
        d. The result is multiplied by the factor .0023, which converts the square footage of the scale map to acres.
        e. This result is then divided by the area (A) of the site in acres.
        f. This process is mathematically represented by the formula
        +-------+-----------------+
        | ACS = | (I) (L) (.0023) |
        +-------+-----------------+
        | "     | (A)             |
        +-------+-----------------+
        g. The answer is the percentage of the ACS for the site.
    2. Sloped Area Analysis 
In addition to ACS requirements, any parcel containing areas with a slope of 25 percent or more shall have HDZ applicability as stated in Section24.2.C. A sloped area analysis, which must be prepared by a qualified registrant, shall identify individual slopes for design and review purposes. A detailed methodology for performing sloped area analysis is available from the Planning and Zoning Department.

II. Riparian Habitat Overlay Zone in Effect Prior to Implementation of the Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance on 7/19/11 (formerly codified in Section 24.7)
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to protect and enhance riparian areas by instituting standards for preservation of riparian habitats associated with watercourses and significant stands of native vegetation in order to:
    1. Protect the valuable, limited and endangered natural riparian habitat resources of the Town of Oro Valley;
    2. Provide an ecologically sound transition between riparian habitat communities and developed/developing areas;
    3. Assure the continuation of existing or natural functions, values and benefits provided by riparian habitat resources;
    4. Protect aesthetic and environmental values of riparian habitats for the enjoyment of citizens and visitors; and
    5. Maintain linear continuity for riparian habitat.
B. Riparian Habitat Identified; Protective Buffer Required 
    1. Riparian Habitat 
    Concurrent with the passage of this Riparian Habitat Overlay District, a set of maps entitled Riparian Habitat Maps, which are available in the Oro Valley Planning and Zoning Department, are also adopted. Said maps chart all riparian habitats within the Town of Oro Valley, which meet the criteria specified herein. Riparian areas identified must be protected from development, in accordance with the policies set forth in the Riparian Habitat Protection Overlay District, the General Plan and other adopted plans and policy documents by and of the Town of Oro Valley.
    2. Protective Apron Required 
    In addition to the defined Riparian Habitat area, as described and further depicted on the adopted Riparian Habitat Maps, an apron area, not less than fifteen (15) feet in width, as measured in any direction from the boundary of a defined Riparian Habitat, shall be provided. Within the required apron area, subsequent to erection of required temporary fencing (see subsections C and D of this section) and issuance of a grading permit, disturbance may occur; i.e., apron area may be used as a “trample zone” for grading, utility installation and other construction-related activities. If this required fifteen (15) foot apron area is disturbed in any way, however, the restoration of the apron, including re-establishing natural grades and soil compaction, must be addressed in the mitigation/revegetation plans, to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
    3. Applicability 
    This section shall apply to all new development, rezoning submittals, subdivision plats, development plans, re-subdivisions of approved plats and/or to annexed, undeveloped areas, which encompass wash and riparian habitats, as delineated on the Riparian Habitat Maps, adopted with, and made a part of, this overlay district. All regulations set forth herein shall apply to wash and riparian habitat areas identified as being either Hydroriparian, Mesoriparian or Xeroriparian, Types A, B, or C.
        a. Exceptions 
            i) This section shall not apply to any development, residential or commercial, approved prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.
            ii) This section shall not apply to any construction related to the provision of alternative water supplies including, but not limited to, facilities for the purposes of groundwater recharge, groundwater savings, and the enhancement of riparian and environmentally sensitive areas. ((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
C. Riparian Habitat Study/Mitigation Plan Requirements 
At the pre-application stage of development, the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall evaluate a site proposed for development and, in accordance with the Riparian Habitat Maps, shall determine whether or not riparian habitat areas exist on the subject property.
In areas Annexed into the Town subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, prospective land developers will be required to provide to the Town a map of riparian habitats, as identified by a qualified professional, which may exist on the property proposed for development. If it is determined that riparian habitat areas do exist, the Riparian Habitat Maps shall be updated to reflect these findings.
If identified riparian areas do occur on a site, the applicant must make a decision as to whether encroachment will, or must, occur within it.
    1. In the event that the applicant commits to no encroachment into the designated riparian habitat, and to preservation/re-vegetation of the required fifteen (15) foot apron area around the entire riparian habitat (see subsection B.2 of this section for further clarification), the requirement for a Riparian Habitat Study may be waived. However, the applicant must commit, in writing, to erecting temporary fencing (see subsection D.2 of this section) around the entire habitat and said fencing shall be placed prior to any grubbing, grading or construction occurring on the project site. The fencing shall remain in place until all construction has been completed.
    2. If it is determined that encroachment into identified riparian areas is to occur, a Riparian Habitat Study and Mitigation Plan must be prepared in accordance with submittal requirements established by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Said study and plan must accompany any application for development (i.e., rezoning, conditional use permit, development plan and/or subdivision plat).
    3. Approvals Required 
        a. Riparian Habitat Studies and Mitigation Plans shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee as part of the development review process (rezoning, preliminary plat, or development plan). It shall be within the purview of the Administrator to call upon a qualified professional(s) with expertise in the field of vegetation preservation to assist in the review process. If outside expertise is required, the applicant will be required to set up an account which will pay for such services.
        b. In addition to meeting all mitigation requirements set forth within Table 24-7: Town of Oro Valley Riparian Habitat Mitigation Standards, the following factors shall also be taken into consideration when evaluating the Mitigation Plan:
            i) Amount and quality of the riparian area to be disturbed;
            ii) Prior site disturbance, if any;
            iii) Contiguity of the habitat;
            iv) Presence of special status animal species inhabiting or traveling through the area in a riparian habitat area, as determined by the Arizona Game and Fish Department;
            v) Upstream and downstream characteristics of designated washes;
            vi) Alternative site designs which could minimize encroachment;
            vii) Consideration of any other information or substantiation as may be provided by the applicant relative to the need for, and extent of, the proposed encroachment;
            viii) An assessment of the applicant’s compliance with the prescribed standards for mitigation, as set forth within Table 24-7: Town of Oro Valley Riparian Habitat Mitigation Standards;
            ix) A comparison of the Mitigation Plan with the study of existing conditions; i.e., the composition of the vegetative community, as set forth in the Riparian Habitat Study for the site; and
            x) An assessment of the applicant’s plans to compensate for the impact.
        c. No permits for grubbing or grading may be issued, nor can a plant salvage operation commence, prior to the Administrator’s approval of the Riparian Habitat Study and, if applicable, the Mitigation Plan, unless the Planning and Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed grubbing, grading or salvage will not impact a protected wash.
    4. 
    5. Mitigation Bond Required 
    A mitigation bond, separate from the required restoration bond, must be posted prior to any site disturbance. Said bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the landscape materials and labor required to restore the area and one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost to irrigate the new plant materials for a period of five (5) years.
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
    |         Item         | Hydro-/Meso-Riparian  |     Xero-Riparian     |     Xero-Riparian     |     Xero-Riparian     |
    |                      |                       |           A           |           B           |           C           |
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
    | Trees (Canopy)       | 90 trees/ac.,         | 75 trees/ac.,         | 60 trees/ac.,         | 45 trees/ac.          |
    |                      | 50% 30" boxed,        | 75% 24" boxed,        | 50% 24" boxed,        | 25% 24" boxed,        |
    |                      | 25% 24" boxed         | 25% 15 gal.           | 50% 15 gal.           | 75% 15 gal.           |
    |                      | and 25% 15 gal.       |                       |                       |                       |
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
    | Shrubs (Mid-Story)   | 200 shrubs/ac.,       | 175 shrubs/ac.,       | 135 shrubs/ac.,       | 100 shrubs/ac.,       |
    |                      | min. 5 gal.           | 75% 5 gal.,           | 75% 5 gal.,           | 50% 5 gal.,           |
    |                      |                       | 25% 1 gal.            | 25% 1 gal.            | 50% 1 gal.            |
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
    | Seeding (Understory) | Hydroseed entire      | Hydroseed entire      | Hydroseed entire      | Hydroseed entire      |
    |                      | disturbed area        | disturbed area        | disturbed area        | disturbed area        |
    |                      | with Mix A*           | with Mix B*           | with Mix B*           | with Mix B*           |
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
    | Grading/ Erosion     | Grading shall         | Grading shall         | Grading shall         | Grading shall         |
    | Control              | facilitate collection | facilitate collection | facilitate collection | facilitate collection |
    |                      | and retention         | and retention         | and retention         | and retention         |
    |                      | of stormwater         | of stormwater         | of stormwater         | of stormwater         |
    |                      | runoff.**             | runoff.**             | runoff.**             | runoff.**             |
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
    | Irrigation           | All transplanted,     | All transplanted,     | All transplanted,     | All transplanted,     |
    |                      | salvaged and          | salvaged and          | salvaged and          | salvaged and          |
    |                      | nursery stock         | nursery stock         | nursery stock         | nursery stock         |
    |                      | trees and shrubs      | trees and shrubs      | trees and shrubs      | trees and shrubs      |
    |                      | shall be watered      | shall be watered      | shall be watered      | shall be watered      |
    |                      | via an automatic      | via an automatic      | via an automatic      | via an automatic      |
    |                      | drip irrigation       | drip irrigation       | drip irrigation       | drip irrigation       |
    |                      | system, to be         | system, to be         | system, to be         | system, to be         |
    |                      | maintained in         | maintained in         | maintained in         | maintained in         |
    |                      | good working          | good working          | good working          | good working          |
    |                      | order.                | order.                | order.                | order.                |
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
    | Maintenance          | ***                   | ***                   | ***                   | ***                   |
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
    | * It may be necessary to adjust seed mix, based on season, to assure germination.                                    |
    | ** Harvesting of run-off outside the mitigation area is encouraged, if consistent                                    |
    | with applicable codes.                                                                                               |
    | *** All mitigation plans must include the following statement/commitment:                                            |
    | “The project owner, and/or his successors, agree to preserve and protect                                             |
    | the mitigation area for the duration of the project. Further, said project                                           |
    | owner, or his successors, agree to actively maintain the mitigated area                                              |
    | for a period of not less than five years. Maintenance activities shall include,                                      |
    | but not be limited to, the regular operation of the irrigation system, the                                           |
    | replacement of dead trees, and the removal of non-indigenous, invasive plant                                         |
    | species.”                                                                                                            |
    +----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
((O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
D. Development Standards Within and Around the Riparian Habitat Overlay District 
    1. Disposition of Lands in Identified Riparian Habitats 
        a. Any land area located within an identified riparian habitat, per the adopted maps, or the required fifteen (15) foot apron area surrounding it in its entirety, shall be placed in a common area and shall be labeled as a conservation easement. An association, with adopted covenants, shall be formed to assure the perpetual protection, preservation, and maintenance of said easement or common area. Recorded conservation easements must be approved by the Town Attorney, and shall be enforceable by the Town of Oro Valley.
        b. For residential development within the R1-20, R1-36, R1-43, and R1-144 Districts, individual lots may be platted to include riparian areas; provided, that a conservation easement is recorded across those areas. Said conservation easement must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the Town Attorney and may be enforced by either the Town or a homeowners’ association. The conservation easement must prohibit construction, clearing of vegetation, ground disturbance, and alteration of topography, regardless of amount.
    2. Temporary Fencing Required 
        a. Temporary fencing shall be erected to protect identified riparian habitat areas. Said fencing shall be erected on the exact boundary line of the habitat area, as identified via map and survey. Said fencing must be wildlife friendly (per Arizona Game and Fish) and shall be of a type and material approved by the Town’s Zoning Inspector. Said fence must clearly and conspicuously delineate any area on the site which is to remain in a natural state, pursuant to the approved plans. Barbed wire may be used only in open range locations. If barbed wire is used within one hundred (100) yards of a riparian habitat, the bottom and top wires shall be twelve and one-half (12 1/2) gauge barbless wire and clearance underneath such wire fence shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) inches. Wire fencing used elsewhere to protect apron and riparian habitat areas shall be limited to stranded wire.
        b. Temporary fencing must be installed and inspected by the Town’s Zoning Inspector prior to any site disturbance.
        c. Temporary fencing may be removed only upon completion of construction, as verified by the Town Zoning Inspector.
        d. The requirement for temporary fencing may be waived by the Planning and Zoning Administrator if a grading plan demonstrates that the fenced building envelope will satisfy the requirements, or meet the intent, of this section.
    3. Disturbance for Essential Infrastructure 
    Up to five (5) percent of the regulated habitat may be disturbed, at the discretion of the Town Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator; however, no approval for such disturbance may be given until all other design options for installation of essential infrastructure have been thoroughly explored and a Mitigation Plan for the affected area(s) has been approved. If restoration of the destroyed habitat is not possible, based upon required paving, drainage structures, or for access to utilities for maintenance purposes, another area, on-site only, may be used to fulfill the mitigation requirements, as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, on an acre for acre basis.
    4. Permanent Walls and Fences 
    No walls, fences, or other barriers may be located so as to impede wildlife movement through designated riparian habitats. (See subsection D.2 of this section for fencing criteria.)
    5. Outdoor Lighting 
    All outdoor lighting shall conform to Oro Valley’s Outdoor Lighting Code, Section 27.5.
    6. Discharge of Dangerous or Harmful Products into Protected Areas 
    It shall be unlawful for any developer, or subsequent property owner, to discharge, or deposit, any chemical, chemical-carrying liquid, including swimming pool discharge, or any dangerous substance into a protected riparian habitat or its surrounding fifteen (15) foot apron area. Any person found guilty of such violation may be prosecuted in accordance with Section 30.2.
((O)11-15, Amended, 5/18/11)
E. Modification to Zoning District Development Standards Allowed in Subdivisions and Developments Containing Identified Riparian Habitats 
    1. Modifications to Zoning District Standards 
    Certain modifications to the development standards of any zoning district may be granted, if deemed appropriate, for properties which include identified riparian habitats. Such modifications may be granted only at the discretion of the Town Council and only in the following cases:
        a. When encroachment into regulated habitat areas would be unnecessary if the modification were to be granted, and
        b. When it is determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, based on a review of the plat or plan, the Riparian Habitat Study and the Mitigation Plan, that development within identified riparian areas cannot be reasonably avoided, and replacing and/or recreating the habitat is not an option.
    2. Applicability 
    Development standards in any zoning district including, but not limited to, the following may be modified as a part of the development (rezoning, subdivision plat or development plan) approval process:
        a. Setbacks 
        Modifications to the building setbacks (up to twenty percent (20%) of the required setback of the zoning district) and/or distance between buildings.
        b. Minimum Lot Size 
        Minimum lot sizes in all R1, R-4, R-S and SDH-6 districts may be modified; however, such lot size modifications are available only where an area of riparian habitat and undisturbed natural areas will be owned by a homeowners’ association, in common area, and preservation in a natural state is guaranteed through recorded covenants running with the land, which are enforceable by the Town of Oro Valley.
        The sum total of square feet by which the area of each lot in the subdivision is reduced shall not exceed the total square footage of the preserved area. Said reduction in lot size shall not result in a density which exceeds that permitted by the zoning district, as provided in a calculation based on the adjusted gross acreage.
        Residential lots may be reduced in size, but may not be smaller than the minimum lot areas set forth below:
        +----------+------------------+
        | District | Minimum Lot Size |
        +----------+------------------+
        | R1-144   | 115,000          |
        +----------+------------------+
        | R1-43    | 36,000           |
        +----------+------------------+
        | R1-36    | 28,000           |
        +----------+------------------+
        | R1-20    | 16,000           |
        +----------+------------------+
        | R1-10    | 8,000            |
        +----------+------------------+
        | R1-7     | 6,000            |
        +----------+------------------+
        | SDH-6    | 5,500            |
        +----------+------------------+
        | R-4      | 5,000            |
        +----------+------------------+
        | R-S      | 5,000            |
        +----------+------------------+
        When modified, smaller lot sizes are approved for use, said sub-standard sized lots must be placed as far away from riparian habitats as feasible and special consideration shall be given to providing the largest lots in the subdivision adjacent to the protected habitat areas.
        c. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking requirements may be modified, provided it can be demonstrated that such modification will not result in a danger to persons or property, or in increased traffic.
        d. Other Modifications Permitted. Modifications to development standards not set forth herein may be requested, and may be granted by the Town Council, if modifications promote the preservation of natural areas and do not violate statutes, development agreements, appeal processes, or other provisions of this Code.
    Modifications to development standards may be granted at the rezoning stage and conditional use permit, upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by Town Council, or, if associated with a plat or site plan, Town Council approval may be given upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. ((O)17-05, Amended,  06/07/2017; (O)11-15, Amended,  05/18/2011)
F. Variance 
Per Section 21.6, any requests for variance to the provisions of this section must be granted by the Board of Adjustment. In addition to the findings required in Section 21.6.J, the Board of Adjustment must also find that:
    1. Approval of the variance will not adversely impact the identified riparian habitat, by allowing destruction of same, or
    2. The developer has committed to, and submitted, a mitigation plan which conforms to all requirements of subsection C of this section, which has been approved, with or without modifications, by the Town Council.

III. Definitions in Effect Prior to Implementation of the Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance on 7/19/11 (formerly codified in Chapter 31)
165. Hillside Conservation Area 
Shall mean the area within the Hillside District that is set aside for conservation of permanent natural open space, the conditions of which are identified in Section24.2.C. Hillside Conservation Area designations may apply toward the natural area requirement of Section 24.2.
285. Ridge 
When used in relation to natural terrain, means a relatively narrow elevation, which is prominent on account of the steep angle at which it rises; an elongated crest or series of crests, with or without peaks, significantly higher than the adjoining ground.

Addendum (J): Methods for Sampling Riparian Habitat and Specifications for Plant Material Quality
This Addendum contains the procedures and minimum specifications for determining and configuring sample areas and techniques for both plot sampling and transect sampling to be conducted in conjunction with preparation of a Mitigation Restoration Plan as required by Section 27.10.G.
1. Sample Area(s) 
    a. Determine the sample areas within which plots or transects will be established in accordance with Reference Site requirements. The following qualities shall be included in the sample area:
    b. Sample areas for significant vegetation stands should include stands of mature and healthy vegetation that meet the minimum cover or density definitions in the ESL for those resources being impacted.
    c. Sample areas’ area shall be large enough to include all species belonging to the plant community.
    d. The habitat should be relatively uniform throughout a single sample area. Each habitat type shall be sampled separately.
    e. Configuration 
        i. Plots or transects shall be distributed throughout the sample area in a manner to capture all of the variability within that sample area. Plots or transects can be either located randomly within a sample area or according to an orderly sampling scheme (e.g., on a grid, at regular intervals, etc.)—as long as the result is that the sample area is accurately described by the plot number and arrangement.
        ii. The sampling locations must be approved as part of the Mitigation Restoration Plan review process, and must be representative of the area being sampled.
2. Plot Sampling 
    a. Plot sampling, or quadrant sampling, can be used to describe a variety of plant community characteristics of an area that is too large for a complete vegetation inventory to be feasible.
    b. The parameters to be addressed include: diversity (species present), cover, and density (number of species in a given area).
    c. The number of plots or transects conducted within each sample area should be sufficient to characterize the range of vegetation conditions within it.
    d. Size and Shape 
        i. Plot size and shape should fit the nature of the vegetation community to be sampled. Circular plots are generally recommended with these field mapping standards, as they are more efficient to accurately establish in the field.
        ii. Plot size should be large enough to include a significant number of individual plants, representing all dominant species, but small enough that plants can be counted without duplication or omission of individuals.
        iii. Suggested plot sizes that are typically appropriate for vegetation in the context of riparian habitat are listed below. Site characteristics may necessitate using a different plot size or shape (i.e., if the riparian vegetation entity is not wide enough). Plot shape and size should be consistent throughout.
            a) Circular plots (preferred): 10-meter radius (314 m2 or 3,380 ft2)
            b) Square plots: 15–20 meters per side (225 m2–400 m2 or 2,422 ft2– 4,306 ft2)
            c) Rectangular plots: 15 meters x 20 meters (300 m2 or 3,229 ft2)
3. Transect Sampling 
Transects may be conducted according to the point intercept and belt transect methods. The method is based on a 50-meter point transect centered on a 2×50-meter plot (i.e., the belt transect). Using this method, vegetation is sampled by points at 0.5-meter intervals along the 50-meter transect to determine cover. The surveyor will note the species encountered at each interval. In addition, individuals of each perennial species rooted within the 2×50-meter plot will be counted to determine density and diversity. All annuals present in the 2×50-meter plot will also be noted.
4. Plant Material Quality 
    a. Plant materials may consist of salvaged plants or cuttings as well as container plants grown in traditional or tall pots from seed collected locally specifically for the project. Container plants will be grown at a nursery that specializes in producing high-quality native plant species for habitat restoration projects.
    b. Native soil shall be used in the plant containers if possible. If more native soil is needed than is available to fill plant containers, each container shall receive some native soil mixed with an appropriate commercial nursery soil mix.
    c. Container plants must be grown outdoors and in full sunlight. Prior to container plants being delivered to the project site, they shall be hardened off from water, so they may be able to sustain themselves under potential drought conditions once planted.
    d. Deep-planting techniques for woody species are permitted in order to achieve maximum survival with minimal irrigation. This may include deep-planting of dormant pole cuttings as well as the use of container stock grown in tall pots.
All plant materials shall be inspected by Town staff prior to installation to ensure they are healthy, disease free, and of proper species, quantities, and sizes.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This website is for demonstration or proofing purposes only. It is not necessarily endorsed by Town of Oro Valley and should not be relied upon for the content of any document.
The Oro Valley Town Code is current through Ordinance (O)19-03, passed February 20, 2019.
Disclaimer: The Town Clerk’s Office has the official version of the Oro Valley Town Code. Users should contact the Town Clerk’s Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.
The Oro Valley Zoning Code is current through Ordinance (O)19-06, passed July 31, 2019.
Disclaimer: The Town Clerk’s Office has the official version of the Oro Valley Zoning Code. Users should contact the Town Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

Town Website: www.orovalleyaz.gov
Code Publishing Company