


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions (Reserved)

1.08    Power of Initiative and Referendum

1.12    Right of Entry for Inspection

1.16    Claims Against the Town

1.20    Enforcement and Penalties


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title - Citation - Reference.

1.01.030    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.040    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.050    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.060    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the Code.

1.01.070    Effect of Code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.080    Constitutionality.

1.01.090    References to prior code.

1.01.100    Effective date.


1.01.010 Adoption.

There is adopted "Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 98-152 § 1)


1.01.020 Title - Citation - Reference.

This code shall be known as the "Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code" or the "Town Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code" or the "Town Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. (Ord. 98-152 § 2)


1.01.030 Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code" or the "Town Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 98-152 § 3)


1.01.040 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings containing herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 98-152 § 4)


1.01.050 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 98-152 § 5)


1.01.060 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.

The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 97-136, passed October 16, 1997. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 97-136, but prior to adoption of this Town Code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances Nos. 97-138, 97-139, 97-140, 97-141, 97-142, 97-143, 97-144, 98-145, 97-146, 97-147, 97-148 and 98-150. (Ord. 98-152 § 6)


1.01.070 Effect of Code on past actions and obligations.

The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 98-152 § 7)


1.01.080 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 98-152 § 8)


1.01.090 References to prior code.

References in Town forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former Town ordinances shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 98-152 § 9)


1.01.100 Effective date.

This code shall become effective on December 7, 1998. (Ord. 98-152 § 10)


Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Reserved)


Chapter 1.08 POWER OF INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:

1.08.010    Power reserved - Time of election.

1.08.020    Number of signatures.

1.08.030    Time of filing.

1.08.040    Sample ballots and publicity pamphlets.

1.08.050    Fees.


1.08.010 Power reserved - Time of election.

There is reserved to the qualified electors of the Town the power of the initiative and the referendum as prescribed by the State Constitution. Any initiative or referendum matter shall be voted on at the next ensuing primary or general election, or at a special election called by the council for such purpose. (Ord. 92-97 § 1) (Ord. 99-169 § 1)


1.08.020 Number of signatures.

A.    The total number of registered voters qualified to vote at the last municipal election, whether regular or special, immediately preceding the date upon which any initiative petition is filed shall be the basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the Town required to file an initiative petition shall be computed.

B.    The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the Town required to file a referendum petition shall be as determined by state law. (Ord. 92-97 § 2)


1.08.030 Time of filing.

A.    Initiative petitions shall be filed at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the election at which they are to be voted upon.

B.    Referendum petitions shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the adoption of the ordinance or resolution to be referred. If the Town Clerk is unable to provide petitioners with a copy of the ordinance or resolution at the time of application for an official number or on the same business day of the application, the thirty (30) day period shall be calculated from the date such ordinance or resolution is available. (Ord. 92-97 § 3)


1.08.040 Sample ballots and publicity pamphlets.

The following procedures relating to sample ballots and publicity pamphlets are adopted for conducting elections at which an initiative or referendum is to be voted upon:

A.    A publicity pamphlet, containing the entire text of the official ballot, shall be mailed by the Town Clerk to each household within the Town in which a registered voter resides, not less than ten (10) days prior to the election to which the sample ballot pertains.

B.    The pamphlet shall contain the proposition, as it will appear on the ballot together with a summary of each proposition. Each summary shall be followed by any arguments supporting the proposition followed by any argument opposing the proposition. Arguments submitted by the person filing the initiative or referendum shall appear first. The remaining arguments shall be placed in the order in which they were filed.

C.    Arguments supporting and opposing propositions appearing on the ballot shall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk by five p.m. not less than sixty (60) days prior to the election at which the propositions are to be voted upon. If time does not permit compliance with the sixty (60) day deadline the Town Clerk may establish a separate deadline for filing referendum ballot arguments. Arguments supporting or opposing propositions appearing on the ballot shall meet the following requirements:

1.    Arguments must relate to the propositions proposed by initiative or referred by referendum, which will appear on the ballot.

2.    Arguments must identify the proposition to which they refer and indicate whether the argument is in support of or opposition to the proposition.

3.    Arguments may not exceed three hundred (300) words in length.

4.    Arguments must contain the original signature of each person sponsoring it. Arguments submitted by organizations shall be signed by two executive officers of the organization, or if the argument is sponsored by a political committee it must be signed by the committee’s chairman or treasurer. All persons signing documents shall indicate their residence or post office box and address and a telephone number, which information shall not appear in the publicity pamphlet.

5.    No person or organization shall submit more than one argument for each proposition to be voted upon. (Ord. 92-97 § 4)


1.08.050 Fees.

Each argument submitted for inclusion in a publicity pamphlet shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established from time to time by Resolution, to offset proportional costs of printing. This requirement shall not be waived on any account. (Ord. 06-274)


Chapter 1.12 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION

Sections:

1.12.010    Entry.

1.12.020    Inspection.

1.12.030    Superseding effect.


1.12.010 Entry.

Whenever any officer or employee of the Town is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance, he/she may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same, provided, that he/she shall effect entry in the manner provided in Section 1.12.020 of this chapter, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or control of such building or premises has been otherwise obtained. (Ord. 97-135 § 1)


1.12.020 Inspection.

If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If consent to such entry is not given, the authorized officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 97-135 § 2)


1.12.030 Superseding effect.

This chapter shall be controlling over any other ordinance or part of an ordinance on the same subject, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, unless such ordinance or part of an ordinance provides differently by an express reference to this chapter. (Ord. 97-135 § 3)


Chapter 1.16 CLAIMS AGAINST THE TOWN

Sections:

1.16.010    Claims against the Town.

1.16.020    Claims involving real property.

1.16.030    Cause of action accrual – Limitation of actions.

1.16.040    Alternate dispute resolution.

1.16.050    Automatic denial after sixty (60) days.


1.16.010 Claims against the Town.

Persons who have claims against the Town or a Town employee shall file claims with the Town Clerk or as set forth in the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure within one hundred eighty (180) days after the cause of action accrues. The claim shall contain facts sufficient to permit the Town or Town employee to understand the basis upon which liability is claimed. The claim shall also contain a specific amount for which the claim can be settled and the facts supporting that amount. Any claim which is not filed within one hundred eighty (180) days after the cause of action accrues is barred and no action may be maintained thereon. (Ord. 07-299 § 1 (part))


1.16.020 Claims involving real property.

In the event that the claim relates to a claim involving eminent domain, condemnation, zoning, subdivisions, streets and roads or public rights-of-way, or other land use claims, a claim or notice of claim shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. §§ 12-821.01, 12-1134 and this section.

A.    Only the fee title owner(s) may file a claim involving real property. The owner shall have the burden of proof on the issue of diminution in value of the property. Claims shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. §§ 12-821.01, 12-1134 and this section.

B.    A claim or notice of claim shall at a minimum contain the following information:

1.    Street address and legal description of the real property.

2.    Identification of all of the legal owners of the property. A description of the legal interest held by each owner/claimant and evidence of ownership showing the date the ownership interest was acquired.

3.    Identification of the Town ordinance, resolution, or decision which the property owner alleges diminishes the value of his land including a description of the desired use of the property, how the regulation restricts the desired use of the property and how the land use law reduces the fair market value of the property.

4.    For claims which involve a claim for damage to real property or diminution in value of real property, copies of appraisals or other documents or statements of value, or documents or statements which support any claim involving a diminution in value.

5.    The amount of damages or compensation claimed including any claims for diminution in value. (Ord. 07-299 § 1 (part))


1.16.030 Cause of action accrual – Limitation of actions.

A.    For purposes of this chapter, a cause of action accrues when the damaged party realizes he or she has been damaged and knows or reasonably should know the cause, source, act, event, instrumentality or condition which caused or contributed to the damage.

B.    All actions against the Town or a Town employee shall be brought within the time periods required by Arizona Revised Statutes Title 12, Chapters 7 and 8, or other applicable statute of limitation, and not afterward. (Ord. 07-299 § 1 (part))


1.16.040 Alternate dispute resolution.

Notwithstanding Section 1.16.010, any claim which must be submitted to a binding or nonbinding dispute resolution process or an administrative claims process or review process pursuant to a statute, ordinance, resolution, administrative or governmental rule or regulation, or contractual term shall not accrue for the purposes of this section until all such procedures, processes or remedies have been exhausted. The time in which to give notice of a potential claim and to sue on the claim shall run from the date on which a final decision or notice of disposition is issued in an alternative dispute resolution procedure, administrative claim or review process. This provision shall not be construed to prevent the parties to any contract from agreeing to extend the time for filing such notice of claim. (Ord. 07-299 § 1 (part))


1.16.050 Automatic denial after sixty (60) days.

A claim against the Town or a Town employee filed pursuant to this chapter is deemed denied sixty (60) days after the filing of the claim unless the claimant is advised of the denial in writing before the expiration of the sixty (60) days. (Ord. 07-299 § 1 (part))


Chapter 1.20 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Sections:

1.20.010    Purpose.

1.20.020    Applicability.

1.20.030    Enforcement officers.

1.20.040    Criminal citations – Hearings.

1.20.050    Criminal penalties.

1.20.060    Civil citations – Hearings.

1.20.070    Civil penalties.

1.20.080    Abatement.

1.20.090    Civil Hearing Officer.

1.20.100    Effective date.


1.20.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to create a procedure for a timely, efficient means for enforcement of the Town Code, including the issuance of both criminal and civil citations to be filed in the Magistrate Court, and to provide for consent agreements between the Town and a person accused of violating the Town Code. (Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part). Formerly 1.16.010)


1.20.020 Applicability.

A.    This chapter provides for criminal penalties, civil penalties and for consent orders to be used to help the Town enforce its Town Code. These penalties and orders are intended to be in addition to all other legal remedies that may be pursued by the Town to address violations of this Town Code. Penalties and other remedies may be specified in any chapter of this Town Code, and where specified, those penalties shall be used. However, where no specified penalty is part of a title or chapter, the penalties and consent orders set forth in this chapter may be used.

B.    The use of this chapter neither limits nor precludes the Town from pursuing any other type of enforcement allowed by law. (Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part). Formerly 1.16.020)


1.20.030 Enforcement officers.

Sworn police officers employed by the Town Police Department and the Town Code Enforcement Officer shall have the primary responsibility for issuing criminal and civil citations to enforce the Town Code. However, the Town Manager may also designate other Town employees who may issue criminal and civil citations to enforce the Town Code. (Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part). Formerly 1.16.030)


1.20.040 Criminal citations – Hearings.

A.    The enforcement officer may either use the uniform Arizona Traffic Ticket and Complaint, or may use any other form authorized by the Town Manager which contains all of the following:

1.    State the date of the violation or, if the date of the violation is unknown, then the date the violation is identified;

2.    State the address or a definite description of where the violation occurred;

3.    Notify the defendant with a written description or statutory designation of the violation;

4.    State whether this is the first, second or a repeat violation, if applicable. If no designation is made at or prior to the pretrial hearing or no later than twenty (20) days prior to the trial, the violation shall be designated a first offense by the Court;

5.    Show the name and signature of the enforcement officer;

6.    List the phone number of the Magistrate Court to contact for questions concerning the hearing process; and

7.    Direct the defendant to correct the violation (if applicable) and to pay the criminal penalties set forth in the Court’s deposit schedule for criminal infractions on or before the initial hearing or appearance date, or to appear in the Magistrate Court at the time and date specified in the citation.

B.    A copy of the citation or complaint may be served by delivering a copy of the citation or complaint to the person charged with the violation or by any means authorized by the Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure. In addition, if the enforcement officer indicates on the citation or complaint that no jail time is requested, the citation or complaint may be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, delivered to addressee only at the address provided by the person charged with the violation. Service of the complaint is complete on filing the receipt in the Magistrate Court.

C.    The original citation or complaint shall be filed in the Magistrate Court within thirty (30) days of the time the citation or complaint was issued.

D.    The Magistrate Court shall hold an initial hearing and a trial, if necessary, and may schedule a pretrial hearing if in the discretion of the court; a pretrial hearing would be beneficial to the Court or the parties. (Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part). Formerly 1.16.040)


1.20.050 Criminal penalties.

A.    Except in matters where the penalties and other remedies are specified in the chapter or title of this Town Code, any person convicted of an undesignated criminal infraction shall be deemed a violation of a Class I misdemeanor.

B.    Any person who commits a violation of any section of this Town Code generally punishable as a criminal infraction, after previously having been found guilty of committing two (2) or more criminal infractions of the same title within any thirty-six (36) month period, whether by admission, by payment of the fine, by default, by plea of "no contest," or by judgment after hearing, shall be guilty of a criminal misdemeanor punishable by a criminal penalty or fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

C.    Any reference in this Town Code to Class I, Class II, Class III misdemeanors or to petty offenses shall be defined and enforced, and shall carry the same penalties as those same named classes of offenses as set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 13, Chapters 7 and 8, as amended, in addition to any restitution ordered by the Court.

D.    In addition to the criminal penalties and fines prescribed in this chapter or other chapters of the Town Code, a Court shall have the discretion to order restitution for any victim. The Court shall also have the discretion to order community service, abatement of any violation or nuisance, or any other remedy allowed by law fashioned by the court to fit the violation, crime or infraction.

E.    Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation or offense. (Ord. 15-387 § 4 (part); Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part); Ord. 98-154 § 1 (part); Ord. 97-136 § 1. Formerly 1.16.050)


1.20.060 Civil citations – Hearings.

A.    The enforcement officer may either use the uniform Arizona Traffic Ticket and Complaint, or may use any other form authorized by the Town Manager which contains all of the following:

1.    State the date of the violation or, if the date of the violation is unknown, then the date the violation is identified;

2.    State the address or a definite description of where the violation occurred;

3.    Notify the defendant with a written description or statutory designation of the violation;

4.    State whether this is the first, second or a repeat civil violation. If no designation is made at or prior to the pretrial hearing, the violation shall be designated a first offense by the Court;

5.    Show the name and signature of the enforcement officer;

6.    List the phone number of the Magistrate Court to contact for questions concerning the hearing process; and

7.    Direct the defendant to correct the violation (if applicable) and to pay the civil penalties set forth in the Court’s deposit schedule for civil infractions on or before the initial hearing or appearance date, or to appear in the Magistrate Court at the time and date specified in the citation.

8.    Notify the defendant not to ignore the citation, to appear at the Magistrate Court on the initial hearing or appearance date; and that if the defendant fails to correct the violation (if applicable) and to pay the civil penalty on or before the appearance date, or appear on the date specified in the citation, that the Magistrate Court judge will issue a written decision of default against the defendant, find that the defendant is responsible for the violation, and impose a civil penalty and issue other orders to correct the violations as allowed by this chapter or the Town Code.

B.    A copy of the citation or complaint may be served by delivering a copy of the citation or complaint to the person charged with the violation or by any means authorized by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. In addition, a citation or complaint for a violation may be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, delivered to addressee at the address provided by the person charged with the violation. Service of the complaint is complete on filing the receipt in the Magistrate Court.

C.    The original complaint shall be filed in the Magistrate Court within thirty (30) days of the time the citation or complaint was issued.

D.    A Magistrate Court Judge or Hearing Officer shall hear and dispose of civil violations, and make such orders as may be necessary and proper to dispose of such cases. Cases shall be heard without a jury.

E.    No initial hearing is required, and the defendant may appear telephonically or in person for the initial hearing or appearance date to enter a plea of "not responsible" or "responsible." No person from the Town need appear at the initial hearing or appearance date.

F.    If the defendant appears and denies the allegation, the Magistrate Court shall set the matter for hearing.

G.    If the defendant appears before the Magistrate Court and admits the allegations, the Magistrate Court shall issue a decision, finding the defendant "responsible," impose a civil penalty, and may issue such other orders as are consistent with this Town Code.

H.    The Magistrate Court may continue the date set for the hearing and may continue any hearing, for cause.

I.    The Magistrate Court may not grant variances nor modify the provisions of the Town Code.

J.    The Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be followed by the Magistrate Court for civil citations issued pursuant to this Town Code except where inconsistent with the provisions of this Town Code.

K.    The Town employee who issued the citation or complaint may appear in Magistrate Court and be the Town’s representative to prosecute civil violations. A police officer, the Town Code Enforcement Officer, Town Attorney, or other enforcement person appointed by the Town Manager may also serve as the Town’s representative to prosecute civil violations.

L.    No person may be examined except by the Court, an attorney for a party, the Town’s designated representative or the defendant. (Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part). Formerly 1.16.060)


1.20.070 Civil penalties.

A.    Except in matters where the penalties and other remedies are specified in the chapter or title of this Town Code, any person found responsible for an undesignated civil violation or infraction for violation of an ordinance of the Town is punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).

B.    Any person who commits a violation of any section of this Town Code generally punishable as a civil violation or infraction, after previously having been found responsible of committing two (2) or more civil violations or infractions of the same title within any thirty-six (36) month period, whether by admission, by payment of the civil penalty, by default, by plea of "no contest," or by judgment after hearing, shall be responsible for payment of a civil penalty of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) up to a maximum civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).

C.    In addition to the civil penalties prescribed in this chapter or other chapter in the Town Code, the Court shall have the discretion to order restitution for any victim. The Court shall also have the discretion to order community service, abatement of a violation or nuisance, or any other remedy allowed by law fashioned by the Court to fit the violation, crime or infraction.

E.    A person who fails to comply with an order of the Magistrate Court, fails to comply with penalties imposed under this section, or who fails to appear in Magistrate Court after being served a citation or complaint may be charged with a criminal citation or complaint for failing to obey a Court order pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 9-500.21(5), 13-2810(A)(2) or 13-3904, for which an arrest warrant may be issued.

F.    Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation or offense. (Ord. 15-387 § 4 (part); Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part); Ord. 98-154 § 1 (part); Ord. 97-136 § 1. Formerly 1.16.070)


1.20.080 Abatement.

A.    If the Magistrate Court has determined that the Town Code violation constitutes a public nuisance or a hazard to public health and safety, the Court may, together with the decision, issue a written abatement order and shall cause the responsible persons to be notified of the existence of such order and shall direct that such guilty/responsible persons abate and correct said conditions within a reasonable time but not less than thirty (30) days from the date of the order. This abatement order shall be a civil order even if the violation constitutes a crime.

B.    The abatement order shall include notice that if the responsible person fails to comply with the abatement order, the Town may abate the violation and record the cost of such abatement, including administrative fees and additional inspection fees, as a lien against the property in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 9-499. The notice shall also include an estimate of the amount of such costs.

C.    A copy of the abatement order shall be sent to the owner and to the occupant or lessee of the property on which the violation exists and may be sent to any other persons sought to be charged with the responsibility of abatement. The notice may be personally delivered or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and addressed as follows:

1.    To the owner, as such person’s name and address appear on the records of the Navajo County Assessor’s Office as the address where the last tax bill was mailed or as otherwise known to the Town by virtue of more recent and reliable information;

2.    To any occupant or lessee at the address of the subject property; and

3.    To any other such responsible person, as such person’s name and address are known to the Town.

D.    The Town Manager or his or her designee shall record the abatement order in the Navajo County Recorder’s Office and shall file a copy thereof in the office of the Town Clerk together with an affidavit or certificate stating the time and manner in which notice of such abatement order was given. The failure of any owner or other person to receive such abatement order shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder.

E.    The owner of real property as shown in the records of the Navajo County Assessor’s Office shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper person and address for mailing of notice of any hearing, civil citation or order pursuant to this chapter and the failure of any addressee to receive notice shall not invalidate any notice, civil citation or order so issued. Any duly issued civil citation, notice or order shall be conclusively deemed to be adequate notice to any and all occupants, users, or possessors of the property or its contents, and the failure of any such person to see, read, understand or otherwise receive the civil citation notice or order shall not invalidate any of the proceedings.

F.    Any person aggrieved by the Magistrate Court’s abatement order may appeal to the Town Board of Adjustment by filing a written appeal with the Town Clerk. An appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days of the date of the Magistrate Court’s decision or shall be waived.

G.    The hearing before the Town Board of Adjustment shall be a trial de novo.

H.    If no appeal to the Board of an abatement order is taken by the defendant, or if the Board affirms the findings of the Magistrate Court, and the abatement is not accomplished by the defendant by the date specified, the Town may proceed to have the conditions abated as soon thereafter as is practical. The Town may use Town employees or may contract for the required services, or use any other methods to secure compliance in an expeditious and timely manner.

I.    The Town Manager or his or her designee shall keep an itemized account of the expenses involved in abating the public nuisance, conditions and violation(s). A statement showing the expense of the abatement, including the cost of additional inspections and administrative costs, together with an explanation of appeal rights shall be served on the owner in the same manner as provided in subsection C of this section. This statement shall also specify the date by which the owner must pay the amount in full to Town and explain that a lien will be placed on the property if the amount is not paid in full by the date specified.

J.    Within ten (10) working days from the date of the statement of expenses, the owner may appeal and protest, in writing, the amount of the costs to the Board of Adjustment. The appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall clearly show the legal description of the property, the date the statement of expenses was issued and the reason for the appeal.

K.    At the time fixed for the hearing on the statement of expense, the Board shall consider the statement and appeal or protests and objections raised by the owner. The Board may revise, correct or modify the statement as it considers just and thereafter shall confirm the statement by motion or resolution. The decision of the Board on all appeals, protests and objections which may be made shall be final and binding on all parties.

L.    Upon completion of the abatement by the Town and service of the statement of expenses on the owner, or if an appeal to the statement of expenses was filed, upon confirmation of the statement of expenses by the Board, the Town shall take action to collect the amount owing to the Town. If the property owner does not pay the expense of abating the violation(s) within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement of expenses, the amount shall be recorded as an assessment lien against the property in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 9-499. Such assessment lien shall be payable and bear interest as set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 9-499.

M.    At the discretion of the Town Manager or his or her designee, the Town may take any and all other legal actions to collect such amounts.

N.    If abatement is performed by the property owner or other interested person, prior to abatement by the Town but after Town has recorded the notice of violation and abatement order or when Town receives full payment from the property owner of the amount of the assessment lien together with interest as provided by law, the Town shall record a release of the notice or lien release as is appropriate. (Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part). Formerly 1.16.080)


1.20.090 Civil Hearing Officer.

A.    The Magistrate Court may appoint one (1) or more Civil Hearing Officers to hear cases involving civil violations and infractions. The cost of the Hearing Officer shall be paid from the Town’s funds, unless specifically included in the Magistrate Court budget.

B.    A Hearing Officer may conduct hearings and order penalties and abatements as set forth in this chapter, or as otherwise allowed by the Town Code.

C.    At least ten (10) days prior to the violation hearing, both parties shall produce for inspection by the opposing party a list of witnesses and prepared exhibits. The prepared exhibits are to be filed with the Hearing Officer. Failure to comply with this provision may result, at the Hearing Officer’s discretion, in the denial of the admission of evidence or the granting of a continuance to permit inspection, or other appropriate remedy.

D.    The order of the violation hearing proceedings shall be as follows:

1.    The Hearing Officer shall call the case and briefly describe the procedures to be followed. The Hearing Officer may ask questions of the parties or witnesses during the proceedings.

2.    Town’s and defendant’s opening statements.

3.    Testimony of the Town’s witnesses.

4.    Testimony of the defendant’s witnesses.

5.    Statements and testimony of other witnesses at the discretion of the Hearing Officer.

6.    Town’s rebuttal.

7.    The Hearing Officer may allow rebuttals with discretion in the interests of justice.

8.    The Town’s closing statement.

9.    The defendant’s closing statement.

E.    Ruling by the Hearing Officer. At the conclusion of the violation hearing, the Hearing Officer shall determine whether a violation exists. If a violation is found to exist, the Hearing Officer shall proceed to the penalty phase of the hearing.

F.    The Hearing Officer may order such penalties, abatement, restitution or other orders and requirements as are allowed by Section 1.20.070 of this chapter, or as allowed by other chapters of the Town Code or by Arizona Law.

G.    The Hearing Officer shall issue a written ruling within ten (10) days of the Violation Hearing. The written ruling shall include the findings and penalties ordered by the Hearing Officer.

H.    The Arizona Rules of Evidence shall not apply at hearings before a Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer may admit any evidence offered subject to a determination by the Hearing Officer that the offered evidence is relevant and reliable.

I.    The violation hearing shall be recorded. The recording shall be kept on record by the Magistrate Court for a period of six (6) months. A record of the proceedings may be made by a court reporter if requested and paid for by the party requesting the court reporter.

J.    Either party who participated in a violation hearing may appeal the decision, the penalty, or the other things ordered by the Hearing Officer to the Magistrate Court to be heard de novo by a judge or judge pro tempore. Any such appeal shall be filed in writing with the Magistrate Court with a copy to the Hearing Officer within ten (10) days of written ruling required by subsection G of this section. (Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part). Formerly 1.16.090)


1.20.100 Effective date.

The effective date of this chapter shall be May 1, 2006. All violations cited after the effective date shall be cited and processed in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 07-299 § 2 (part); Ord. 06-260. Formerly 1.16.100)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.04    Town Council

2.08    Town Manager

2.10    Town Attorney

2.12    Town Clerk

2.14    Town Magistrate and Court Administrative Fees

2.16    Planning Department

2.18    Town Marshal/Chief of Police

2.20    Elections

2.22    Town Engineer

2.24    Forfeiture of Personal Property

2.32    Criminal History Records Check


Chapter 2.04 TOWN COUNCIL ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE

Sections:

2.04.010    Authority.

2.04.020    Regular meetings.

2.04.030    Special meetings.

2.04.040    Work sessions.

2.04.050    Executive sessions.

2.04.060    Emergency meetings.

2.04.070    Council packet preparation.

2.04.080    Public notice – Posting agendas.

2.04.090    Minutes.

2.04.100    Mayor – Election and duties.

2.04.110    Call to order.

2.04.120    Attendance by teleconference.

2.04.130    Quorum.

2.04.140    Order of business.

2.04.150    Agenda.

2.04.160    Public hearings.

2.04.170    Rules of debate.

2.04.180    Addressing the Council.

2.04.190    Manner of addressing the Council – Time limit.

2.04.200    Silence constitutes affirmative vote.

2.04.210    Decorum.

2.04.220    Enforcement of decorum.

2.04.230    Council members may explain a "no" vote.

2.04.240    Ordinances, resolutions, motions and contracts.

2.04.250    Reports and resolutions to be filed with clerk.

2.04.260    Adjournment.

2.04.280    Creation of committees, boards and commissions.

2.04.290    Suspension and amendment of these rules.


2.04.010 Authority.

Arizona Revised Statutes Section 9-234 provides that the Council may determine its own rules of procedure for meetings. The following set of rules shall be in effect upon their adoption by the Council and until such time as they are amended or new rules are adopted. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.020 Regular meetings.

A.    All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, unless closed pursuant to state law.

B.    The Council should hold regular meetings on the first and third Thursdays of each month, with the regular meeting commencing at 6:00 p.m. at the Town Council Chambers, located at 1360 N. Niels Hansen Lane, Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, except in December when only one (1) meeting will be held; provided, that the Town Council may hold regular and special meetings at other times and places upon giving proper and legal notice; provided, that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the day preceding the holiday, unless another date and/or time is designated.

C.    Any meeting of the Council may be adjourned to a later date and time; provided, that no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting.

D.    The Mayor may, when necessary, change the time and place of the regular meeting. The Mayor shall set forth the reasons necessitating such change in writing. The reasons for the change shall be published once in the Town official newspaper at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting to be held pursuant to the change. Twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting to be held pursuant to such change, the Town Clerk shall give each Council member written notice, personally or by registered mail, of any change from the regular meeting days established by this section.

E.    Except for properly called executive sessions as permitted by state law, all regular meetings of the Town Council and its committees shall be open to the public, including the media, freely subject to recording by radio, television and photography at any time; provided, that such arrangements do not interfere with the orderly conduct of the meetings under such rules as the Council may prescribe.

F.    The Council may provide for a "call to the public" at its regular meetings and at special meetings when approved by the Mayor. (Ord. 12-364; Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part); Ord. 91-89 § 1)


2.04.030 Special meetings.

A.    The Mayor or three (3) members of the Council may call special meetings of the Council whenever in their opinion the public business may require it by contacting the Town Manager.

B.    Whenever a special meeting shall be called, a notice in writing signed by the Mayor or at least three (3) Council members shall be filed with the Town Clerk, with a copy to the Town Manager, and shall also be served upon each member of the Council either in person or by notice left at the place of residence or place of business, stating the date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which such meeting is called, and no business shall be transacted at the meeting except such as is stated in the notice and agenda. Special meetings shall not provide for a call to the public except when authorized by the Mayor.

C.    No special meeting shall be held until at least twenty-four (24) hours after the notice has been served except in cases of emergency. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.040 Work sessions.

A.    The Council may meet informally in work sessions which shall be open to the general public, at the call of the Mayor or of any three (3) members of the Council, to review forthcoming programs of the Town, receive progress reports on current programs or projects, review items on the same or upcoming agendas, hear the Town Manager’s or Council Committee’s reports, or receive other similar information from the Town Manager; provided, that no Council action may be taken and that all discussions and conclusions thereon shall be informal.

B.    Work sessions shall not continue past one (1) hour of their starting time unless the majority of those Council members present choose to continue. No call to the public shall be scheduled during work sessions. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.050 Executive sessions.

Executive sessions or closed meetings may be held in accordance with the provisions of the State Open Meeting Laws. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.060 Emergency meetings.

As provided in Arizona Revised Statutes, the Mayor or three (3) Council members may call a special emergency meeting to discuss or take action on an unforeseen issue where time is of the essence and sufficient time does not provide for the posting of a meeting notice twenty-four (24) hours or more before the meeting. Notice of an emergency meeting of the Mayor and Council will be posted within twenty-four (24) hours following the holding of an emergency meeting. The notice will include the agenda and a brief but complete description of the nature of the emergency. Emergency meetings shall not provide for a call to the public. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.070 Council packet preparation.

In order to provide the Town Council with information packets for adequate review prior to Council meetings, it is required that any item being requested to be placed on the Council agenda, including the supporting information, be submitted to the Town Clerk by 5:00 p.m. eight (8) days prior to the Council meeting. The Town Clerk will prepare the agenda and packets with information provided and will deliver the packets to the Council members by 5:00 p.m. at least six (6) days preceding the Council meeting. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.080 Public notice – Posting agendas.

Public notice of all meetings of the Town Council shall be accomplished by posting an agenda of the matters to be discussed or decided at the meeting in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 38, Chapter 3, Article 3.1, as amended. The agenda shall list the time and place for each meeting, and shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of each Town Council meeting; except that in cases of actual emergency, the Town Council may meet without such public notice as authorized by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 38, Chapter 3, Article 3.1, as amended. The agenda will be posted on the bulletin board in the public hallway outside the Clerk’s Office at the Town Offices, 1360 North Niels Hansen Lane, Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, in the kiosk outside the Town Offices, and at both the Pinetop Post Office and the Lakeside Post Office. The Town Clerk shall post all public notices on the Town’s Internet website and shall give additional public notice as is reasonable and practicable as to all meetings. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.090 Minutes.

A.    All regular and special meetings and work sessions shall be recorded. The recordings of the meetings shall be maintained in the Office of the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk will transcribe the minutes of these meetings in writing for approval by the Town Council. Once the written minutes of meetings have been approved by the Town Council, the recordings shall be retained for an additional three (3) months after which time they will be disposed of. The written minutes shall reflect:

1.    The date, time and place of the meeting or session;

2.    The members recorded as either present or absent;

3.    A general description of all matters proposed, discussed or decided; and

4.    A record of any votes taken.

B.    Approval of minutes of all but closed meetings or executive sessions shall be considered at the next regular Council meeting. It shall not be necessary to read the minutes prior to approval. Such minutes may be revised by the Clerk to correct spelling, numbering and other such technical defects at any time before Council approval. Prior to approval, any Council member may, through the Mayor, request the privilege of amending or correcting the minutes to accurately reflect the substance of the prior meeting. If objection is made by any Council member to such amendment or correction, a majority vote of the Council shall be necessary for adoption of the correction or amendment. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.100 Mayor – Election and duties.

A.    The presiding officer of the Council shall be the Mayor. The Mayor of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall be directly elected by the qualified electors of the Town beginning with the next regularly scheduled candidate election to be held in accordance with A.R.S. § 16-204. The Vice Mayor shall be elected every other year at the first meeting in June after the newly elected Council is seated by the Council members, from their membership.

B.    The Mayor shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the Council and confine Council members and others in debates to the question under discussion.

C.    The Mayor shall announce each agenda item to be considered and shall state every question coming before the Council, announce the decision of the Council on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the Council, in which event a majority vote of the Council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order.

D.    The Mayor may make motions and seconds to motions, and shall vote on all questions.

E.    The Mayor shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council during his/her presence. In the event of the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall sign ordinances or resolutions as then adopted. The Town Clerk shall attest all such signatures on ordinances and resolutions, and the Town Attorney shall approve them as to form.

F.    The Vice Mayor shall preside in the absence of the Mayor.

G.    In the absence of the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Council may call any other member to temporarily chair the meeting in order to take part in debate, to make a motion, or to cover a temporary absence. Such substitution shall not continue if the Mayor or Vice Mayor returns to preside over the meeting nor beyond adjournment.

H.    The Mayor, in consultation with the Town Manager, will set the agendas. (Ord. 16-400 § 2; Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.110 Call to order.

A.    The Mayor or Vice Mayor, in the Mayor’s absence, shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the Council to order.

B.    In the absence of the Mayor or Vice Mayor, the Town Clerk, or his/her assistant, shall call the Council to order, whereupon a temporary chair shall be elected by the members of the Council then present.

C.    Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Vice Mayor, the temporary chair shall immediately relinquish the position of presiding officer upon the conclusion of the agenda item or business immediately before the Council. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.120 Attendance by teleconference.

The Council may permit members to attend by teleconference in accordance with A.R.S. § 38-431 which permits attendance by technological devices, when such members are outside Navajo County, Arizona, on the date and time of the meeting. However, attendance by teleconference shall only be permitted when each and every Council member is able to hear the other members of the Council as well as other information presented by Town staff or the public. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.130 Quorum.

A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum and be necessary for the transaction of business. If a quorum is not present, those in attendance shall be named and shall adjourn to a later time. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.140 Order of business.

Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the Council shall take their regular stations in the Council Chambers, and the business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order:

A.    Ascertainment of quorum.

B.    Pledge of allegiance.

C.    Invocation.

D.    Consent agenda – Approval of minutes of previous meeting – Approval of expenditures and/or the check register.

E.    Business before the Council or the Board of Adjustment.

F.    Report of officers/boards/committees.

G.    Current events by Town Manager.

H.    Adjournment. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.150 Agenda.

A.    All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents, or other matters to be submitted to the Council for consideration shall be delivered to the Town Clerk at least eight (8) days prior to each Council meeting, whereupon the Town Clerk shall immediately arrange a list of such matters through the Town Manager according to the order of business and furnish each member of the Council, the Town Attorney and Town Manager with a copy of the same at least six (6) days, but no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the Council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.

B.    None of the foregoing matters shall be presented to the Council by administrative officials except those of an urgent nature, and the same, when so presented, shall have the approval of the Mayor before presentation.

C.    Consent Agenda.

1.    The consent agenda lists items that are of such a nature that discussion is not required, or concern issues that have been previously studied by the Town Council. These items may be adopted by one (1) motion.

2.    There is no detailed discussion on items listed under the consent agenda, unless a member of the Town Council requests that an item or items be removed for discussion. Council members may ask questions without removal of the item from the consent agenda.

3.    Items removed from the consent agenda are considered in their normal sequence as listed on the agenda, unless called out of sequence as provided for herein.

D.    Executive Sessions. The Mayor, Town Manager, and Town Attorney shall review the submittal for executive session discussion, prior to submission to the Town Clerk, to ensure that the item is legally permissible to be discussed in executive session pursuant to A.R.S. § 38-431.03. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.160 Public hearings.

A.    Generally public hearings, other than those of a quasi-judicial nature, shall be conducted in the following order:

1.    The Mayor will announce the agenda item as a public hearing, and ask staff to provide a short summary of the matter.

2.    The Mayor will then ask the applicant to speak on their application if they so desire.

3.    At the conclusion of the staff report and/or presentation by the applicant, the Mayor may allow for comments from the public.

4.    After all public comments are heard, the Mayor may ask staff or the applicant to respond to the comments.

5.    The Mayor may then close the public hearing and call for a motion and second (if applicable) and ask if Council wishes to discuss the issue. Council may then proceed to discuss the matter.

6.    Upon conclusion of the Council discussion, the Mayor will call for action on the motion.

B.    Questions or comments from the public shall be limited to the subject under consideration. Depending upon the extent of the agenda, and the number of persons desiring to speak on an issue, the Mayor may, at the beginning of the hearing, limit testimony to not more than five (5) minutes per individual. Upon approval of the Town Council, persons may be allowed to speak longer than five (5) minutes. Council members may ask the individual speaker questions, and the speaker may respond.

C.    Exhibits, letters, petitions, and other documentary items presented or shown to the Town Council at a public hearing item become part of the record of the public hearing. Twelve (12) collated sets of written or graphic materials should be provided by the speaker twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of the hearing to allow for distribution to the Town Council, Town staff, and a copy for the Town Clerk to include in the public record of the hearing.

D.    Quasi-judicial hearings, as when hearing appeals, shall be conducted in accordance with principles of due process, and the Town Attorney shall advise the Town Council in this regard. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.170 Rules of debate.

A.    The Mayor, or such other member of the Council as may be presiding, may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Council member by reason of acting as the presiding officer.

B.    Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair, and, upon resignation by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.

C.    A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to be called to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, be called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed.

D.    The Council member moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.

E.    A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Council may be made only at the meeting such action was taken. Such motion must be made by one (1) of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any member, and may be made at anytime and have precedence over all other motions or while a member has the floor; it shall be debatable. This shall not be construed to prevent the Council from amending or changing action on a similar item or topic at a subsequent meeting of the Council. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.180 Addressing the Council.

Any person desiring to address the Council by oral communication shall fill out a request to address the Council form and be recognized and called upon to speak by the Mayor when and if appropriate. The purpose of all public comments is to provide information and the speaker’s views for Council consideration. It is not appropriate for the speakers to question directly, or debate the matter under consideration with staff, other speakers, the audience, or members of the Council. The Council may question the speakers, any applicant’s representatives, or Town staff. Except when answering a direct question from a Council member, all remarks will be addressed to the Mayor and Council as a body, and not to individual members of the Council. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.190 Manner of addressing the Council – Time limit.

A.    Each person addressing the Council shall step up to the microphone at the podium, shall give his/her name and place of residence in an audible tone of voice for the record, and unless further time is granted by the Mayor shall limit his/her address to three (3) minutes for call to the public matters and five (5) minutes for business items on the agenda.

B.    All remarks shall be addressed to the Mayor and Council as a body and not to any member thereof.

C.    No person, other than the Council and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of the Mayor.

D.    No question shall be asked a Council member except through the Mayor.

E.    Time limit may be waived or extended by majority of the Town Council. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.200 Silence constitutes affirmative vote.

Unless a member of the Council states that he/she is not voting, his/her silence in failing to respond to the call for a vote shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.210 Decorum.

A.    Proper decorum must be observed by speakers in providing testimony and remarks. In the event of any delay, interruption, or interference, the Mayor will have the disruptive person(s) removed from the Council chambers.

B.    During a Council meeting, no person shall engage in conduct by conversation, laughter, applause, stamping of feet, or other conduct which delays, interrupts, or otherwise interferes with the proceedings or the peace of the Council. In the event of any such delay, interruption, or interference, the Mayor will have the disruptive person(s) removed from the Council chambers.

C.    Any member of the public desiring to address the Council shall proceed to the podium after having been recognized by the Mayor. Once at the podium, the speaker shall clearly state his or her name for the record, and shall remain at the podium unless excused or given permission by the Mayor to leave the podium. An accommodation will be made for those individuals whose physical limitations prohibit them from accessing the podium area. Any handouts the speaker wishes to present to the Town Council which have not been provided in advance of the meeting shall be given to the Town Clerk for review by the Town Council at a later time unless otherwise directed by the Mayor. Twelve (12) collated sets of written or graphic materials should be provided by the speaker prior to the commencement of the hearing to allow for distribution to the Town Council, Town staff, and a copy for the Town Clerk to include in the public record of the hearing.

D.    The Mayor shall keep control of the meeting, and require that the speakers refrain from abusive or profane remarks, disruptive outburst, protests, or other conduct which disrupts or interferes with the orderly conduct of the business of the meeting.

E.    Personal attacks on Council members, Town staff or members of the public shall not be allowed. Oral communications during the Town Council meeting may not be used to lodge charges or complaints against any employee of the Town, regardless of whether such employee is identified in the presentation by name or by other reference which tends to identify the employee. Any such charges or complaints against employees shall be submitted during normal business hours to the Town Manager for appropriate action.

F.    It is inappropriate to utilize the public hearing or other agenda item for the purpose of making political speeches, including threats of political action.

G.    After a motion has been made, or after a public hearing has been closed, no member of the public shall address the Council unless permission is granted by the Mayor. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.220 Enforcement of decorum.

A.    The Chief of Police, or such member or members of the Police Department as he may designate, or other person designated by the Mayor if no police officer be present, shall be Sergeant-at-Arms of the Council meetings. He, or they, shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the Mayor for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meeting.

B.    Upon instructions of the Mayor, it shall be the duty of the Sergeant-at-Arms, or any of them present, to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him to be prosecuted under the provisions of Town Code Chapter 1.20, the complaint to be signed by the Mayor. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.230 Council members may explain a "no" vote.

Council members shall have the right to have the reasons for his/her "no" vote or dissent from any action of the Council entered in the minutes during the discussion and vote of any agenda item. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.240 Ordinances, resolutions, motions and contracts.

A.    All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall be prepared or approved by the Town Attorney and the Town Manager or his/her designee. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the Council unless ordered by a majority vote of the Council, or requested by the Town Manager, or prepared by the Town Attorney or Town Manager on his/her own initiative.

B.    Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the Council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council, Town Attorney, or Town Manager.

C.    The Town Clerk shall prepare copies of all proposed ordinances for distribution to all members of the Council six (6) days, but no less than twenty-four (24) hours, before the Council meeting at which the ordinance is to be introduced.

D.    All ordinances shall have one (1) reading.

E.    The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the official record of the Council.

F.    In the event of a tie in votes on any motion, the motion shall be considered not passed.

G.    Upon passage, a number shall be assigned to each ordinance or resolution by the Town Clerk.

H.    When passed by the Council, an ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, be attested by the Town Clerk, and approved by the Town Attorney; and it shall be immediately filed and thereafter preserved in the office of the Town Clerk.

I.    Any three (3) members of the Town Council may request the Mayor or Town Manager to have prepared proposed ordinance(s) with such ordinance(s) to be placed on the agenda of the next scheduled Council meeting, provided the ordinance(s) can be drafted and distributed to members of the Council in accordance with time schedules set forth in subsection C of this section.

J.    Any member of the Town Council may request written legal opinions, relating to Town business, from the Town Manager.

K.    Upon receiving requests for a proposed ordinance or a written legal opinion, the Town Manager shall forthwith request same from the Town Attorney; and upon return receipt thereof, the Town Manager shall forthwith cause to have distributed the subject ordinance or written legal opinion to all members of the Council so that all members of the Council may be fully informed of the status of Town affairs.

L.    Any member of the Council may, for purposes of inquiry, request verbal opinions or advice on Town legal matters directly from the Town Attorney. The Town Attorney will distribute or report his/her response to such inquiries to the entire Council and the Town Manager except with respect to inquiries made about conflicts of interest or private legal matters to which confidentiality is required by law.

M.    Emergency ordinances may be used to take action required by resolution or ordinance in a timely fashion. No actual emergency is called for or required. Use of the emergency clause may be warranted when urgency calls for immediate action, as the thirty (30) day period can stop commercial deals, cost the Town money, or create unnecessary risk of litigation. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.250 Reports and resolutions to be filed with clerk.

All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the Clerk and entered in the minutes. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.260 Adjournment.

Unless the Council votes to adjourn a meeting, the Council meeting will be adjourned by the Mayor when the business of the Town Council has been completed. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.280 Creation of committees, boards and commissions.

A.    The Council may create or reconvene committees, boards, and commissions to assist in the conduct of the operation of the Town government with such duties as the Council may specify not inconsistent with the Town Code.

B.    Membership and selection of members shall be as provided by the Council if not specified by the Town Code.

C.    Any committee, board, or commission so created shall cease to exist upon the accomplishment of the special purpose for which it was created, or when abolished by a majority vote of the Council.

D.    No committee so appointed shall have powers other than advisory to the Council or the Town Manager except as otherwise specified by the Town Code. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


2.04.290 Suspension and amendment of these rules.

A.    Any provision of these rules not governed by the Town Code may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of the Council. The vote on any such suspension shall be taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the record.

B.    These rules may be amended, or new rules adopted, by a majority vote of all members of the Council; provided, that the proposed amendments or new rules shall have been introduced into the record at a prior Council meeting. (Ord. 07-305 § 2 (part))


Chapter 2.08 TOWN MANAGER

Sections:

2.08.010    Office created.

2.08.020    Eligibility.

2.08.030    Bond.

2.08.040    Compensation.

2.08.050    Removal from office.

2.08.060    Absence.

2.08.070    Powers and duties.

2.08.080    Authority of the Town Manager to negotiate and settle claims.

2.08.090    Limitations upon responsibility.

2.08.100    Council interference.

2.08.110    Conduct.

2.08.120    Resignation of Manager.


2.08.010 Office created.

The office of the Town Manager of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside is created and established. The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and his or her knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. This office is created pursuant to the authority granted by A.R.S. § 9-303 which authorizes the Town by ordinance to create the office of Manager who shall have and exercise the powers and perform the duties relating to the affairs of the Town as shall be specified by ordinance. This office is also subject to other applicable provisions of state statutes including A.R.S. §§ 9-237 and 9-239. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.020 Eligibility.

Residence in the Town, at the time of appointment, shall not be required as a condition thereof. No person elected to membership on the Council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as Town Manager until one (1) year has elapsed after he or she has ceased to be a member of the Council. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.030 Bond.

The Town Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the Council in such sum as may be determined by the Council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the Town Manager as herein prescribed. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.040 Compensation.

The Manager shall receive such compensation as the Council shall from time to time determine and fix by ordinance, resolution, or motion, and said compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the Town as the Council shall designate. The Town Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the Town under direction of the Council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, with receipts and/or invoices attached thereto, setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented, but may not exceed any per diem or limitations set in Town policies or rules unless approved and allowed by the Council. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.050 Removal from office.

The Town Manager may be removed, with or without cause by the Town Council, by simple majority vote of its members. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.060 Absence.

To perform the duties of Town Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the permanent Town Manager, the Town Manager may designate by letter, filed with the Clerk, a qualified administrative officer of the Town to be chosen from current employees thereof. In the event of failure of the Town Manager to make such designation the Council may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the Town to perform the duties of the Manager until the Manager shall have returned or his or her disability shall have ceased. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.070 Powers and duties.

The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Town government and shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the Town under the direction and control of the Council. In addition to the general powers as the chief administrative officer and the head of the administrative branch of the Town government, and not as a limitation thereon, the Manager shall have the powers, responsibilities, and duties set forth in the following subsections:

A.    Execute on behalf of the Mayor and Council general administrative supervision and control of the affairs of the Town, and enforce the ordinances, resolutions and codes of the Town.

B.    It shall be the duty of the Manager to attend all meetings of the Council unless he or she is excused therefrom by the Mayor individually or the Council. It is the Manager’s responsibility to make recommendations to the Council for the adoption of such resolutions, ordinances and other measures as he or she deems reasonable and necessary. It is the Manager’s responsibility to be prepared to report on or discuss any matter concerning the affairs of the departments, boards, services, or activities under his or her supervision.

C.    Coordinate the administrative functions and operations of the various departments, boards, divisions, and services of the Town government, and on its behalf, carry out policies, rules, regulations, and ordinances adopted by it, relating to the administration of the affairs of such departments, boards, divisions, or services.

D.    Appoint/hire, remove, suspend, promote, and demote the employees of the Town. The Manager or his or her designee will be the Human Resources/Personnel Director. 

E.    The head of each department shall be hired/appointed by and report to the Town Manager subject to approval of the hiring/appointment including starting compensation by the Town Council. Any department head who is demoted or terminated by the Manager may appeal that action to the Town Council in accordance with procedures in the Town’s Employee Manual.

F.    He or she may make recommendations regarding the appointment and removal of Council-appointed officers; and members of boards, commissions and committees appointed by the Council. 

G.    Supervise and be responsible for all expenditures of the Town including all departments, divisions, or services of the Town government. The Manager or their designee will act as purchasing agent for the purchase of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment, and material which may be required for any of such departments, divisions, or services within the existing budget; provided, that no single purchase or group of purchases of like items shall total more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) unless approved by Council action.

H.    Analyze and supervise the functions, duties and activities of the various departments, boards, and services of the Town government and of all employees thereof, and make such recommendations to the Town Council with reference thereto as in his or her judgment will result, if made effective, in the highest degree of efficiency in the overall operation of the Town government.

I.    Develop and organize necessary improvement projects and programs and aid and assist the Council and the various departments and boards in carrying the same through to a successful implementation and/or conclusion.

J.    To keep the Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the Town and to provide whatever reports to the Council as it may deem necessary. It shall further be his or her duty to see that no indebtedness is incurred or expenditure made in violation of the Arizona Constitution and Statutes, the State Budget Law, and any other applicable law rule or regulation. It is the Manager’s responsibility to thoroughly review and see to the preparation and timely processing of an annual budget for Council approval.

K.    Serve as or designate a public relations officer of the Town government, and follow through and endeavor to appropriately address all complaints filed against any employee, department, or service thereof to the end that every effort may be made to satisfy all citizens that their Town government is being operated in their behalf with the highest degree of efficiency and integrity.

L.    Cooperate with all community organizations whose aim and purpose it is to advance the spiritual and material interests of the Town and its residents to provide them with all reasonable assistance obtainable through the Town government within the limitations of the law.

M.    Make and keep an up-to-date inventory of all personal property owned by the Town and recommend to the Town Council the purchase of new machinery, equipment, and supplies whenever, in his or her judgment, the same can be obtained at the best advantage, taking into consideration trade in value of machinery, equipment, etc., in use.

N.    Make, or cause to be made, studies and surveys of the duties, responsibilities, and work of the personnel in the various departments and services of the Town government, and to recommend to the Town Council abolition or consolidation of positions, offices, departments or units whenever, in his or her judgment, such action would increase efficiency in the administration of the Town government.

O.    See that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the Town are faithfully observed.

P.    To devote as much time to the duties of the office of Town Manager and the interest of the Town as is necessary.

Q.    To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the Town.

R.    Ensure that all warrants or checks drawn on the bank account or accounts of the Town are issued in accordance with Town Code or policies approved by the Council. All warrants or checks shall have two (2) authorized signatures, typically from the Town Clerk and Finance Director. The Town Manager, Mayor and Vice Mayor, or other Council member (approved by the Council) are also authorized to countersign checks. 

S.    Perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by the Mayor and Town Council. (Ord. 18-415 § 3, 2018; Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.080 Authority of the Town Manager to negotiate and settle claims.

A.    Town Manager is authorized to negotiate and settle claims and disputes brought against the Town, its officers, appointees and employees, subject to the following conditions:

1.    The Town Manager or the Town Manager’s designated representative has made a thorough investigation regarding questions of liability and damages and has determined a reasonable dollar value of the claim.

2.    The claim and any proposed settlement has been reviewed and approved by the Mayor and the Town Attorney.

3.    The settlement is conditioned upon an appropriate written release signed by the claimant in favor of and releasing the Town, its officers, appointees and employees.

4.    Following any settlement of a claim or lawsuit, the circumstances and conditions of the settlement are reported to the Town Council at a public meeting.

B.    The settlement authority of the Town Manager is limited in the following respects:

1.    For claims which have been submitted to the Town’s insurance carrier, contingent upon the review and approval of the Mayor and the Town Attorney.

2.    The Town Manager is authorized to settle any claims not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for settlement of claims or disputes made in connection with easements and property acquisitions or condemnation actions. Such settlement shall be reviewed and approved by the Mayor, the Town Attorney and, when applicable, the Town Engineer.

3.    For any other claims presented to the Town, including but not limited to claims for bodily injury, property damage or claims in settlement of personnel actions, the Town Manager shall have authority to settle such claims for an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000). Such settlement shall be reviewed and approved by the Mayor and the Town Attorney.

4.    The Town Manager or his/her designee may process workers’ compensation claims in accordance with the Arizona workers’ compensation statutes (currently A.R.S. § 23-901 et seq.), and the provisions of the Town Employee Manual.

C.    All other claims, which cannot be resolved within the parameters set forth above, will be submitted to the Town Council for discussion and review, and approval or denial.

D.    The Town Manager will submit to the Town Council a periodic report of all claims and lawsuits made, in progress, settled and concluded. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.090 Limitations upon responsibility.

The Town Manager shall not exercise any policy making or legislative functions whatsoever, nor attempt to commit or bind the Town Council or any member thereof to any action, plan or program requiring official action of the Town Council. It is not intended by this chapter to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon, the Town Manager which is vested in or imposed by general law or Town ordinances in any Town commission, board, officer, or employee except as herein specifically set forth. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.100 Council interference.

Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Town Manager, and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the Town Manager, either publicly or privately, without the permission of the Town Manager. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.110 Conduct.

In the discharge of his or her duties as Town Manager the person holding such position shall endeavor at all times to exercise tact, patience, and courtesy in his or her contacts with the public and with all Town boards, departments, and employees, and shall use his or her best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious relationship between all personnel employed in the government of the Town to the end that the highest possible standards of public service shall be maintained continuously. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


2.08.120 Resignation of Manager.

The Manager shall provide the Council with thirty (30) days’ written notice of intention to resign his or her position. The Manager shall assist the Council on their recruitment and selection of a replacement if requested by the Council. In the event of resignation due to health reasons or other reasons which a majority vote of the Council deems an emergency, the period of written notice shall be determined in conference between the Manager and the Town Council. (Ord. 13-375 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 2.10 TOWN ATTORNEY

Sections:

2.10.010    Appointment.

2.10.020    Duties.

2.10.030    Removal from office.


2.10.010 Appointment.

The Town Council shall appoint the Town Attorney, who shall be an attorney at law, duly licensed and in good standing to practice law in the State of Arizona and shall further have the qualifications as deemed necessary by the Council. (Ord. 08-307 § 1 (part))


2.10.020 Duties.

The Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the Council, Town Manager, and other Town officials, and as such shall give his or her opinion in writing when requested. The Attorney shall work in cooperation with the Town Manager and shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the Council or Town Manager. He or she shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance thereof by the Council. The Attorney shall return all ordinances and resolutions submitted to him or her for consideration by the Council, with his or her approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with the reasons therefor. The Attorney shall prosecute and defend all code violations, state law offenses, suits, actions or causes where the Town is a party, or will advise the Town Manager and the Town Council about the need for outside legal counsel on Town legal matters, and shall report to the Council, when required, the condition of any suit or action to which the Town is a party. (Ord. 08-307 § 1 (part))


2.10.030 Removal from office.

The Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and may be removed by a majority vote of the members of the Council then holding office. (Ord. 08-307 § 1 (part))


Chapter 2.12 TOWN CLERK

Sections:

2.12.010    Creation of office.

2.12.020    Records management.

2.12.030    Public inspection of records.

2.12.040    Recording, transcribing, posting minutes of Town Council meetings.

2.12.050    Preparation of agendas and packets.

2.12.060    Maintenance of the Town website.

2.12.070    Ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices.

2.12.080    Updating the Town Code.

2.12.090    Retain custody of the Town seal.

2.12.100    Treasurer.

2.12.110    Administer oaths.

2.12.120    Election Official.

2.12.130    Additional administrative duties.


2.12.010 Creation of office.

The office of Town Clerk is created and established in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes including A.R.S. §§ 9-237, 9-238, and 9-239. The Town Clerk shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Council under the supervision of the Town Manager. The Town Clerk shall be an "at will" employee of the Town. (Ord. 16-399: Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.020 Records management.

The Town Clerk will keep a true and correct record of all business transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain to the business of the Town or that the Council directs. The Town Clerk will be the custodian of all Town documents and is responsible for maintenance and destruction of all official Town records pursuant to the Arizona State Records Retention Schedule. The Town Clerk will keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept on file so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.030 Public inspection of records. 

The Town Clerk will keep convenient for public inspection all public records and public documents under his or her control, as provided by state statute. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.040 Recording, transcribing, posting minutes of Town Council meetings.

It will be the duty of the Town Clerk, or his or her deputy or designee, to attend all meetings of the Town Council, unless by request he or she is excused therefrom by the Mayor individually or by the Town Council. The Town Clerk will prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of Town Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy. The Town Clerk’s Department may also be responsible for recording minutes of any other committees that may be established from time to time by the Town Council, and that meet the requirements of the Open Meeting Law. The Town Clerk will prepare legal action of the Town Council meetings and post same to the Town’s website in compliance with state statutes. The Town Clerk will post the minutes of the Town Council meetings to the Town’s website after approval by the Town Council. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.050 Preparation of agendas and packets.

The Town Clerk will prepare agendas for Town Council meetings for review by the Town Manager and Mayor normally seven (7) days prior to the Council meeting. The Town Clerk will be responsible for the preparation of the agenda packets for Town Council meetings and will deliver them to Town Council members normally six (6) days prior to the Town Council meeting. The Town Clerk is also responsible for or will oversee the preparation of all agendas and packets for all boards, commissions, committees and other "public bodies" of the Town that are subject to the Open Meeting Laws of this state. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.060 Maintenance of the Town website.

The Town Clerk’s Department is responsible for keeping the minutes, agendas, ordinances, and resolutions current and overseeing their posting to the Town’s website, or such other website as may be required or allowed by state statute. In addition, the Town Clerk’s Department will maintain the Town’s website, as well as the Town Council information section and employment opportunities. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.070 Ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices. 

The Town Clerk will process, record, file, post, and if required by state statute, publish all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may be passed by the Town Council in accordance with the Town Code, or approved policies, or as required by state statute. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.080 Updating the Town Code.

The Town Clerk is responsible for updating the Town Code from time to time due to the adoption of ordinances by the Town Council, and is authorized to correct obvious errors, omissions, and inconsistencies. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.090 Retain custody of the Town seal.

The Town seal is maintained by the Town Clerk and is used on and/or affixed to official Town documents. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.100 Treasurer. 

The Town Clerk shall be Treasurer of the Town (as currently provided in A.R.S. § 9-238), but these duties of Treasurer of the Town are delegated to the Town Manager and Finance Director, who shall have the responsibility, care, control, and custody of the revenue of the Town. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.110 Administer oaths.

The Town Clerk may administer an oath of office to the newly elected Town Council members at a date and time in accordance with state statute. The Town Clerk, or his or her designee, may also administer an oath of office to any new and reinstated employees, members to boards, committees, or commissions. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.120 Election Official. 

The Town Clerk will be the Town Election Official and perform all duties required by state statute for Town elections. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.12.130 Additional administrative duties. 

In addition to those specified in this code, the Town Clerk will perform those administrative responsibilities and duties that are conferred upon him or her by the Town Council or Town Manager, and such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))

 


Chapter 2.14 TOWN MAGISTRATE AND COURT ADMINISTRATIVE FEES

Sections:

2.14.010    Created.

2.14.020    Appointment – Removal – Compensation.

2.14.030    Powers and duties of Magistrate.

2.14.040    Magistrate Court.

2.14.050    Conduct of proceedings.

2.14.060    Fee to defray Court automation costs.

2.14.070    Fee to defray costs associated with FTA warrants.

2.14.080    Fee to defray costs associated with civil traffic defaults.

2.14.090    Surcharge fee to be applied to all civil traffic fines, civil penalties and criminal fines imposed for violations of the Town Code.

2.14.100    Time payment plans for civil traffic fines and Town Code violations – Time payment fee.


2.14.010 Created.

The position of "Town Magistrate" is created. The Town Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the Magistrate Court and shall perform those functions necessary to the maintenance of a Magistrate’s Court as provided by state statute and pursuant to the orders, rules and regulations of the Arizona Supreme Court. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part); Ord. 85-16 § 1. Formerly 2.12.010)


2.14.020 Appointment – Removal – Compensation.

A.    The Town Magistrate shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall serve a two (2) year term, at a minimum, and up to a four (4) year term with the beginning and end of the term specified at the time of appointment; and there may be provided a written contract to be approved by the Magistrate and the Town Council. During such term, the Magistrate may be removed only for cause. The compensation of the Magistrate shall be set by the Town Council at the time of appointment and may not be reduced during the term of service. 

B.    In the event of a vacancy of the Town Magistrate, the Town Council may appoint an interim magistrate to serve. The interim magistrate shall serve until the end of the term or until a Town Magistrate is appointed in accordance with this section. The interim magistrate should not serve for more than six (6) months. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part); Ord. 85-16 § 2. Formerly 2.12.020)


2.14.030 Powers and duties of Magistrate.

The powers and duties of the Magistrate are those set forth and conferred upon him or her under the provisions of the State Constitution and statutes, the rules and regulations of the Arizona Supreme Court, this Code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the Town. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.14.040 Magistrate Court.

There is established in the Town a Magistrate Court which shall be the police court of the Town and which shall have jurisdiction in accordance with the State Constitution and statutes and over all violations of Town ordinances, civil traffic violations, and jurisdiction concurrently with justices of the peace court(s) of precincts in which the Town is located of violations of state laws committed within the limits of the Town. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.14.050 Conduct of proceedings.

The proceedings of the Municipal Court shall be conducted in accordance with the State Constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the State Supreme Court pertaining to police or magistrate courts. The proceedings shall also be conducted in accordance with the rules of criminal procedure of the Superior Court, unless otherwise prescribed, and providing this Code and resolutions of the Town are not in conflict therewith. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


2.14.060 Fee to defray Court automation costs.

A.    Basis for Court Automation Fee. The Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court has established a coordinated plan for the automation of cases and cash-flow management and seeks to offset the annual maintenance and support of automation equipment and programs. The Court Administrator has performed an analysis of the number of cases closed in the Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court over a four (4) year period, as well as the annual cost of Court automation, and has determined that the actual cost of Court automation on a per charge basis exceeds six dollars ($6.00) per charge.

B.    Court Automation Fee. There is imposed an administrative fee of six dollars ($6.00) per charge to be collected in cases filed in the Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court. This fee shall be collected at the time of filing of each civil action filed by a private plaintiff; as part of the fines, fees and surcharges imposed in each criminal action resulting in a conviction; and as part of the civil sanctions, fees and assessments in each civil traffic action in which judgment is entered in favor of the state. This fee may be waived only in cases of extreme financial hardship as determined by the Town Magistrate. All such fees shall be deposited monthly to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Treasurer and held in a separate account for the sole purpose of defraying costs associated with the annual maintenance and support of Court automation equipment and programs. This fee shall not be subject to any fees or surcharges adopted by the State of Arizona and shall be in addition to any other fees adopted by the Town.

C.    Annual Review. The fee imposed by subsection B of this section shall be reviewed annually by the Court Administrator to ensure that the amount collected does not substantially exceed (or fail to defray) the actual costs associated with the maintenance and support of Court automation equipment and programs. If appropriate, the Court Administrator shall recommend an upward or downward adjustment of the fee to the Town Council prior to the start of the next fiscal year. (Ord. 15-386 § 1; Ord. 14-385 § 1; Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part); Ord. 08-312 § 2. Formerly 2.28.010)


2.14.070 Fee to defray costs associated with FTA warrants.

A.    Basis for FTA Warrant Fee. The Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court incurs substantial costs in criminal (including criminal traffic) cases where the defendant fails to appear and a failure to appear ("FTA") warrant must be issued and processed. These costs are incurred by the Court and by the affected law enforcement officials including the Town Police Department. The Court Administrator has performed an analysis of these costs and has determined that they are approximately one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per case, with approximately one-third of this amount incurred by the Court and approximately two-thirds incurred by the Police Department.

B.    FTA Warrant Fee. Based on the analysis of the Court Administrator, there is imposed an administrative fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per case to be collected in criminal cases filed in the Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court in which an FTA warrant is used. This fee shall be imposed in each criminal case in which an FTA warrant is issued. This fee may be waived only in cases of extreme financial hardship as determined by the Town Magistrate, or in cases where the FTA warrant is quashed for good cause shown and the Town Magistrate determines that a waiver is appropriate. All such fees shall be deposited monthly with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Treasurer and held in a separate account for the sole purpose of defraying costs associated with the issuance and processing of FTA warrants. The funds so deposited may be divided between the Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court (one-third) and the Police Department (two-thirds). This fee shall not be subject to any fees or surcharges adopted by the State of Arizona and shall be in addition to any other fees adopted by the Town.

C.    Annual Review. The fee imposed by subsection B of this section shall be reviewed annually by the Court Administrator to ensure that the amount collected does not substantially exceed (or fail to defray) the actual costs associated with the issuance and processing of FTA warrants. If appropriate, the Court Administrator shall recommend an upward or downward adjustment of the fee to the Town Council prior to the start of the next fiscal year. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part). Formerly 2.28.020)


2.14.080 Fee to defray costs associated with civil traffic defaults.

A.    Basis for Civil Traffic Default Fee. The Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court incurs substantial costs in civil traffic cases where the defendant defaults in the payment of a civil sanction and the Court must take steps to collect the sanction and notify the Motor Vehicle Department pursuant to A.R.S. § 22-404(E). The Court Administrator has performed an analysis of these costs and has determined that they are approximately thirty dollars ($30.00) per case.

B.    Civil Traffic Default Fee. Based on the analysis of the Court Administrator, there is imposed an administrative fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per case to be collected in civil traffic cases filed in the Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court where the defendant defaults in the payment of a civil sanction. This fee may be waived only in cases of extreme financial hardship as determined by the judge. All such fees shall be deposited monthly with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Treasurer and held in a separate account for the sole purpose of defraying costs associated with collecting civil traffic sanctions and notifying the Motor Vehicle Department pursuant to A.R.S. § 22-404(E). This fee shall not be subject to any fees or surcharges adopted by the State of Arizona and shall be in addition to any other fees adopted by the Town.

C.    Annual Review. The fee imposed by subsection B of this section shall be reviewed annually by the Court Administrator to ensure that the amount collected does not substantially exceed (or fail to defray) the actual costs associated with collecting civil traffic sanctions and notifying the Motor Vehicle Department. If appropriate, the Court Administrator shall recommend an upward or downward adjustment of the fee to the Town Council prior to the start of the next fiscal year. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part). Formerly 2.28.030)


2.14.090 Surcharge fee to be applied to all civil traffic fines, civil penalties and criminal fines imposed for violations of the Town Code.

A.    Basis for Surcharge Fee. The Town and the Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court incur substantial costs in enforcing civil traffic matters and fines, and civil and criminal sections and penalties of the Town Code. These costs are incurred by both the Magistrate Court and the Town, including the Town Police Department, Community Development Department officials and the Town Attorney. The Court Administrator has performed an analysis of these costs and has determined that they are approximately seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per violation with a portion (approximately forty-five (45%) percent) going to the State of Arizona as a surcharge, a portion (approximately five (5%) percent) of this amount for direct costs incurred by the Court, and the remainder (approximately fifty (50%) percent) incurred by the various Town departments as the cost of enforcement and prosecution.

B.    Surcharge Fee and Disbursement. Based upon the analysis of the Court Administrator, there is hereby imposed a surcharge fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each civil traffic violation, for each violation, both civil and criminal, of the Town Code. This surcharge fee may be waived only in cases of extreme financial hardship as determined by the Town Magistrate. All of the surcharge fees collected shall be deposited monthly with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall pay the State of Arizona the portion of the funds which constitute the state surcharge, and shall hold the remaining funds in a separate account for the sole purpose of defraying costs associated with the annual maintenance and support of Court automation monthly with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Treasurer and held in a separate account to be distributed and used only for the purposes set forth in this section.

C.    Annual Review. The fee imposed by subsection B of this section shall be reviewed annually by the Court Administrator to ensure that the amount collected does not substantially exceed (or fail to defray) the actual costs associated with enforcing the civil and criminal sections and penalties of the Town Code as well as the civil traffic infractions set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes. If appropriate, the Court Administrator shall recommend an upward or downward adjustment of the surcharge fee to the Town Council prior to the start of the next fiscal year. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part); Ord. 11-351 § 1: Ord. 07-306 § 1. Formerly 2.28.040)


2.14.100 Time payment plans for civil traffic fines and Town Code violations – Time payment fee.

A.    Time Payment Plans. The Pinetop-Lakeside Magistrate Court is authorized to set up payment plans for persons unable to pay amounts assessed for civil traffic fines, and for civil or criminal violations of the Town Code. Payment plans may extend for no more than one (1) year except in cases of extreme hardship in which case the Town Magistrate shall set up a fair and equitable time for payment.

B.    Time Payment Fee – Civil Traffic. Based upon the analysis of the Court Administrator, there is hereby imposed a time payment fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each payment plan for civil traffic violation(s). This time payment fee may be waived only in cases of extreme financial hardship as determined by the Town Magistrate. This ten dollar ($10.00) time payment fee shall be collected, then paid monthly to Navajo County Collections pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement between the Town and Navajo County. This time payment fee shall not be subject to any fees or surcharges adopted by the State of Arizona and shall be in addition to any other fees, penalties or fines adopted by the Town.

C.    Time Payment Fee – Town Code. Based upon the analysis of the Court Administrator, there is hereby imposed a time payment fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each payment plan for any civil violation or criminal violation of the Town Code. This time payment fee may be waived only in cases of extreme financial hardship as determined by the Town Magistrate. Twenty dollars ($20.00) of the time payment fees collected shall be paid monthly to Navajo County Collections pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement between the Town and Navajo County, and ten dollars ($10.00) shall be deposited monthly with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Treasurer and held in a separate account for the sole purpose of defraying the costs associated with the collection of these time payment plans by various Town departments and the Town Attorney. This time payment fee shall not be subject to any fees or surcharges adopted by the State of Arizona and shall be in addition to any other fees, penalties or fines adopted by the Town.

D.    Annual Review. The fees imposed by subsections B and C of this section shall be reviewed annually by the Court Administrator to ensure that the amount collected does not substantially exceed (or fail to defray) the actual costs associated with collecting the civil traffic fines, and the civil and criminal penalties of the Town Code. If appropriate, the Court Administrator shall recommend an upward or downward adjustment of the time payment fee to the Town Council prior to the start of the next fiscal year. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part); Ord. 04-233; Ord. 04-230. Formerly 2.28.050)


Chapter 2.16 PLANNING DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.16.010    Designated.


2.16.010 Designated.

The Town Staff within the Town Planning and Zoning Department is designated as the "Planning Agency" and "Planning Department" in accordance with ARS 9-461 (3). (Ord. 86-46 § 1)


Chapter 2.18 TOWN MARSHAL/CHIEF OF POLICE

Sections:

2.18.010    Appointment – Removal – Compensation.


2.18.010 Appointment – Removal – Compensation.

The Town Marshal shall be the Chief of Police, who will be appointed by the Town Manager subject to the approval of the Town Council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Manager, performing such duties as may be required by law and as the Manager may deem necessary. The Chief of Police may be removed by the Manager with or without cause subject to prior approval by the Town Council. The Chief of Police may be provided a written employment contract approved by the Chief of Police and the Town Council. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 2.20 ELECTIONS

Sections:

2.20.010    Adoption of optional procedure for municipal elections as authorized in ARS Section 9-821.01.

2.20.020    Change in polling place.

2.20.030    Mail ballot election.


2.20.010 Adoption of optional procedure for municipal elections as authorized in ARS Section 9-821.01.

A.    Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of all the votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he or she is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate; provided that if more candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled, those candidates equal in number to the offices to be filled with the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.

B.    Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the support of the candidate.

C.    If at any primary election held as above provided there be any office for which no candidate is elected, then as to such office, the primary election shall be considered to be a primary election for nomination of candidates for such office, and the general municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill such office. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the general municipal election shall be those not elected at the primary election and, shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office or less than that number if there be less than that number names on the primary election ballot. Persons who receive the highest number of votes for the respective offices at such first election shall be the only candidates at such second election, provided that if there be any person who, under the provisions of this chapter, would have been entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of votes therefore, then all such persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for such office.

D.    The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. (Ord. 84-4 §§ 1--4)


2.20.020 Change in polling place.

The Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, authorize a change in polling place for Town Elections from the Blue Ridge High School Auditorium to the Town Office Complex. (Ord. 93-98)


2.20.030 Mail ballot election.

A.    The Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may choose to conduct any Town election as a mail ballot election.

B.    All Town elections held on the same date shall use the same method of voting.

C.    Any elector who receives a mail ballot may vote a provisional ballot, subject to verification by the Town Clerk that the elector has not already voted a mail ballot.

D.    The Town Clerk shall supply printed instructions to mail ballot voters. The mail ballot voter shall complete and sign the ballot affidavit, mark the ballot in such a manner that the vote cannot be seen, put it in the envelope provided for that purpose, seal the envelope, and deliver or mail the envelope to the Town Clerk. Voters may return the ballot and affidavit to the Town Clerk no later than 7:00 p.m. on Election Day. (Ord. 06-268)


Chapter 2.22 TOWN ENGINEER

Sections:

2.22.010    Designated. 


2.22.010 Designated. 

The Town may employ or contract with consultants for professional engineering. Subject to the approval of the Town Council, the Town Manager has the authority to appoint/hire an appropriately credentialed and licensed professional engineer. The Town Engineer may also serve as Public Works Director at the discretion of the Town Manager with the approval of the Town Council. The Town Manager may terminate the services of the Town Engineer subject to the prior approval of the Town Council. (Ord. 13-378 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 2.24 FORFEITURE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY

Sections:

2.24.010    Definitions.

2.24.020    Disposal of weapons.

2.24.030    Disposal of spirituous liquor.

2.24.040    Disposal of property used in the commission of a crime.

2.24.050    Disposal of other property.

2.24.060    Disposal of money.

2.24.070    Conversion to Town use.

2.24.080    Certificate of ownership, sale.

2.24.090    Town employees excluded.

2.24.100    Notices.

2.24.110    Records.


2.24.010 Definitions.

A.    In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.    "Abandoned property" means that personal property to which the owner has relinquished all right, title, claim, and possession, with the intention of not reclaiming it or resuming its ownership, possession or enjoyment.

2.    "Finder" means a person, not an owner, who accidentally and lawfully comes into possession of personal property. A finder cannot be an employee of the Town.

3.    "Lost property" means personal property which the owner has casually and involuntarily parted with and does not know where to find or recover it. Lost property shall not include property which has been intentionally concealed or deposited in a secret place for safe keeping.

4.    "Owner" means the person in whom is vested the legal right, ownership, dominion, or title of personal property. Owner may also include a person in whose favor there is a security interest or who is the beneficiary of a perfected lien or an encumbrance pertaining to an interest in personal property, but such person shall not have rights superior to the owner who is not a secured party.

5.    "Personal property" means that kind of property which usually consists of things tangible and movable which is not real property. In addition, as used in this chapter, personal property shall not include motor vehicles or animals.

6.    "Spirituous liquor" includes alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer, any malt liquor, malt beverage, absinthe or compound or mixture of any of them, or any of them with any vegetable or other substance, alcohol, bitters, bitters containing alcohol, and any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which produced intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits, and beverages containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume.

7.    "Stolen property" means that personal property which has been unlawfully taken and carried away without right or pretense of title, and without leave or consent of the owner.

8.    "Weapon" means any firearm, spring gun, air gun or gas operated gun or any other like device, capable of discharging a dangerous or deadly missile, or any other thing designed for lethal use or which is capable of inflicting serious bodily injury. Weapon shall not include a firearm in permanently inoperable condition. (Ord. 91-86 § 1)


2.24.020 Disposal of Weapons.

A.    All weapons, explosives, or other dangerous instruments which are seized by police officers in the line of duty and forfeited in accordance with Title 13, Arizona Revised Statutes, shall be disposed of in accordance with Title 13, Arizona Revised Statutes.

B.    All weapons, explosives or other dangerous instruments which are seized, confiscated or impounded as a result of an arrest pertaining to the commission of a crime may be returned to a person when permitted by law after such person is adjudged not guilty or where all criminal charges are dismissed.

C.    If the owner of a lost, abandoned or stolen weapon cannot be located within ninety (90) days from the date such weapon comes into police custody, the weapon shall be returned to the finder where permitted by law. If the finder does not want the weapon or the finder fails to respond to notices, the weapon shall become the property of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Police Department. (Ord. 91-86 § 2)


2.24.030 Disposal of spirituous liquor.

A.    Spirituous liquor seized by a police officer in the line of duty pursuant to a violation of any federal, state or local law shall be destroyed by the Police Department sixty (60) days following the conviction of the owner or possessor of such spirituous liquor.

B.    In the event that such person is found not guilty or in the event that all criminal charges against such person are dismissed, the spirituous liquor may be returned to the owner where permitted by law.

C.    Lost, abandoned or stolen spirituous liquor that is in the possession of the Police Department may be returned to the owner where permitted by law. (Ord. 91-86 § 3)


2.24.040 Disposal of property used in the commission of a crime.

Upon the conviction of any person for the violation of a criminal offense as defined in Title 13, Arizona Revised Statutes, personal property which was seized, confiscated or otherwise impounded by police officers in the line of duty shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with Title 13, Chapter 39, Arizona Revised Statutes. (Ord. 91-86 § 4)


2.24.050 Disposal of other property.

A.    Lost, abandoned or stolen personal property received or in the custody of the Police Department shall be retained for a period of ninety (90) days. During this ninety (90) day period, the Police Department shall make reasonable attempts to identify the owner of such personal property and to notify the owner that the personal property is in the custody of the Police Department. Personal property shall be returned to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership.

B.    In the event that an owner does not respond to notices concerning personal property, or in the event that an owner disclaims interest or otherwise declines to reclaim the personal property, the personal property shall be offered to the finder.

C.    In the event that personal property is offered to a finder, a finder shall be entitled to notice. In the event that a finder fails to respond to such notice within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of notice, the personal property shall be considered forfeited and may be sold at public auction, may become the property of the Town, or may be destroyed. (Ord. 91-86 § 5)


2.24.060 Disposal of Money.

A.    Money or currency, excepting rare coins or coins or currency with numismatic value, which is received or in the custody of the Police Department, shall be deposited in the general fund of the Town through the Town Finance Director where an owner or finder does not claim or reclaim possession of such money or currency.

B.    Rare coins or coins and currency with numismatic value shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.24.050. (Ord. 91-86 § 6)


2.24.070 Conversion to Town use.

Personal property that has not been reclaimed by an owner or claimed by a finder in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, may be converted to Town ownership and use. (Ord. 91-86 § 7)


2.24.080 Certificate of ownership, sale.

A.    On delivery of personal property to a finder in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall execute a certificate of ownership of the property to the finder which certificate shall pass title of the property to the finder.

B.    On delivery of personal property to a purchaser of any property sold under the provisions of this chapter, a certificate of ownership shall be issued by the Chief of Police or his or her designee which certificate shall pass title of the property to the purchaser.

C.    On delivery of personal property or other forfeiture of personal property to the Town, a certificate of ownership shall be issued by the Chief of Police or his or her designee to the Town which certificate shall pass title of the property to the Town. (Ord. 91-86 § 8)


2.24.090 Town employees excluded.

Employees of the Town who find or otherwise come into possession of lost, abandoned or stolen property shall not claim any right, title or interest in the personal property. A Town employee shall not qualify as a finder of personal property pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 91-86 § 9)


2.24.100 Notices.

A.    Notice shall be given to owners and finders (if applicable) of personal property before such property may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such notices shall provide at least the following information:

1.    A description of the property;

2.    The approximate date the property was seized, received or put in the custody of the Police Department;

3.    The date on which the personal property will be sold or otherwise disposed of if not claimed;

B.    Notices shall be sent to owners and finders (if applicable) by:

1.    Personal service;

2.    Mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the current address;

3.    In the event that a current address is not known, by posting a notice in a public place within the Town Office of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

C.    A maximum of two notices shall be made to an owner of personal property.

D.    Only one notice shall be made to the finder of personal property.

E.    Owners and finders of personal property shall claim or make arrangements to claim personal property no later than the date specified in the notice or within fifteen (15) days of the time of personal service, mailing of written notice, or posting of a written notice which ever comes later. (Ord. 91-86 § 10)


2.24.110 Records.

A.    The Police Department shall keep property invoice records concerning all property seized, received or otherwise in the possession of the Police Department. Such records shall contain the following:

1.    A description of all personal property seized, received or otherwise in the possession of the Police Department pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

2.    A description of notices sent to owners and finders (if applicable) pursuant to this chapter.

3.    Information concerning the sale or other disposal of the personal property.

B.    Records maintained pursuant to this section shall be maintained for a minimum of one year after the sale or other disposal of the personal property. (Ord. 91-86 § 11)


Chapter 2.32 CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK

Sections:

2.32.010    Authorization.


2.32.010 Authorization.

The Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, under the authority provided by A.R.S. § 41-1750, hereby authorize the Central State Repository of the Arizona Department of Public Safety to provide (upon receipt of applicant fingerprint cards and fees), and the applicable personnel of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to receive, criminal history record information for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of all specified current and prospective employees, volunteers and business license/permit applicants in accordance with those rules issued by the Arizona Department of Public Safety. (Ord. 09-324)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.08    Collection of Annual Assessment Installments on Outstanding Improvement District Bonds

3.12    Development Impact Fees


Chapter 3.08 COLLECTION OF ANNUAL ASSESSMENT INSTALLMENTS ON OUTSTANDING IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BONDS

Sections:

3.08.010    Procedure.


3.08.010 Procedure.

Annual assessment installments for improvement district bonds issued by the Town pursuant to Article 2, Chapter 4, Title 48, Arizona Revised Statutes are to be collected in the same manner by the officers provided by law for the collection and enforcement of the general taxes levied by the Town. (Ord. 87-51)


Chapter 3.12 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES

Sections:

3.12.010    Title.

3.12.020    Legislative intent and purpose.

3.12.030    Definitions.

3.12.040    Applicability.

3.12.050    Authority for development impact fees.

3.12.060    Administration of development impact fees.

3.12.070    Land use assumptions. 

3.12.080    Infrastructure improvements plan.

3.12.090    Adoption and modification procedures. 

3.12.100    Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure improvements plan and the land use assumptions.

3.12.110    Collection of development impact fees.

3.12.120    Development impact fee credits and credit agreements. 

3.12.130    Development agreements. 

3.12.140    Appeals.

3.12.150    Refunds of development impact fees.

3.12.160    Oversight of development impact fee program.


3.12.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the "2012 Development Impact Fees Code of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona," and may be cited as such. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.020 Legislative intent and purpose. 

This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside by:

A.    Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs incurred by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside that are associated with providing necessary public services to new development. 

B.    Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing development impact fees consistent with the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05, including requirements pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05(K) that, on or before August 1, 2014, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside replace its development impact fees that were adopted prior to January 1, 2012, with development impact fees adopted pursuant to the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05 as amended by the state legislature in SB 1525, Session Law Chapter 243 of the Fiftieth Legislature, First Regular Session 2011.

C.    Providing for the temporary continuation of certain development impact fees adopted prior to January 1, 2012, until otherwise replaced pursuant to this chapter, or longer where such development impact fees were pledged to support financing or debt for a grandfathered facility as permitted by Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05(K), (R), and (S). 

D.    Setting forth procedures for administering the development impact fee program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and refunds of development impact fees. All development impact fee assessments, offsets, credits, or refunds must be administered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

E.    This chapter shall not affect the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s zoning authority or its authority to adopt or amend its general plan; provided, that planning and zoning activities by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may require amendments to development impact fees as provided in Section 3.12.070. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.030 Definitions.

A.    When used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall have the following meanings unless the context requires otherwise. Singular terms shall include their plural. 

1.    "Applicant" means a person who applies to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside for a building permit.

2.    "Appurtenance" means any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components, associated with a capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding replacement of the same after initial installation.

3.    "Aquatic center" means a facility primarily designed to host nonrecreational competitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving events. Such facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited to, locker rooms, offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.

4.    "Building permit" means any permit issued by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside that authorizes vertical construction, increases square footage, authorizes changes to land use, or provides for the addition of a residential or nonresidential point of demand to a water or wastewater system. 

5.    "Capital facility" means an asset having a useful life of three (3) or more years that is a component of one (1) or more categories of necessary public service provided by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. A capital facility may include any associated purchase of real property, architectural and engineering services leading to the design and construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to existing facilities, improvements to or expansions of existing facilities, and associated financing and professional services. Wherever used herein, "infrastructure" shall have the same meaning as "capital facilities."

6.    "Category of necessary public service" means a category of necessary public services for which the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside is authorized to assess development impact fees, as further defined in Section 3.12.080(A)(1). 

7.    "Category of development" means a specific category of residential, commercial, or industrial development against which a development impact fee is calculated and assessed. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside assesses development impact fees against the following categories of development:

a.    Residential development (as may be identified in the Town fee schedule):

i.    Single-family detached;

ii.    Multi-family;

iii.    All other types of housing.

b.    Nonresidential development (as may be identified in the Town fee schedule):

i.    Commercial/retail twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or less;

ii.    Commercial/retail twenty-five thousand one (25,001) to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet;

iii.    Commercial/retail fifty thousand one (50,001) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet;

iv.    Commercial/retail one hundred thousand one (100,001) to two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet;

v.    Commercial/retail over two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet;

vi.    Office/institutional ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less;

vii.    Office/institutional ten thousand one (10,001) to twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet;

viii.    Office/institutional twenty-five thousand one (25,001) to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet;

ix.    Light industrial;

x.    Office/institutional fifty thousand one (50,001) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet;

xi.    Office/institutional over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet;

xii.    Warehousing;

xiii.    Manufacturing;

xiv.    Hotel (per room);

xv.    Nursing homes (per bed).

8.    "Commercial land use" means the land uses identified in Title 17 as commercial uses including but not limited to those identified in Chapters 17.60, Commercial Recreational; 17.64, Light Commercial; 17.68, Heavy Commercial; and applicable elements of a PUD development.

9.    "Credit" means a reduction in an assessed development impact fee resulting from developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications for capital facilities included in an infrastructure improvements plan pursuant to Section 3.12.120 (or as otherwise permitted by this chapter).

10.    "Credit agreement" means a written agreement between the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and the developer(s) of subject development that allocates credits to the subject development pursuant to Section 3.12.120. A credit agreement may be included as part of a development agreement pursuant to Section 3.12.130.

11.    "Credit allocation" means a term used to describe when credits are distributed to a particular development or parcel of land after execution of a credit agreement, but are not yet issued.

12.    "Credit issuance" means a term used to describe when the amount of an assessed development impact fee attributable to a particular development or parcel of land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.

13.    "Developer" means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation, state agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development activity, and their respective successors and assigns.

14.    "Development agreement" means an agreement prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 3.12.130, Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-500.05, and any applicable requirements of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Code.

15.    "Direct benefit" means a benefit to an EDU ("equivalent demand unit" defined below) resulting from a capital facility that: (a) addresses the need for a necessary public service created in whole or in part by the EDU; and that (b) meets either of the following criteria: (i) the capital facility is located in the immediate area of the EDU and is needed in the immediate area of the EDU to maintain the level of service; or (ii) the capital facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need for, a capital facility that would have otherwise have been needed in the immediate area of the EDU to maintain the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s level of service. 

16.    "Dwelling unit" means a house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of rooms, or single room occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant, intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.

17.    "Equipment" means machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies (not including vehicles) that are needed by a capital facility to provide the level of service specified by the infrastructure improvement plan, but excluding replacement of the same after initial development of the capital facility. 

18.    "Equivalent demand unit (EDU)" means a unit of development within a particular category of development, defined in terms of a standardized measure of the demand that a unit of development in that category of development generates for necessary public services in relation to the demand generated by a detached single-family dwelling unit. For all categories of necessary public services, the EDU factor for a detached single-family dwelling unit is one (1), while the EDU factor for a unit of development within another category of development is represented as a ratio of the demand for each category of necessary public services typically generated by that unit as compared to the demand for such services typically generated by a detached single-family dwelling unit. An EDU shall be a "service unit" for purposes of Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05(T)(10).

19.    "Excluded library facility" means library facilities for which development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05, including that portion of any library facility that exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and equipment, vehicles or appurtenances associated with library operations.

20.    "Excluded park facility" means park and recreational facilities for which development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05, including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums, arenas, arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities, bathhouses, boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet in floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian facilities, golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks, water reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities. 

21.    "Fee report" means a written report developed pursuant to Section 3.12.090 that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of each development impact fee, explains the relationship between the development impact fee to be assessed and the plan-based cost per EDU calculated in the infrastructure improvements plan, and which meets other requirements set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05.

22.    "Financing or debt" means any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or expansion of a capital facility. 

23.    "Fire protection" means a category of necessary public services that includes fire stations, fire equipment, improvements to water infrastructure to provide adequate fire flows, fire vehicles and all appurtenances for fire stations. Fire protection does not include vehicles or equipment used to provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Fire protection does not include any facility that is used for training firefighters from more than one (1) station or substation.

24.    "Grandfathered facilities" means capital facilities provided through financing or debt incurred before June 1, 2011, for which a development impact fee has been pledged towards repayment as described in Section 3.12.050(C).

25.    "General plan" means the overall land use plan for the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside establishing areas of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside for different purposes, zones and activities adopted pursuant to Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Resolution 01-551, adopted January 18, 2001, as amended, and including any specific area plans adopted pursuant to Town of Pinetop-Lakeside procedures.

26.    "Gross impact fee" means the total development impact fee to be assessed against a subject development on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of any credits. 

27.    Industrial Land Use. Reserved.

28.    "Infrastructure improvements plan" means a document or series of documents that meet the requirements set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05, including those adopted pursuant to Section 3.12.090 to cover any category or combination of categories of necessary public services. 

29.    Institutional Land Use. Reserved.

30.    "Interim fee schedule" means any development impact fee schedule established prior to January 1, 2012, in accordance with then-applicable law, and which shall expire not later than August 1, 2014, pursuant to Section 3.12.110.

31.    "Land use assumptions" means projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least ten (10) years as specified in Section 3.12.070.

32.    "Level of service" means a quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a necessary public service that is to be provided by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to development in a particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between service capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort or convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures. Level of service may be measured differently for different categories of necessary public services, as identified in the applicable infrastructure improvements plan.

33.    "Library facilities" means a category of necessary public services in which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials are kept (materials may be kept in any form of media such as electronic, magnetic, or paper) for noncommercial use by the public in a facility providing a direct benefit to development. Libraries do not include excluded library facilities, although a library may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded library facility.

34.    "Necessary public services" shall have the meaning prescribed in Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05(T)(5).

35.    "Offset" means an amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of providing necessary public services to account for those capital components of infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a development through taxes, fees (except for development impact fees), and other revenue sources, as determined by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside pursuant to Section 3.12.080.

36.    "Parks and recreational facilities" means a category of necessary public services including but not limited to parks, swimming pools and related facilities and equipment located on real property not larger than thirty (30) acres in area, as well as park facilities larger than thirty (30) acres where such facilities provide a direct benefit. Parks and recreational facilities do not include excluded park facilities, although parks and recreational facilities may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded park facility.

37.    "Plan-based cost per EDU" means the total future capital costs listed in the infrastructure improvements plan for a category of necessary public services divided by the total new equivalent demand units projected in a particular service area for that category of necessary public services over the same time period.

38.    Pledged. Where used with reference to a development impact fee, a development impact fee shall be considered "pledged" where it was identified by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside as a source of payment or repayment for financing or debt that was identified as the source of financing for a necessary public service for which a development impact fee was assessed pursuant to the then-applicable provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05.

39.    "Police facilities" means a category of necessary public services, including vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders, protect the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain police records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. Police facilities do not include vehicles and equipment used to provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Police facilities do not include any facility that is used for training officers from more than one (1) station or substation.

40.    "Public school" means an institution of learning offering free education for all children, including some or all of the grades from kindergarten through twelfth grade. The site may contain athletic, dining, assembly and recreation facilities.

41.    "Qualified professional" means any one (1) of the following: (a) a professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst or planner, or other licensed professional providing services within the scope of that person’s education or experience related to Town of Pinetop-Lakeside planning, zoning, or impact development fees and holding a license issued by an agency or political subdivision of the State of Arizona; (b) a financial analyst, planner, or other nonlicensed professional that is providing services within the scope of the person’s education or experience related to Town of Pinetop-Lakeside planning, zoning, or impact development fees; or (c) any other person operating under the supervision of one (1) or more of the above. 

42.    "Residential land use" means the land uses identified in Title 17 as residential, including but not limited to Chapters 17.20, (R-low) Rural, one (1) unit per acre; 17.24, (R1-2) Single-Family Residential, one (1) unit per twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; 17.28, (R1-4) Single-Family Residential, one (1) unit per ten thousand (10,000) square feet; 17.32, (R1-6) Single-Family Residential, one (1) unit per six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet; 17.36, (R-2) Multiple-Family, twelve (12) units per acre; 17.40, (R-3) Multiple-Family, twenty (20) units per acre; 17.44, (MH-4) Manufactured Home Neighborhood, one (1) unit per ten thousand (10,000) square feet; 17.48, (MH-6) Manufactured Home Neighborhood, one (1) unit per six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet; 17.52, (MHP) Manufactured Home Park; 17.56, (RVP) Recreational Vehicle Park; and elements of PUD development that are residential.

43.    "Service area" means any specified area within the boundaries of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside within which: (a) the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside will provide a category of necessary public services to development at a planned level of service; and (b) within which (i) a substantial nexus exists between the capital facilities to be provided and the development to be served, or (ii) in the case of library facilities or a park facility larger than thirty (30) acres, a direct benefit exists between the library facilities or park facilities and the development to be served, each as prescribed in the infrastructure improvements plan. Some or all of the capital facilities providing service to a service area may be physically located outside of that service area; provided, that the required substantial nexus or direct benefit is demonstrated to exist. Currently the Town boundary constitutes a single service area.

44.    "Street facilities" means a category of necessary public services including arterial or collector streets or roads, traffic signals, rights-of-way, and improvements thereon, bridges, culverts, irrigation tiling, storm drains, and regional transportation facilities. 

45.    "Storm drainage" means a category of necessary public services including but not limited to storm sewers constructed in sizes needed to provide for stormwater management for areas beyond major street projects and stormwater detention/retention basins, tanks, pump stations and channels necessary to provide for proper stormwater management, including any appurtenances for those facilities.

46.    "Subject development" means a land area linked by a unified plan of development, which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a development agreement executed in accordance with Section 3.12.130.

47.    "Substantial nexus" means a substantial nexus exists where the demand for necessary public services that will be generated by an EDU can be reasonably quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of existing capital facilities, the need it will create for new or expanded capital facilities, and/or the benefit to the development from those capital facilities. 

48.    "Swimming pool" means a public facility primarily designed and/or utilized for recreational noncompetitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public swimming sessions, and recreational league swimming/diving events. The facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting amenities.

49.    "Town" means the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona.

50.    "Useful life" means the period of time in which an asset can reasonably be expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will continue to be owned and operated by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside over the entirety of such period.

51.    "Vehicle" means any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for transportation in the course of providing a particular category of necessary public services at a specified level of service, excluding helicopters and other aircraft.

52.    "Wastewater" means a category of necessary public services including but not limited to sewers, lift stations, reclamation plants, wastewater treatment plants, and all other facilities for the collection, interception, transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater, and any appurtenances for those facilities.

53.    "Water" means a category of necessary public services including but not limited to those facilities necessary to provide for water services to development, including the acquisition, supply, transportation, treatment, purification and distribution of water, and any appurtenances to those facilities. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.040 Applicability.

A.    Except as otherwise provided herein, from and after January 1, 2013, this chapter shall apply to all new development within any service area, except for the development of any public school or Town of Pinetop-Lakeside facility.

B.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the territory within the corporate limits of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and/or within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s water and wastewater service areas.

C.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Town Manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to make determinations regarding the application, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.050 Authority for development impact fees.

A.    Fee Report and Implementation. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may assess and collect a development impact fee for costs of necessary public services, including all professional services required for the preparation or revision of an infrastructure improvements plan, fee report, development impact fee, and required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this chapter. Development impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall develop and adopt a fee report that analyzes and defines the development impact fees to be charged in each service area for each capital facility category, based on the infrastructure improvements plan and the plan-based cost per EDU calculated pursuant to Section 3.12.080(A)(14). Currently the Town boundary constitutes a single service area.

2.    Development impact fees shall be assessed against all new commercial, residential, and industrial developments; provided, that the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may assess different amounts of development impact fees against specific categories of development based on the actual burdens and costs that are associated with providing necessary public services to that category of development. No development impact fee shall exceed the plan-based cost per EDU for any category of development.

3.    No development impact fees shall be charged, or credits issued, for any capital facility that does not fall within one (1) of the categories of necessary public services for which development impact fees may be assessed as identified in Section 3.12.080(A)(1).

4.    Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new development shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing development in the same service area. Development impact fees may not be used to provide a higher level of service to existing development or to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities that are serving existing development. 

5.    Development impact fees may not be used to pay the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.

6.    Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be included in development impact fees to the extent they represent principal and/or interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the infrastructure improvements plan.

7.    Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules, all development impact fees charged by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside must be included in a fee schedule prepared pursuant to this chapter and included in the fee report. The Town Council will approve the fee schedule by resolution, but the fees will not be effective until seventy-five (75) days after its formal adoption. 

8.    All development impact fees shall meet the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05.

B.    Costs per EDU. The fee report shall summarize the costs of capital facilities necessary to serve new development on a per EDU basis as defined and calculated in the infrastructure improvements plan, including all required offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee structure for adoption by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. 

C.     Carry-Over of Previously Established Development Impact Fees and Grandfathered Facilities. Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter, certain development impact fees adopted by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside prior to the effective date of this chapter shall continue in effect as follows: 

1.    Until August 1, 2014, or the date a new development impact fee is effective for the applicable category of necessary public services in a service area pursuant to this chapter, whichever occurs first, development impact fees established prior to January 1, 2012, shall continue in full force and effect to the extent that the development impact fee is used to provide a category of necessary public services that is authorized by Section 3.12.080. Development impact fees collected prior to January 1, 2012, shall be expended on capital facilities within the same category of necessary public services for which they were collected.

2.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may continue to collect and use any development impact fee established before January 1, 2012, even if the development impact fee would not otherwise be permitted to be collected and spent pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05, as amended by the state legislature in SB 1525, Fiftieth Legislature, First Regular Session, if either of the following apply: 

a.    Both of the following conditions are met:

i.    Prior to June 1, 2011, the development impact fee was pledged towards the repayment of financing or debt incurred by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to provide a capital facility.

ii.    The applicable capital facility was included in the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s infrastructure improvements plan, or other Town of Pinetop-Lakeside planning document prepared pursuant to applicable law, prior to June 1, 2011.

b.    Before August 1, 2014, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside uses the development impact fee to finance a capital facility in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05(S).

3.    Defined terms in any previously established fee schedule shall be interpreted according to the ordinance in effect at the time of their adoption.

D.    Development Fees Collected Prior to January 1, 2012. Any development fee monies collected before January 1, 2012, remaining in a development fee account shall be used for the purpose for which they were collected on or before January 1, 2020, and after which, if not spent, shall be distributed equally among the categories of necessary public services authorized by Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05(K). (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.060 Administration of development impact fees.

A.    Separate Accounts. Development impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing accounts for each capital facility category within each service area. 

B.    Limitations on Use of Fees. Development impact fees and any interest thereon collected pursuant to this chapter shall be spent to provide capital facilities associated with the same category of necessary public services in the same service area for which they were collected, including costs of financing or debt used by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to finance such capital facilities and other costs authorized by this chapter that are included in the infrastructure improvements plan.

C.    Time Limit. Development impact fees collected after July 31, 2014, shall be used within ten (10) years of the date upon which they were collected for all categories of necessary public services except for water and wastewater facilities. For water facilities or wastewater facilities collected after July 31, 2014, development impact fees must be used within fifteen (15) years of the date upon which they were collected. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.070 Land use assumptions.

The infrastructure improvements plan shall be consistent with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s current land use assumptions for each service area and each category of necessary public services as adopted by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05. 

A.    Reviewing the Land Use Assumptions. Prior to the adoption or amendment of an infrastructure improvements plan, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall review and evaluate the land use assumptions on which the infrastructure improvements plan is to be based to ensure that the land use assumptions within each service area conform with the general plan.

B.    Evaluating Necessary Changes. If the land use assumptions upon which an infrastructure improvements plan is based have not been updated within the last five (5) years, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall evaluate the land use assumptions to determine whether changes are necessary. If, after general evaluation, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside determines that the land use assumptions are still valid, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall issue the report required in Section 3.12.100. 

C.    Required Modifications to Land Use Assumptions. If the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside determines that changes to the land use assumptions are necessary in order to adopt or amend an infrastructure improvements plan, it shall make such changes as necessary to the land use assumptions prior to or in conjunction with the review and approval of the infrastructure improvements plan pursuant to Section 3.12.100. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.080 Infrastructure improvements plan.

A.    Infrastructure Improvements Plan Contents. The infrastructure improvements plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be based upon or incorporated within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s capital improvements plan. The infrastructure improvements plan shall:

1.    Specify the categories of necessary public services for which the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside will impose a development impact fee, which may include any or all of the following:

a.    Water;

b.    Wastewater;

c.    Stormwater, drainage, and flood control;

d.    Libraries;

e.    Street facilities;

f.    Fire protection;

g.    Police;

h.    Parks.

2.    Define and provide a map of one (1) or more service areas within which the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside will provide each category of necessary public services for which development impact fees will be charged. Each service area must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a substantial nexus between the capital facilities to be provided in the service area and the EDUs to be served by those capital facilities. For libraries and for parks larger than thirty (30) acres, each service area must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a direct benefit between the capital facilities and the EDUs to be served by those capital facilities. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may cover more than one (1) category of capital facilities in the same service area; provided, that there is an independent substantial nexus or direct benefit, as applicable, between each category of necessary public services and the EDUs to be served.

3.    Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon which the infrastructure improvements plan is based in each service area. 

4.    Analyze and identify the existing level of service provided by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to existing EDUs for each category of necessary public services in each service area.

5.    Identify the level of service to be provided by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside for each category of necessary public services in each service area based on the relevant land use assumptions and any established Town of Pinetop-Lakeside standards or policies related to required levels of service. If the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside provides the same category of necessary public services in more than one (1) service area, the infrastructure improvements plan shall include a comparison of the levels of service to be provided in each service area.

6.    For each category of necessary public services, analyze and identify the existing capacity of the capital facilities in each service area, the utilization of those capital facilities by existing EDUs, and the available excess capacity of those capital facilities to serve new EDUs including any existing or planned commitments or agreements for the usage of such capacity. The infrastructure improvements plan shall additionally identify: (a) any changes or upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or maintain the planned level of service to existing EDUs, or to meet new safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory requirements for services provided to existing EDUs; and (b) those portions of capital facilities that will be necessary to serve any new public school or Town of Pinetop-Lakeside facility for which development impact fees will not be assessed.

7.    Identify any grandfathered facilities and the impact thereof on the need for necessary public services in each affected service area.

8.    Estimate the total number of existing and future EDUs within each service area based on the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s land use assumptions and projected new EDUs in each service area. 

9.    Based on the analysis in subsections (A)(3) through (6) of this section, provide a summary table or tables describing the level of service for each category of necessary public services by relating the required capital facilities to EDUs in each service area, and identifying the applicable EDU factor associated with each category of development. 

10.    For each category of necessary public services, analyze and identify the projected utilization of any available excess capacity in existing capital facilities, and all new or expanded capital facilities that will be required to provide and maintain the planned level of service in each service area as a result of the new projected EDUs in that service area, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside from additionally including in its infrastructure improvements plan projected utilization of, or needs for, capital facilities for a period longer than ten (10) years; provided, that the costs of such capital facilities are excluded from the calculation of the plan-based cost per EDU.

11.    For each category of necessary public services, estimate the total cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or expanded capital facilities that will be required to serve new EDUs, including costs of land acquisition, improvements, engineering and architectural services, studies leading to design, design, construction, financing, and administrative costs, as well as projected costs of inflation. Such total costs shall not include costs for ongoing operation and maintenance of capital facilities, nor for replacement of capital facilities to the extent that such replacement is necessary to serve existing EDUs. If the infrastructure improvements plan includes changes or upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or maintain the planned level of service to existing EDUs, or to meet new regulatory requirements for services provided to existing EDUs, such costs shall be identified and distinguished in the infrastructure improvements plan. 

12.    Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or other sources that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital facilities identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, which shall include estimated state-shared revenue, highway users revenue, federal revenue, ad valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar excise taxes and the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to development based on the approved land use assumptions. The infrastructure improvements plan shall additionally estimate the time required to finance, construct and implement the new or expanded capital facilities. 

13.    Calculate required offsets as follows:

a.    From the forecasted revenues in subsection (A)(12) of this section, identify those sources of revenue that: (i) are attributable to new development, and (ii) will contribute to paying for the capital costs of necessary public services.

b.    For each source and amount of revenue identified pursuant to subsection (A)(13)(a) of this section, calculate the relative contribution of each category of development to paying for the capital costs of necessary public services in each service area. 

c.    Based on the relative contributions identified pursuant to subsection (A)(13)(b) of this section, for each category of necessary public services, calculate the total offset to be provided to each category of development in each service area.

d.    For each category of necessary public services, convert the total offset to be provided to each category of development in each service area into an offset amount per EDU by dividing the total offset for each category of development by the number of EDUs associated with that category of development.

e.    Beginning August 1, 2014, for purposes of calculating the required offset, if the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside imposes a construction, contracting, or similar excise tax rate in excess of the percentage amount of the transaction privilege tax rate that is imposed on the majority of other transaction privilege tax classifications in the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, the entire excess portion of the construction, contracting, or similar excise tax shall be treated as a contribution to the capital costs of necessary public services provided to new development unless the excess portion is already utilized for such purpose pursuant to this section.

f.    In determining the amount of required offset for land included in a community facilities district established under Arizona Revised Statutes Title 48, Chapter 4, Article 6, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall take into account any capital facilities provided by the district that are included in the infrastructure improvements plan and the capital costs paid by the district for such capital facilities, and shall offset impact fees assessed within the community facilities district proportionally.

14.    Calculate the plan-based cost per EDU by:

a.    Dividing the total projected costs to provide capital facilities to new EDUs for each category of necessary public services in each service area as determined pursuant to subsection (A)(9) of this section into the number of new EDUs projected for that service area over a period not to exceed ten (10) years, considering the specific EDU factor(s) associated with such EDUs for each category of necessary public services.

b.    Subtracting the required offset per EDU calculated pursuant to subsection (A)(11) of this section.

B.    Multiple Plans. An infrastructure improvements plan adopted pursuant to this subsection may address one (1) or more of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s categories of necessary public services in any or all of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s service areas. Each capital facility shall be subject to no more than one (1) infrastructure improvements plan at any given time. 

C.    Reserved Capacity. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may reserve capacity in an infrastructure improvements plan to serve one (1) or more planned future developments, including capacity reserved through a development agreement pursuant to Section 3.12.130. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the infrastructure improvements plan at the time it is adopted. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.090 Adoption and modification procedures.

A.    Adopting or Amending the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. The infrastructure improvements plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the following procedures:

1.    Major Amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section, the adoption or amendment of an infrastructure improvement plan shall occur at one (1) or more public hearings according to the following schedule, and may occur concurrently with the adoption of an update of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s land use assumptions as provided in Section 3.12.070:

a.    Sixty (60) days before the first public hearing regarding a new or updated infrastructure improvements plan, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall provide public notice of the hearing and post the infrastructure improvements plan and the underlying land use assumptions on its website; the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall additionally make available to the public the documents used to prepare the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions and the amount of any proposed changes to the plan-based cost per EDU.

b.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall conduct a public hearing on the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions at least thirty (30) days, but no more than sixty (60) days, before approving or disapproving the infrastructure improvements plan. 

2.    Minor Amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may update the infrastructure improvements plan and/or its underlying land use assumptions without a public hearing if all of the following apply:

a.    The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not add any new category of necessary public services to any service area.

b.    The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not increase the level of service to be provided in any service area.

c.    Based on an analysis of the fee report and the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s adopted development impact fee schedules, the changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions would not, individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken pursuant to this subsection, have caused a development impact fee in any service area to have been increased by more than five (5%) percent above the development impact fee that is provided in the current development impact fee schedule.

d.    At least thirty (30) days prior to the date that any amendment pursuant to this section is adopted, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall post the proposed amendments on the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside website. 

B.    Amendments to the Fee Report. Any adoption or amendment of a fee report and fee schedule shall occur at one (1) or more public hearings according to the following schedule:

1.    The first public hearing on the fee report must be held at least thirty (30) days after the adoption or approval of an infrastructure improvements plan as provided in subsection A of this section. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside must give at least thirty (30) days’ notice prior to the hearing; provided, that this notice may be given on the same day as the approval or disapproval of the infrastructure improvements plan. 

2.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall make the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions available to the public on the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s website thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing described in subsection (B)(1) of this section. 

3.    The fee report may be adopted by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside no sooner than thirty (30) days, and no later than sixty (60) days, after the hearing described in subsection (B)(1) of this section. 

4.    The development fee schedule in the fee report adopted pursuant to this subsection shall become effective seventy-five (75) days after adoption of the fee report by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.100 Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure improvements plan and the land use assumptions.

A.    Renewing the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, not later than every five (5) years the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall update the applicable infrastructure improvements plan and fee report related to each category of necessary public services pursuant to Section 3.12.090. Such five (5) year period shall be calculated from the date of the adoption of the infrastructure improvements plan or the date of the adoption of the fee report, whichever occurs later.

B.    Determination of No Changes. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, if the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside determines that no changes to an infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, or fee report are needed, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may elect to continue the existing infrastructure improvements plan and fee report without amendment by providing notice as follows:

1.    Notice of the determination shall be published at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the end of the five (5) year period described in subsection A of this section.

2.    The notice shall identify the infrastructure improvements plan and fee report that shall continue in force without amendment.

3.    The notice shall provide a map and description of the service area(s) covered by such infrastructure improvements plan and fee report.

4.    The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may submit, within sixty (60) days, a written request that the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside update the infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, and/or fee report and the reasons and basis for the request.

C.    Response to Comments. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall consider and respond within thirty (30) days to any timely requests submitted pursuant to subsection (B)(4) of this section. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.110 Collection of development impact fees.

A.    Collection. Development impact fees, together with administrative charges assessed pursuant to subsection (A)(6) of this section, shall be calculated and collected prior to issuance of permission to commence development; specifically:

1.    Unless otherwise specified pursuant to a development agreement adopted pursuant to Section 3.12.130, development impact fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit according to the current development impact fee schedule for the applicable service area(s) as adopted pursuant to this chapter, or according to any other development impact fee schedule as authorized in this chapter.

2.    If a building permit is not required for the development, but water or wastewater connections are required, any and all development impact fees due shall be paid at the time the water service connection is purchased. If only a wastewater connection is required, the development impact fees shall be paid prior to approval of a connection to the sewer system. Wastewater development impact fees shall be assessed if a development connects to the public sewer or, as determined by the Town Manager, is capable of discharging sewage to a Town of Pinetop-Lakeside public sewer.

3.    If the development is located in a service area with a stormwater, drainage, and flood control development impact fee, and neither a building permit, water, or sewer service connection is required, the storm drainage development impact fee due shall be paid at the time a civil or site permit is issued for the development.

4.    No building permit, water or sewer connection, or certificate of occupancy shall be issued if a development impact fee is not paid as directed in the previous paragraphs.

5.    If the building permit is for a change in the type of building use, an increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an addition to a residential or nonresidential point of demand to the water or wastewater system, the development impact fee shall be assessed on the additional service units resulting from the expansion or change, and following the development impact fee schedule applicable to any new use type. 

6.    For issued permits that expire or are voided, development impact fees and administrative charges shall be as follows:

a.    If the original permittee is seeking to renew an expired or voided permit, and the development impact fees paid for such development have not been refunded, then the permittee shall pay the difference between any development impact fees paid at the time the permit was issued and those in the fee schedule at the time the permit is reissued or renewed. 

b.    If a new or renewed permit for the same development is being sought by someone other than the original permittee, the new permit applicant shall pay the full development impact fees specified in the fee schedule in effect at the time that the permits are reissued or renewed. If the original permittee has assigned its rights under the permits to the new permit applicant, the new permit applicant shall pay development impact fees as if it were the original permittee.

B.    Exceptions. Development impact fees shall not be owed under either of the following conditions:

1.    Development impact fees have been paid for the development and the permit(s) which triggered the collection of the development impact fees have not expired or been voided. 

2.    The approval(s) that trigger the collection of development impact fees involve modifications to existing residential or nonresidential development that do not: (a) add new EDUs, (b) increase the impact of existing EDUs on existing or future capital facilities, or (c) change the land-use type of the existing development to a different category of development for which a higher development impact fee would have been due. To the extent that any modification does not meet the requirements of this subsection, the development impact fee due shall be the difference between the development impact fee that was or would have been due on the existing development and the development impact fee that is due on the development as modified.

C.    Temporary Exemptions from Development Impact Fee Schedules. New developments in the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall be temporarily exempt from increases in development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or modified development impact fee schedules as follows:

1.    Single-Family Residential Uses. On or after the day that the first building permit is issued for a single-family residential development, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall, at the permittee’s request, provide the permittee with an applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of twenty-four (24) months beginning on the day that the first building permit is issued, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the twenty-fifth month thereafter. During the effective period of the applicable development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same single-family residential development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact fee schedule. 

2.    Commercial, Industrial and Multifamily Uses. On or after the day that the final approval, as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05(T)(4), is issued for a commercial, industrial or multifamily development, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall provide an applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of twenty-four (24) months beginning on the day that final development approval of a site plan or final subdivision plat is given, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the twenty-fifth month thereafter. During the effective period of the applicable development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact fee schedule.

3.    Other Development. Any category of development not covered under subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section shall pay development impact fees according to the fee schedule that is current at the time of collection as specified in subsection A of this section. 

4.    Changes to Site Plans and Subdivision Plats. Notwithstanding the other requirements of this subsection, if changes are made to a development’s final site plan or subdivision plat that will increase the number of service units after the issuance of a grandfathered development impact fee schedule, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may assess any new or modified development impact fees against the additional service units. If the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside reduces the amount of an applicable development impact fee during the period that a grandfathered development impact fee schedule is in force, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall assess the lower development impact fee.

D.     Option to Pursue Special Fee Determination. Where a development is of a type that does not closely fit within a particular category of development appearing on an adopted development impact fee schedule, or where a development has unique characteristics such that the actual burdens and costs associated with providing necessary public services to that development will differ substantially from that associated with other developments in a specified category of development, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may require the applicant to provide the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Community Development Director or authorized designee with an alternative development impact fee analysis. Based on a projection of the actual burdens and costs that will be associated with the development, the alternative development impact fee analysis may propose a unique fee for the development based on the application of an appropriate EDU factor to the applicable plan-based cost per EDU, or may propose that the development be covered under the development impact fee schedule governing a different and more analogous category of development. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Community Development Director or authorized designee shall review the alternative impact fee analysis and shall make a determination as to the development impact fee to be charged. Such decision shall be appealable pursuant to Section 3.12.140. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Community Development Director or authorized designee may require the applicant to pay an administrative fee to cover the actual costs of reviewing the special fee determination application. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.120 Development impact fee credits and credit agreements.

A.    Eligibility of Capital Facility. All development impact fee credits must meet the following requirements:

1.    One (1) of the following is true:

a.    The capital facility, or the financial contribution toward a capital facility that will be provided by the developer and for which a credit will be issued, must be identified in an adopted infrastructure improvements plan and fee report as a capital facility for which a development impact fee was assessed; or

b.    The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject capital facility should have been included in the infrastructure improvements plan in lieu of a different capital facility that was included in the infrastructure improvements plan and for which a development impact fee was assessed. If the subject capital facility is determined to be eligible for a credit in this manner, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall amend the infrastructure improvements plan to (i) include the subject replacement facility and (ii) delete the capital facility that will be replaced. 

2.    Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure provided by a developer if the cost of such infrastructure will be repaid to the developer by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside through another agreement or mechanism. To the extent that the developer will be paid or reimbursed by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside for any contribution, payment, construction, or dedication from any Town of Pinetop-Lakeside funding source including an agreement to reimburse the developer with future collected development impact fees pursuant to Section 3.12.130, any credits claimed by the developer shall be: (a) deducted from any amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside; or (b) reduced by the amount of such payment or reimbursement.

B.    Eligibility of Subject Development. To be eligible for a credit, the subject development must be located within the service area of the eligible capital facility.

C.    Calculation of Credits. Credits will be based on that portion of the costs for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted infrastructure improvements plan for which a development fee was assessed pursuant to the fee report. If the gross impact fee for a particular category of necessary public service is adopted at an amount lower than the plan-based cost per EDU, the amount of any credit shall be reduced in proportion to the difference between the plan-based cost per EDU and the gross impact fee adopted. A credit shall not exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in providing the eligible capital facility. 

D.    Allocation of Credits. Before any credit can be issued to a subject development (or portion thereof), the credit must be allocated to that development as follows: 

1.    The developer and the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside must execute a credit agreement including all of the following:

a.    The total amount of the credits resulting from provision of an eligible capital facility.

b.    The estimated number of EDUs to be served within the subject development.

c.    The method by which the credit values will be distributed within the subject development.

2.    It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation of development impact fee credits through an application for a credit agreement (which may be part of a development agreement entered into pursuant to Section 3.12.130).

3.    If a building permit is issued or a water/sewer connection is purchased, and a development impact fee is paid prior to execution of a credit agreement for the subject development, no credits may be allocated retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits may be allocated to any remaining permits for the subject development in accordance with this chapter.

4.    If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility sells or relinquishes a development (or portion thereof) that it owns or controls prior to execution of a credit agreement or development agreement, credits resulting from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated to the development if the entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to its successor(s) in interest for the subject development.

5.    If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital facility, both entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, and any request for the allocation of credit within the subject development(s) must be made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible capital facility.

6.    Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject development with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s approval of an amendment to an executed credit agreement, subject to the following conditions:

a.    The entity that executed the original agreement with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, or its legal successor in interest and the entity that currently controls the subject development are parties to the request for reallocation. 

b.    The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any credits already issued for the subject development.

7.    A credit agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a noncontiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met:

a.    The entity that executed the original agreement with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside or its legal successor in interest, the entity that currently controls the subject development, and the entity that controls the noncontiguous parcel are parties to the request for reallocation. 

b.    The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any credits already issued for the subject development.

c.    The noncontiguous parcel is in the same service area as that served by the eligible capital facility.

d.    The noncontiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from the eligible capital facility.

e.    The credit agreement specifically states the value of the credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or EDU, or establishes a mechanism for future determination of the credit values.

f.    The credit agreement does not involve the transfer of credits to or from any property subject to a development agreement.

E.    Credit Agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a credit agreement executed in accordance with subsection D of this section. The Town Manager or authorized designee is authorized by this chapter to enter into a credit agreement with the controlling entity of a subject development, subject to the following:

1.    The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all information requested by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to allow it to determine the value of the credit to be applied.

2.    An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside by the developer within one (1) year of the date on which ownership or control of the capital facility passes to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

3.    The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Town Manager or authorized designee(s) for review in the form provided to the applicant by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. The draft credit agreement shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information and supporting documentation:

a.    A legal description and map depicting the location of the subject development for which credit is being applied. The map shall depict the location of the capital facilities that have been or will be provided.

b.    An estimate of the total EDUs that will be developed within the subject development depicted on the map and described in the legal description.

c.    A list of the capital facilities, associated physical attributes, and the related costs as stated in the infrastructure improvements plan.

d.    Documentation showing the date(s) of acceptance by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, if the capital facilities have already been provided.

e.    The total amount of credit to be applied within the subject development and the calculations leading to the total amount of credit.

f.    The credit amount to be applied to each EDU within the subject development for each category of necessary public services. 

4.    The Town Manager may refer the credit agreement to the Town Council for approval. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s determination of the credit to be allocated is final. 

5.    Upon execution of the credit agreement by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and the applicant, credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development.

6.    Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be initiated within two (2) years of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s final acceptance of the eligible capital facility for which the amendment is requested.

7.    Any credit agreement approved as part of a development agreement shall be amended in accordance with the terms of the development agreement and Section 3.12.130.

F.    Issuance of Credits. Credits allocated pursuant to subsection D of this section may be issued and applied toward the gross impact fees due from a development, subject to the following conditions: 

1.    Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only be applied to the development impact fee due for the applicable category of necessary public services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another category of necessary public services.

2.    Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital facility from which the credits were derived has been accepted by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside or when adequate security for the completion of the eligible capital facility has been provided in accordance with all terms of an executed development agreement.

3.    Where credits have been issued pursuant to subsection (F)(2) of this section, an impact fee due at the time a building permit is issued shall be reduced by the credit amount stated in or calculated from the executed credit agreement. Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross impact fee shall be paid in full, and a refund of the credit amount shall be due when the developer demonstrates compliance with subsection (F)(2) of this section in a written request to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

4.    Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or reallocated to another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released for reuse on the same subject development if a building permit for which the credits were issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund under Section 3.12.150(A)(2)(a).

5.    Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, credits issued prior to January 1, 2012, may only be used for the subject development for which they were issued. Such credits may be transferred to a new owner of all or part of the subject development in proportion to the percentage of ownership in the subject development to be held by the new owner. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.130 Development agreements.

Development agreements containing provisions regarding development impact fees, development impact fee credits, and/or disbursement of revenues from development impact fee accounts shall comply with the following:

A.    Development Agreement Required. A development agreement is required to authorize any of the following:

1.    To issue credits prior to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s acceptance of an eligible capital facility.

2.    To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous with the subject development and that does not meet the requirements of Section 3.12.120(D)(7).

3.    To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital facility using funds from development impact fee accounts.

4.    To allocate different credit amounts per EDU to different parcels within a subject development.

5.    For a single-family residential dwelling unit, to allow development impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building permit as provided in this section. 

B.    General Requirements. All development agreements shall be prepared and executed in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-500.05 and any applicable requirements of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Code. Except where specifically modified by this section, all provisions of Section 3.12.120 shall apply to any credit agreement that is authorized as part of a development agreement.

C.    Early Credit Issuance. A development agreement may authorize the issuance of credits prior to acceptance of an eligible capital facility by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside when the development agreement specifically states the form and value of the security (i.e., bond, letter of credit, etc.) to be provided to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside prior to issuance of any credits. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall determine the acceptable form and value of the security to be provided.

D.    Noncontiguous Credit Allocation. A development agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a noncontiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met:

1.    The noncontiguous parcel is in the same service area as that served by the eligible capital facility.

2.    The noncontiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from the eligible capital facility.

3.    The development agreement specifically states the value of the credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or EDU, or establishes a mechanism for future determination of the credit values.

E.    Uneven Credit Allocation. The development agreement must specify how credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per-EDU basis, if the credits are not to be allocated evenly. If the development agreement is silent on this topic, all credits will be allocated evenly amongst all parcels on a per-EDU basis.

F.    Use of Reimbursements. Funds reimbursed to developers from impact fee accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility must be utilized in accordance with applicable law for the use of Town of Pinetop-Lakeside funds in construction or acquisition of capital facilities, including Arizona Revised Statutes § 34-201 et seq.

G.    Deferral of Fees. A development agreement may provide for the deferral of payment of development impact fees for a residential development beyond the issuance of a building permit; provided, that a development impact fee may not be paid later than the fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for that dwelling unit. The development agreement shall provide for the value of any deferred development impact fees to be supported by appropriate security, including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond.

H.    Waiver of Fees. If the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside agrees to waive any development impact fees assessed on development in a development agreement, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall reimburse the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount that was waived.

I.    No Obligation. Nothing in this section obligates the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to enter into any development agreement or to authorize any type of credit agreement permitted by this section. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.140 Appeals.

A development impact fee determination by Town of Pinetop-Lakeside staff may be appealed in accordance with the following procedures:

A.    Limited Scope. An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the calculation of the development impact fees for a specific development and/or permit and calculation of EDUs for the development.

B.    Form of Appeal. An appeal shall be initiated on such written form as the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may prescribe, and submitted to the Town Manager.

C.    Town Manager Action. The Town Manager shall act upon the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of the appeal with the Town Manager, and the applicant shall be notified of the Town Manager’s decision in writing.

D.    Final Decision. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Town Manager’s or authorized designee’s decision regarding the appeal is final.

E.    Fees During Pendency. Building permits may be issued during the pendency of an appeal if the applicant (1) pays the full impact fee calculated by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside at the time the appeal is filed; or (2) provides the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside with financial assurances in the form acceptable to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Town Manager, or authorized designee, equal to the full amount of the impact fee. Upon final disposition of an appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered, and a refund paid if warranted. If the appeal is denied by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Town Manager or authorized designee, and the applicant has provided the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside with financial assurances as set forth in clause (2) of this subsection, the applicant shall deliver the full amount of the impact fee to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside within ten (10) days of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Town Manager or designee’s final decision on the appeal. If the applicant fails to deliver the full amount of the impact fees when required by this subsection, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may draw upon such financial assurance instrument(s) as necessary to recover the full amount of the impact fees due from the applicant. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.150 Refunds of development impact fees. 

A.    Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any current owner of property within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside who submits a written request to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and demonstrates that: 

1.    The permit(s) that triggered the collection of the development impact fee have expired or been voided prior to the commencement of the development for which the permits were issued and the development impact fees collected have not been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the repayment of financing or debt; or

2.     The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor in interest paid a development impact fee for the applicable capital facility on or after August 1, 2014, and one (1) of the following conditions exists: 

a.    The capital facility designed to serve the subject real property has been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject real property and any development for which there is reserved capacity, and the service which was to be provided by that capital facility has not been provided to the subject real property from that capital facility or from any other infrastructure. 

b.    After collecting the fee to construct a capital facility the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside fails to complete construction of the capital facility within the time period identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, as it may be amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the subject real property from that capital facility or any other infrastructure.

c.    For a category of necessary public services other than water or wastewater facilities, any part of a development impact fee is not spent within ten (10) years of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s receipt of the development impact fee.

d.    Any part of a development impact fee for water or wastewater facilities is not spent within fifteen (15) years of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s receipt of the development impact fee.

e.    The development impact fee was calculated and collected for the construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific capital facility serving the subject real property and the actual construction costs for the capital facility are less than the construction costs projected in the infrastructure improvements plan by a factor of ten (10%) percent or more. In such event, the current owner of the subject real property shall, upon request as set forth in this subsection A, be entitled to a refund for the difference between the amounts of the development impact fee charged for and attributable to such construction cost and the amount the development impact fee would have been calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the fee report. The refund contemplated by this subsection shall relate only to the costs specific to the construction of the applicable capital facility and shall not include any related design, administrative, or other costs not directly incurred for construction of the capital facility that are included in the development impact fee as permitted by Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05.

B.    Earned Interest. A refund of a development impact fee shall include any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the development impact fee by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid. 

C.    Refund to Government. If a development impact fee was paid by a governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


3.12.160 Oversight of development impact fee program.

A.    Annual Report. Within ninety (90) days of the end of each fiscal year, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall file with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Clerk an unaudited annual report accounting for the collection and use of the fees for each service area and shall post the report on its website in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes § 9-463.05(N) and (O), as amended. 

B.    Biennial Audit. In addition to the annual report described in subsection A of this section, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall provide for a biennial, certified audit of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s land use assumptions, infrastructure improvements plan and development impact fees. 

1.    An audit pursuant to this subsection shall be conducted by one (1) or more qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and who did not prepare the infrastructure improvements plan. 

2.    The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of development fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments describing the amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and spent on capital facilities.

3.    The audit shall describe the level of service in each service area, and evaluate any inequities in implementing the infrastructure improvements plan or imposing the development impact fee. 

4.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall post the findings of the audit on the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside’s website and shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within sixty (60) days of the release of the audit to the public. 

5.    For purposes of this section, a certified audit shall mean any audit authenticated by one (1) or more of the qualified professionals conducting the audit pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section. (Ord. 12-365 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses Generally

5.08    Temporary Use Permits

5.12    Special Event Permits

5.16    Distributors And Wholesalers

5.18    Yard Sales

5.20    Sexually-Oriented Business License And Regulations

5.24    Liquor Licenses Generally


Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY

Sections:

5.04.010    Definitions.

5.04.020    License required.

5.04.030    Change of location.

5.04.040    Prohibited business locations.

5.04.050    Exemptions.

5.04.060    Application/issuance of business license.

5.04.070    Renewal of business license (permanent business).

5.04.080    Renewal of temporary business license.

5.04.090    Inspections.

5.04.100    Records.

5.04.110    Denial of application or revocation of a license.

5.04.120    Suspension/revocation.

5.04.130    Appeal of denial of business license or revocation of license.

5.04.140    Exhibition of license or permit.

5.04.150    License or permit not transferable.

5.04.160    Enforcement and penalty.


5.04.010 Definitions.

In this title, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.    "Administrator" means the Administrator of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Planning and Zoning Department who shall administer this title.

2.    "Business" means any activity, trade, calling, profession, or occupation, whether a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other recognized entity, which regularly provides delivery of products and/or services from an address or other location(s) within the corporate limits of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. "Business" does include a distributor/wholesaler with a business location within the corporate limits of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, but does not include a distributor/wholesaler located outside the Town’s corporate limits. "Business" does not include waste haulers who hold a valid Town waste hauler’s permit, public schools, churches, amateur athletic teams or other qualified nonprofit organizations. "Business" includes "home occupations" which involve the sale of goods or services as described in this definition.

a.    "Permanent business" means a business use which occurs for a period of more than six (6) months in any twelve (12) month period.

b.    "Temporary business" means a temporary business use that occurs for a period of less than six (6) months in any twelve (12) month period.

c.    "Business establishment" means a permanent business operating and open to the public at a fixed location within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

3.    "Business license ordinance" means the ordinance codified in this chapter, as amended.

4.    "Department" means the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Community Development Department.

5.    "Distributor/wholesaler" means a person or business that sells or distributes goods to retailers for resale only. A distributor/wholesaler shall not include a person or business who sells goods direct to the public. A person or business who sells or distributes goods both to resellers and the public does not qualify as a distributor/wholesaler for purposes of this title.

6.    "Fire District" means either the Pinetop Fire District or the Lakeside Fire District or other fire district or municipal fire department, as applicable.

7.    "License" means a business license required, permanent, or temporary, by this title.

8.    "Nonprofit organization" means any association, business or other entity organized and operated not for pecuniary profit, and which has a letter or other document from the Internal Revenue Service verifying such nonprofit status.

9.    "Peddler" means any person who conducts the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise, food or personal property of any nature whatsoever and who does not intend to establish a permanent business location within the Town or who conducts such business by foot, cart, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place-to-place, house-to-house, street-to-street, or business-to-business. "Peddler" includes transient merchants and vendors. "Peddler" shall not include distributors/wholesalers.

10.    "Permit" means a peddler’s or solicitor’s permit or a special event permit as described in Chapters 5.08 and 5.12.

11.    "Person" means an individual, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company or any other recognized entity acting as a unit, "person" shall apply in the plural as well as the singular number. "Person" includes subsidiaries of corporations or other businesses.

12.    "Police Department" means the Police Department of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

13.    "Retailer" means a person who buys products or goods from a producer, licensed manufacturer, or a distributor/wholesaler for resale to a consumer only.

14.    "Solicitor" means a salesman or peddler which takes or attempts to take orders for the sale and future delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, intangibles, personal property of any nature whatsoever or services to be furnished or performed in the future, rather than selling such items from inventory or stock currently in possession. A person may be a solicitor regardless of whether such person has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order, and regardless of whether such person collects advance payment on such sales or orders. A "solicitor" shall include transient merchants and vendors. "Solicitor" shall not include distributors/wholesalers selling or distributing goods to licensed businesses within the Town. See Section 5.16.010.

15.    "Special event" means show promoters and show vendors, art shows, circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, religious revivals, political rallies, vehicle shows and displays, rodeos, parades, marches, demonstrations and similarly recognized temporary activities. A "special event" shall not include weddings and funeral ceremonies, elections, private yard sales, charitable fund-raising such as car washes and other similar activities that are otherwise lawfully conducted and which are in accordance with the provisions of the Town’s Zoning Regulations. A "special event" shall not include minor fund-raising activities of public schools, churches, or other nonprofit organizations which have a minimal impact on surrounding properties. Any organization claiming nonprofit status shall possess a letter or other documentation from the Internal Revenue Service proving nonprofit status. Retail sales events and promotions not associated with a business establishment do not qualify as special events and do require a peddler’s or solicitor’s permit in accordance with Chapter 5.08.

16.    "Town" means the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

17.    "Zoning Regulations" means the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Zoning Regulations, as amended. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.020 License required.

It is unlawful for any person to conduct any business from within the Town boundaries, as defined in Section 5.04.010, without first obtaining a business license from the Town in accordance with this chapter.

Any person or business subject to the Town Tax Code shall by definition be required to obtain a business license. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.030 Change of location.

A business that possesses a current business license shall notify the Department of a change of address within ten (10) days of the change of address. Upon receipt of a notice of change of address, the Department shall give notice of such change to the appropriate Fire District. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.040 Prohibited business locations.

No person shall conduct business within the Town in any structure or area where conducting such business is prohibited by law, by the Town’s Zoning Regulations, by the applicable fire code or by other applicable codes or regulations. No permanent business as defined in Section 5.04.010 shall use any location within a public or private street, nor shall an applicant be licensed to operate a business in any congested area where its operations might impede traffic or otherwise inconvenience the public. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.050 Exemptions.

A business license shall not be required when:

A.    Federal or state law precludes requiring a business license for the business.

B.    The business is the sale of food products by an owner, proprietor or tenant of agricultural lands, orchards, farms and gardens on which such food products are grown, raised or prepared for market, if the business is carried on only at that location.

C.    The activity is regulated by the requirements of Chapter 5.08 or 5.12 for peddlers, solicitors or special events as set forth in this title. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.060 Application/issuance of business license.

A.    Applications for a business license or a temporary business license shall be made on forms and in the manner prescribed by the Community Development Department.

B.    The business license application shall include all of the following information and such other information as the Department deems reasonably necessary:

1.    Name of business.

2.    Name of applicant and relationship to the business or entity.

3.    Complete street and mailing addresses of each business location(s).

4.    A brief description of the nature and type of business.

5.    The type of business entity. If the business is a corporation or limited liability company, the state where formed and the statutory agent’s name and address.

6.    A list of chemicals or other hazardous materials or hazardous wastes which will be used or stored by the business.

7.    List of officers/owners/managers of the business and their addresses.

8.    The name and telephone number for the individual(s) who can be called in case of emergency. This should be a telephone that will be answered twenty-four (24) hours a day.

9.    The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.

10.    The federal, state or local sales tax number.

11.    If the business specified in this title is subject to a certificate of health or sanitary examination, the applicant shall produce such certificate or permit from the Navajo County Health Department, as provided for in Arizona Revised Statutes Section 36-136 as amended. This section shall also apply to all new or remodeled restaurants, bars or other businesses which serve food to the public located within the Town limits.

12.    Where any business specified in this title is subject to other federal, state or local licensing, registration or permit requirements, i.e., professional, medical, technical, contractors, real estate, etc., the applicant shall produce such license, registration or permit from the appropriate federal, state or local governmental authorities.

C.    Any person applying for a business license shall submit the application along with the applicable application fee as established from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the Town Council.

D.    Upon receipt of completed business license application, the Community Development Department shall:

1.    Check the information provided pursuant to this section.

2.    Promptly give a copy of the business license application to the appropriate fire district providing fire protection services to the property.

3.    Promptly give a copy of the business license application to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Police Department.

4.    Issue or deny the license within five (5) working days. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.070 Renewal of business license (permanent business).

A business license for a permanent business shall be renewed every year on July 1st, on the renewal form prescribed by the Community Development Department. The renewal form shall be filed with the Department prior to the expiration date on the last current business license. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.080 Renewal of temporary business license.

Temporary business licenses shall be valid only for the dates shown thereon. A new application and application fee shall be required for renewal. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.090 Inspections.

A.    The Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may inspect the premises of any business for conformance with this title.

B.    Nothing in this title shall require any person or business to upgrade or undertake improvements to an existing building or structure to meet new requirements of the Town Zoning Regulations, Building Code, Electrical Code or any other applicable code that would not otherwise be required by that code. Likewise, a business license application shall not have any effect on a legal, nonconforming use as defined in the Town Zoning Regulations. For example, a business currently operating under a legal, nonconforming use designation would be allowed to continue to carry on that business at the same location in accordance with the Town Zoning Regulations. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.100 Records.

A.    The Department shall keep a record of all business licenses issued for a period of two (2) years after the expiration of the license.

B.    The Department shall keep a record of all business licenses denied for a period of one (1) year after the denial. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.110 Denial of application or revocation of a license.

The Department shall have the power to deny applications and may refuse to issue a business license if the person applying for the license fails to comply with the requirements of this title. If the application for a business license is denied, the reasons for the denial shall be given within five (5) days of the denial. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.120 Suspension/revocation.

A.    Licenses issued under the provisions of this title may be suspended or revoked by the Planning and Zoning Administrator after notice and a hearing before the Administrator for any of the following causes:

1.    Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in a business license application.

2.    Failure to provide or maintain the certificates, licenses or registration required in Sections 5.04.060(B)(11) and (12).

3.    The business creates imminent danger to the public, or has caused serious injury or damage to person(s) or property and is likely to similarly endanger the public.

4.    Other violations of this title.

B.    If the Planning and Zoning Administrator has evidence to conclude that a suspension or revocation is authorized for the reasons set forth in subsection (A)(3) of this section, the Administrator may suspend the license immediately and shall give the applicant notice by certified mail of the suspension, and of a hearing to be held within ten (10) days to determine whether or not the license should be suspended or revoked. This notice shall contain a statement of the reason(s) for the proposed suspension and the suspension or revocation. Within three (3) days after the hearing, if the Planning and Zoning Administrator determines that there is good and sufficient reason for the suspension or revocation of the business license, the Administrator shall enter an order suspending or revoking the license and notifying the applicant of same by certified mail.

C.    If the Planning and Zoning Administrator intends to suspend or revoke a license for any of the reasons in subsection A of this section, except as authorized by subsection B of this section, the Administrator shall give the applicant notice by certified mail sent to the licensee’s last known address of a hearing to be held within ten (10) days to determine whether or not the license should be suspended or revoked. This notice shall contain a statement of the reason(s) for the proposed suspension or revocation. Within three (3) days after the hearing, if the Planning and Zoning Administrator determines that there is good and sufficient reason for suspension or revocation of a business license, the Administrator shall enter an order suspending or revoking the license and notifying the applicant of same by certified mail. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.130 Appeal of denial of business license or revocation of license.

A.    Within ten (10) days, excluding weekends and legal holidays, an applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustment from the refusal of the Community Development Department to issue a license under this title or from the suspension or revocation of any license by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.

B.    The Board of Adjustment, upon receipt of a notice of appeal, shall determine whether or not to stay the revocation pending appeal, and shall set a time for hearing the appeal within thirty (30) days.

C.    The appeal hearing shall be conducted in accordance with other appeals (zoning appeals for example) heard by the Board of Adjustment. The written decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be delivered/mailed to the parties within ten (10) days of the hearing.

D.    Appeals from the Board of Adjustment shall be to the Navajo County Superior Court in accordance with Arizona law. Appeals to the Superior Court shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.140 Exhibition of license or permit.

A.    Every business, peddler and solicitor shall display its license or permit in a location conspicuous to the public at its place of business. Every business not having a fixed place of business shall require its employees or agents to carry the license or permit, or a true facsimile thereof, at all times while carrying on that business for which the license or permit was granted.

B.    Every special event sponsor or participant shall post the permit required by this title in a location conspicuous to the public during all hours of the special event.

C.    Every license or permit holder shall produce and exhibit its license whenever requested to do so by the Administrator, by any police officer or by any other person. Failure to display, produce or exhibit the license, whether intentional or by neglect, shall be a violation of this title. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.150 License or permit not transferable.

No license or permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be in any manner assignable or transferable to any other person or business. Upon the sale or other transfer of a business, a new application for business license or other permit shall be required. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


5.04.160 Enforcement and penalty.

A.    Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Administrator or designee and the Pinetop-Lakeside Police Department to enforce this title. In addition to denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit as authorized in this title, the Town may enforce this title by filing a criminal citation in the Town Magistrate Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction.

B.    Criminal Violation – Penalty. Each day that a business operates in violation of this chapter is a separate violation and any person or enterprise found guilty of violating any part of this chapter is guilty of a Class II misdemeanor. The Town shall not be required to issue a citation for each day a violation subsequent to the date of the violation listed on the citation, and the court may receive evidence and exact a penalty for each day the defendant is in violation subsequent to the date of violation noted on the citation. It will also be within the discretion of the court to dismiss citations in which the defendant has complied with all applicable terms of the Town Code. (Ord. 10-336 § 2 (Exh. A (part)))


Chapter 5.08 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS

Sections:

5.08.010    Permit required.

5.08.020    Exemptions.

5.08.030    Definitions.

5.08.040    Temporary use permit.

5.08.050    Mobile merchants.

5.08.060    Peddlers and solicitors.

5.08.070    Temporary use permit application fee.

5.08.080    Unlawful noise.

5.08.090    Signs prohibiting peddling or soliciting.

5.08.100    Appeal of denial of temporary peddler’s permit or revocation of permit.


5.08.010 Permit required.

It is unlawful for any person to conduct any business which includes sales of goods or services to the general public without first obtaining and maintaining in effect a temporary use permit. A permit card issued by the Community Development Department shall be kept at all times by any person conducting business and shall be surrendered upon request of the Administrator or any police officer of the Town. When sales are conducted from a fixed location the permit and a copy of the state transaction privilege tax license shall be prominently displayed. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.020 Exemptions.

A person conducting sales required by statute, sales by order of any court or bona fide auction sales pursuant to Arizona law; and distributors and wholesalers shall be exempt from this chapter. Any nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization conducting sales shall also be exempt from this chapter. Outdoor sales or activities being conducted on a property directly related to the primary sales of a business located on the same property may be exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.030 Definitions.

A.    "Mobile merchant" means any person who sells any type of tangible personal property, including, but not limited to, food and drink or firewood, at or adjacent to the person’s mobile sales unit in which such tangible personal property is carried.

B.    "Solicitor" or "peddler" means any person who shall sell, offer for or expose for sale, or who shall trade, deal or traffic in, any goods or services in the Town by going from house to house or from place to place or by indiscriminately approaching individuals. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.040 Temporary use permit.

The purpose of this chapter is to allow for short-term activities that are compatible with adjacent and surrounding uses when conducted in compliance with the Zoning Code. Temporary uses are not intended to be permanent uses but are transient in nature, generally allowing for the cultivation and establishment of small, low-overhead businesses.

A.    Time Limits. A temporary use permit shall be valid for up to ten (10) days in any given month.

B.    Allowed Temporary Uses. A temporary use permit shall be required for the following temporary activities: mobile merchants, peddlers and solicitors. Other temporary or short-term activities that do not fall within the categories defined shall comply with the special event permit requirements in Chapter 5.12. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.050 Mobile merchants.

A.    Application Requirements – Procedure. Any mobile merchant desiring to obtain a new or renewal permit must apply to the Town by presenting a complete application, and applicable fee, to the Community Development Department.

1.    Applications must be received a minimum of five (5) business days before the commencement of sales.

B.    All mobile merchants shall provide written authorization from the private property owner(s) or property management company(ies) representing the property owner(s) to utilize the property on which they intend to locate.

C.    A mobile food unit(s) shall be inspected by the Governing Fire Department, or the mobile food vendor shall provide evidence that the mobile food unit passed a fire inspection by another city or town fire department in this state within the preceding twelve (12) months.

D.    The use shall be limited to the approved dates, days and hours of operation as listed on the application. The mobile merchant’s operation shall be occupied by the applicant or an employee working for the applicant during the approved hours of operation.

E.    The location of the mobile merchant’s equipment, structures and display(s) shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet inside the property line and shall conform to an approved site drawing.

F.    There shall be no disruption of vehicle access, traffic flow, pedestrian access ways, or sidewalks or use of landscaped areas.

G.    All signs associated with these events shall be placed in compliance with the provisions of Section 17.108.120, Temporary sign regulations.

H.    The use of any outdoor lighting shall be fully shielded in compliance with the provisions of Section 17.104.100, Outdoor light control, and shall be extinguished outside of the approved hours of operation.

I.    The mobile merchant shall adhere to all Arizona State sales tax requirements and all applicable Navajo County health codes for food preparation, handling and sales.

J.    Refuse, Trash and Litter Maintenance. A mobile merchant shall:

1.    Provide a minimum of one (1) fifteen (15) gallon trash receptacle within fifteen (15) feet of each individual mobile food unit for customers and employees;

2.    Maintain an area around the mobile unit clear of litter, garbage, rubble and debris; and

3.    Transport the trash from the area of operation to an authorized waste disposal location.

K.    Mobile merchant vendors shall be limited to C-1 Light Commercial zoning.

L.    No more than two (2) temporary use permits will be issued at any time for any property. Three (3) or more temporary use permits on a property require a special event permit per Chapter 5.12.

M.    A new or renewal permit shall be issued to an applicant pursuant to this article unless:

1.    The applicant fails to provide a completed application or the required application fee;

2.    The applicant or a controlling person fails to pay transaction privilege taxes or violates the zoning code;

3.    The applicant or controlling person failed to comply with any federal and state laws, regulations promulgated by the Arizona Department of Health Services or Navajo County, or the Town Code. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.060 Peddlers and solicitors.

A.    Application Requirements – Procedure. Any peddler or solicitor desiring to obtain a new or renewal permit must apply to the Town by presenting a complete application, the applicable fee, and fingerprint records to the Community Development Department.

1.    Applications must be received a minimum of forty-five (45) days before the commencement of sales.

2.    Fingerprint records are required on all new applications, for all applicants and controlling persons; and on all renewal applications, for any new controlling persons, and for the licensee.

3.    Fingerprints shall be submitted in a form approved by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. The fingerprints shall be submitted to the Arizona Department of Public Safety to be used to obtain a state and federal criminal records check in accordance with A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544. The Arizona Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation.

B.    Following receipt of the required documents and fees, all applications shall be submitted to the Town Police Department for investigation and criminal record review on behalf of the Community Development Department. The Police Department shall receive and review the criminal history record information resulting from the criminal records check, including conviction and nonconviction data, of license applicants and controlling persons for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of licensees and controlling persons in connection with the issuance, renewal, suspension or revocation of a license. The Police Department evaluation and the criminal information obtained shall be used only for the purpose of supporting and defending a denial, non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of a license.

C.    Complete applications shall be submitted to the Town no later than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the commencement of sales; otherwise the license shall be deemed incomplete.

D.    A new or renewal permit shall be issued to an applicant pursuant to this chapter unless:

1.    The applicant fails to provide a completed application, the required application fee, or the fingerprint records;

2.    The applicant or a controlling person fails to pay transaction privilege taxes or violates the zoning code;

3.    The application contains false or misleading information;

4.    The applicant or controlling person, within the seven (7) year period immediately preceding the submission of the application, was convicted of any of the following:

a.    Felony involving trafficking in stolen property, fraud, forgery, theft, burglary, robbery, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, or any preparatory offenses of the aforementioned crimes;

b.    Felony involving a fraudulent or dishonest act;

c.    Felony involving the sale, manufacture or transportation of any dangerous drug as defined under A.R.S. § 13-3401, a "violent crime" under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapters 11, 12, 13 or a "sexual offense" under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 14, or for conduct in another jurisdiction which if carried out in Arizona would constitute an offense under one (1) of the statutory provisions enumerated in this subsection; or

d.    Misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.070 Temporary use permit application fee.

A.    Any person applying for a temporary use permit as required by this chapter shall submit the application along with an application fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the Town Council. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.080 Unlawful noise.

No permit holder, nor any person in his/her behalf, shall shout, make loud noise, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device including any loudspeaker radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks and other public places of the Town where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.090 Signs prohibiting peddling or soliciting.

It shall be a violation for a peddler or solicitor in the course of business to ring the doorbell or knock at any building whereon any of the following signs is exposed to public view: no peddlers, no solicitors or canvassers, no transient merchants, no soliciting or no trespassing or any other sign which has similar words or intent. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


5.08.100 Appeal of denial of temporary peddler’s permit or revocation of permit.

Any person who wishes to dispute either the denial or revocation of a permit, or the determination that they are liable for any fees under this chapter, may do so by submitting a request for an administrative review hearing in writing no more than ten (10) days after the denial, revocation or fees charged. The Town and the person disputing the denial, revocation or fee shall be given notice of the hearing and an opportunity to be heard. The hearing officer shall establish rules of administration and procedure to ensure the fair and orderly conduct of hearings held pursuant to this section. (Ord. 19-417 § 1 (part))


Chapter 5.12 SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS

Sections:

5.12.010    Permit required.

5.12.020    Time restriction.

5.12.030    Special event application requirements.

5.12.040    Special event plot plan.

5.12.050    Special event permit application fee.

5.12.060    Special event vendor’s permit application fee.

5.12.070    Permit approval/denial.

5.12.080    Location.


5.12.010 Permit required.

A.    It is unlawful for any person to conduct or sponsor a special event as defined in Chapter 5.04 within the Town limits without first obtaining a special event permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.

B.    It is also unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale goods or services at a special event within the Town limits without first obtaining a special event vendor’s permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.

C.    Special events on Town-owned property are subject to the provisions of Chapter 12.12, Town Parks. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


5.12.020 Time restriction.

Special events shall not exceed ten (10) days in duration, nor occur more than four (4) times in any calendar year. A special event permit shall be limited to the specific time restriction shown on the permit. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


5.12.030 Special event application requirements.

Any person applying for a special event permit should submit an application to the Department at least thirty (30) days prior to commencement of the special event. Any submission less than thirty (30) days prior to the event may be declined if, in the determination of the Town Manager, there is not sufficient time to process and approve the application. The application submittal will provide the following information:

A.    Applications for special event permits shall be made on forms and in the manner prescribed by the Community Development Department.

B.    The special event permit application and special event vendor’s permit application shall include all of the following information and such other information as the Department deems reasonably necessary:

1.    Name of person, business or organization.

2.    Name of applicant and relationship to the person, business or organization.

3.    Complete street and mailing addresses of each person, business or organization.

4.    A brief description of the nature and type of the business or organization.

5.    A list of chemicals or other hazardous materials or hazardous wastes which will be used or stored by the business.

6.    The type of business entity. If the business or organization is a corporation or limited liability company, the state where formed and the statutory agent’s name and address.

7.    If a special event will be serving alcohol, the event will be subject to Section 12.12.070, Alcoholic beverages, and Chapter 5.24, Liquor Licenses Generally.

8.    List of officers/owners/managers of the business or organization, with their addresses.

9.    The dates for the special event.

10.    The state sales tax number.

11.    The federal tax identification number.

12.    If the business specified in this chapter is subject to a certificate of health or sanitary examination, the applicant shall produce such certificate or permit from the Navajo County Health Department, as provided for in Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 36, Chapter 1, Article 2, and applicable Navajo County ordinances, as amended.

13.    Where any business specified in this chapter is subject to other federal, state or local licensing, registration or permit requirements, i.e., professional, medical, technical, contractors, real estate, etc., the applicant shall produce such license, registration or permit from the appropriate federal, state or local governmental authorities.

14.    All businesses and special events specified in this chapter shall be subject to the town sign regulations, Chapter 17.108.

15.    All special event applicants/event organizers will be required to provide a certificate of insurance, specifically stating the dates of the special event, for commercial general liability naming the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside as an additional insured. The minimum limits are one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


5.12.040 Special event plot plan.

In addition to the requirements in Section 5.12.030, applicants for a special event permit may be required by the Administrator to submit three (3) copies of an eleven (11) by seventeen (17) inch plot plan, clearly indicating the following:

A.    Exact site location and layout of the event.

B.    Location and number of booth spaces, stalls or vending areas.

C.    Location of temporary structures and temporary utilities necessary for operation.

D.    Location and provision of toilets and other sanitary services.

E.    Ingress and egress.

F.    Fire and emergency vehicle access and 2006 International Fire Code compliance, where applicable.

G.    Parking areas.

H.    Signage.

I.    Lighting.

J.    Any additional information (i.e., security or traffic control plan) as requested by police or fire officials. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


5.12.050 Special event permit application fee.

Any person applying for a special event permit as required by this chapter shall submit an application along with an application fee, as established from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


5.12.060 Special event vendor’s permit application fee.

A special event vendor’s permit shall be required for each vendor offering goods and/or services for sale at a special event. Any business located in the Town that possesses a current business license may obtain an annual vendor’s permit at no charge. Any person applying for a special event vendor’s permit as required by this chapter shall submit an application with proof of a state transaction privilege tax license and demonstrating lawful presence in the United States in accordance with current A.R.S. § 41-1080 along with an application fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the Town Council. Applicants may apply for a single event permit or an annual permit. Applications for special event vendor’s permits shall be submitted to the Department for review and investigation at least ten (10) days prior to the commencement of the special event. It shall be the responsibility of the special event permit holder to ensure that all vendors participating in the event covered by the permit obtain a special event vendor’s permit. Failure to obtain the necessary special event vendor’s permits shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the special event permit. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


5.12.070 Permit approval/denial.

Upon receipt of an application, the Administrator or designee shall conduct the necessary investigation for the protection of public health, safety, welfare and overall public good, including confirmation of a state transaction privilege tax license and demonstrating lawful presence in the United States in accordance with current A.R.S. § 41-1080. The permit application and any required plot plan must be referred to the applicable fire district providing area fire protection and the Police Department. The Police Department may conduct a background check of local records on the applicant(s) for all special events. If, as a result of such investigation, any agency determines that the granting of the permit would be detrimental to the public health, welfare, or safety, the application shall be denied. If a special event permit application is denied, the reason(s) for the denial shall be given in writing within ten (10) days of the denial. The Department shall keep a record of special event permits issued for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


5.12.080 Location.

It is unlawful for any special event to be located on public property within public right-of-way or within any portion of a public street, access lane, or public easement, without the express written permission of the owner and the Administrator. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 5.16 DISTRIBUTORS AND WHOLESALERS

Sections:

5.16.010    Business license required.


5.16.010 Business license required.

A distributor or wholesaler who maintains a business location within the boundaries of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall be required to have a business license in accordance with Chapter 5.04 of this title. Every distributor/wholesaler which does not have a physical location within the Town boundaries and which does business only as a distributor or wholesaler selling or delivering goods to licensed businesses within the Town, as defined in this title shall not be required to have a license or permit as required by this title. (Ord. 97-144 § 1(VI)) (Ord. 02-206)


Chapter 5.18 YARD SALES

Sections:

5.18.010    Definitions.

5.18.020    Regulations.


5.18.010 Definitions.

A.    In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.    "Yard Sale merchandise" means miscellaneous merchandise and personal property offered for sale at a yard sale.

2.    "Yard Sales" means the resale by an owner, resident or designee of a specific residence or lot of yard sale merchandise. Yard sales include, but are not limited to, "tag sales," "garage sales," "lawn sales," "carport sales," and any other similar activity conducted at premises used primarily for residential purposes.


5.18.020    Regulations.

1.    Yard sales shall only be conducted by the owner or resident of a residential address or lot and only for the purposes of selling yard sale merchandise, provided however, that neighborhood or combined yard sales shall be permitted where all other requirements of this section are followed.

2.    Yard sales shall be limited to no more than four (4) times per calendar year per residential address or lot and shall not exceed three (3) days in length for each of the four permitted times.

3.    At no time shall any yard sale be permitted to operate if, in the judgment of the Town Manager, or his designee, such operation generates noise, traffic, or other nuisance detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding neighbors or the community.

4.    Yard sales shall be conducted only during hours beginning one-half (1/2) hour after daylight until one-half (1/2) hour after sunset.

5.    All yard sale merchandise as well as all tables, stands, and other displays shall be removed from public view at the conclusion of each yard sale period.

6.    No more than three (3) off-site temporary signs may be used. Signs shall not be placed so as to obstruct sight lines or create traffic hazards, obscure traffic signage, or obscure permanently placed business signage. Yard sale signs shall not be affixed to any utility pole, traffic sign, or other similar structure. Every sign shall display the name and address of the party(s) responsible for the yard sale. Yard sale signs shall be removed within two (2) hours of the end of the yard sale. (Ord. 06-276)


Chapter 5.20 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE AND REGULATIONS

Sections:

5.20.010    Purpose and intent.

5.20.020    Definitions.

5.20.030    Classification.

5.20.040    License required.

5.20.050    Issuance of license.

5.20.060    Fees.

5.20.070    Inspection.

5.20.080    Expiration of license.

5.20.090    Suspension.

5.20.100    Revocation.

5.20.110    Transfer of license.

5.20.120    Location of sexually-oriented businesses.

5.20.130    Additional regulations for adult motels.

5.20.140    Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually-explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms.

5.20.150    Additional regulations for escort agencies.

5.20.160    Additional regulations for nude model studios.

5.20.170    Additional regulations concerning public nudity.

5.20.180    Prohibition against children in a sexually-oriented business.

5.20.190    Hours of operation.

5.20.200    Exemptions.

5.20.210    Injunction.

5.20.220    Misdemeanor designations and penalties.


5.20.010 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually-oriented businesses within the Town, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually-oriented businesses. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of the chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.


5.20.020 Definitions.

A.    For the purpose of this section, certain terms and words are defined as follows:

1.    "Adult Arcade" Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so displayed exhibit "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

2.    "Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store" A commercial establishment which, offers sexually explicit material for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, and meets one (1) or more of the following criteria:

a.    That has thirty percent (30%) or more of its inventory, stock, or merchandise on hand at any time that is comprised of sexually explicit material; or

b.    That has a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock, or merchandise on hand at any time that is comprised of sexually explicit material; or

c.    That derives thirty percent (30%) or more of its gross income for any one calendar month from the sale or rental, in any form of consideration, of sexually explicit material; or

d.    That derives a substantial or significant portion of its gross income for any one month from the sale or rental, in any form of consideration, of sexually explicit material; or

e.    That at any time displays sexually explicit material either in a display area that is thirty percent (30%) or more of its total display area or on a floor area equal to at least two hundred (200) square feet. For purposes of calculating the floor area, the business premises shall be viewed from above in two dimensions and all areas that are reserved for foot traffic shall be included; or

f.    That displays a substantial or significant amount of sexually explicit material in its display area.

3.    "Adult Cabaret" A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which during any part of any two or more days within any continuous thirty day period features, exhibits, or displays:

a.    Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or

b.    Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities" or

c.    Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides or other reproductions offered in photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital or other imaging medium or other visual representations that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

4.    "Adult Motel" A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:

a.    Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides, or other reproductions offered in photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital or other imaging medium or other visual representations that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult, nude, sex, or "XXX" movies, videos, films or similar reproductions; or

b.    Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or

c.    Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time less than ten (10) hours.

5.    "Adult Motion Picture Theater" A commercial establishment that features, exhibits or displays during any part of any two or more days within any continuous thirty day period for any form of consideration; films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides, or other reproductions offered in photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital or other imaging medium or other visual representations that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters that exhibit "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

6.    "Adult Theater" A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which during any part of any two or more days within any continuous thirty day period features, exhibits, or displays persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude or live performances that expose or exhibit "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."

7.    "Employee" Any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually-oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.

8.    "Escort" A person who for tips or other form of consideration agrees or offers to act as a companion or date for another person and who offers to privately model lingerie, to perform a striptease, to appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, to display any specified anatomical areas or perform any specified sexual activities.

9.    "Escort Agency" A person or business that furnishes; offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts for a fee, tip, or other consideration.

10.    "Establishment" Means and includes any of the following:

a.    The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business; or

b.    The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; or

c.    The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or

d.    The relocation of any sexually-oriented business.

11.    "Licensee" In the case of a business, a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually-oriented business.

12.    "Massage Establishment" Means an establishment in which a person, firm, association or corporation engages in or permits massage activities, including any method of pressure on, friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or simulating of external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance.

This paragraph does not apply to:

a.    Physicians licensed pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes Title 32, chapter 7, 8, 13, 14, or 17.

b.    Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, physical therapists or technicians who are acting under the supervision of a physician licensed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 32, chapter 13, 15, 17, or 19.

c.    Persons who are employed or acting as trainees for a bona fide amateur, semiprofessional athlete or athletic team.

d.    Persons who are licensed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 32, chapter 3 or if the activity is limited to the head, face or neck.

e.    Massage therapy is non-sexual massage offered by an individual who is licensed by a professionally recognized organization.

13.    "Nude Model Studio" Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly exhibited, before other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude Model Studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Arizona or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:

a.    That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and

b.    Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and

c.    Where no more than one (1) nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.

14.    "Nudity" or a "State of Nudity"

a.    The appearance of a human anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or

b.    A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.

15.    Person" An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.

16.    Semi-Nude" A state of dress which shows the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or which shows the male or female buttocks. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.

17.    Sexual Encounter Center" A business or commercial enterprise that offers for any form of consideration or features, displays, exhibits, or permits:

a.    Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between two or more persons when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or

b.    Two or more persons engaging in "specified sexual activities" or exposing "specified anatomical areas."

18.    "Sexually-Oriented Business" An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center, or any combination of the foregoing.

19.    "Specified Anatomical Areas" Means and includes the following:

a.    Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal;

b.    The appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, or areola of the female breast; or

c.    A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, or the areola of the female breast.

20.    "Specified Criminal Activity" Means any of the following offenses:

a.    Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault, molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;

b.    for which:

(1)    Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; or

(2)    Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or

(3)    Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

(a)    The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant.

21.    "Specified Sexual Activities" Means and includes any of the following:

a    The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, that occurs directly and not through clothing; or

b.    Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or

c.    Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

d.    Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (c) above.

22.    "Substantial Enlargement" Of a sexually-oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent (25%) as the floor area exists on the date this chapter takes effect.

23.    "Transfer of Ownership or Control" Of a sexually-oriented business means and includes any of the following:

a.    The sale, lease or sublease of the business;

b.    The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or

c.    The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.


5.20.030 Classification.

Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows:

1.    Adult arcades;

2.    Adult bookstores or adult video stores;

3.    Adult cabarets;

4.    Adult motels;

5.    Adult motion picture theaters;

6.    Adult theaters;

7.    Escort agencies;

8.    Nude model studios;

9.    Sexual encounter centers;

10.    Adult novelty stores; and

11.    Any combination of classifications set forth above.


5.20.040 License required.

A.    It is a Class II misdemeanor:

1.    For any person to operate a sexually-oriented business without a valid sexually-oriented business license issued by the Town pursuant to this chapter.

2.    For any person who operates a sexually-oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually-oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually-oriented business employee by the Town pursuant to this chapter.

3.    For any person to obtain employment with a sexually-oriented business without having secured a sexually-oriented business employee license pursuant to this chapter.

A.    An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the Town.

B.    All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the Town to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.

D.    If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following Section, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.

E.    The completed application for a sexually-oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:

1.    If the applicant is:

a.    An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

b.    A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;

c.    A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process;

d.    A limited liability company, the company shall state its complete name, and the names of all members who own a twenty-percent (20%) or greater interest in the capital or profits of the limited liability company. If the management of the limited liability company is vested in a manager or managers, the company shall also state the name of each person who is a manager of the limited liability company.

2.    If the applicant intends to operate the sexually-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state 1) the sexually-oriented business’s fictitious name and 2) submit the required registration documents.

3.    If the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each offense.

4.    If the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually-oriented business ordinances from another city, town, county or state denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually-oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually-oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.

5.    If the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually-oriented business licenses from another town or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.

6.    The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing.

7.    The location of the proposed sexually-oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any.

8.    The applicant’s mailing address and residential address.

9.    A recent photograph of the applicant(s).

10.    The applicant’s driver’s license number, social security number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.

11.    A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.

12.    A current certificate and straight-line drawing without regard to intervening structures or objects, prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually-oriented businesses within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property line of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, a private, public or charter school, a child care facility, a public park, a public recreation area or a residence within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of the property line of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted.

13.    If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in Section 5.20.140.

F.    Before any applicant may be issued a sexually-oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the Town the following information:

1.    The applicant’s name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual;

2.    Age, date, and place of birth;

3.    Height, weight, hair and eye color;

4.    Present residence address and telephone number;

5.    Present business address and telephone number;

6.    Date, issuing state and number of driver’s permit or other identification card information;

7.    Social Security number; and

8.    Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.

G.    Attached to the application form for a sexually-oriented business employee license as provided above, shall be the following:

1.    A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.

2.    A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant has had a previous license, permit or authorization under this chapter or other similar sexually-oriented business ordinances from another town or county denied, revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) in use by the applicant at the time of such denial revocation or suspension, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application.

3.    A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each offense. (Ord. 09-334 § 1)


5.20.050 Issuance of license.

A.    Sexually-Oriented Business License. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed sexually-oriented business application, the Town shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The Town shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:

1.    Applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.

2.    An applicant is overdue in payment to the Town of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business.

3.    An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license of has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.

4.    An applicant has been denied a license by the Town to operate a sexually-oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months.

5.    An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter.

6.    The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.

7.    The license fee required by this ordinance has not been paid.

8.    An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Sexually-Oriented Business Employee License. Upon the filing of said application for a sexually-oriented business employee license, the Town shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate Town departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the Town shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:

1.    The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license of has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;

2.    The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;

3.    The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter;

4.    The sexually-oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of the chapter; or

5.    The applicant has had a sexually-oriented business employee license revoked by the Town within two (2) years of the date of the current application. If the sexually-oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in Section 5.20.100.

C.    Annual License Renewal. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the Town that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in Section 5.20.060.

D.    Posting Requirement. The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually-oriented business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to Section 5.20.030. All licenses for businesses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time. A sexually-oriented business employee license must be on the employee’s person, readily available for inspection, or at the adult business premises, at all times during which the employee is engaging in such licensed business activities within the Town and shall be available for inspection upon request by any law enforcement officer or any town official whose duties are related to licensing.

E.    Certifications Required. The fire department, and the Town shall complete their certifications that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance with requirements of this chapter and other applicable Town ordinances within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the Town.

F.    License Classification. A sexually-oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as found in Section 5.20.030.


5.20.060 Fees.

A.    Every application for a sexually-oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a $100.00 non-refundable application and a $300.00 per person investigation fee.

B.    In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually-oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the Town an annual non-refundable license fee of $500.00 within thirty (30) days of license issuance or renewal.

C.    Every application for a sexually-oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual $50.00 non-refundable application and license fee, and a $300.00 investigation fee.

D.    All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Town’s Community Development Department.


5.20.070 Inspection.

A.    An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Community Development Department, or other Town departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.

B.    A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or his agent or employee commits a Class II misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business.


5.20.080 Expiration of license.

A.    Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 5.20.040. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.

B.    When the Town denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Town finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final.


5.20.090 Suspension.

A.    The Town shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:

1.    violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;

2.    used to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter;

3.    has violated applicable provisions of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code;

4.    been on the premises of the sexually-oriented business while in an intoxicated condition or has committed disorderly conduct as defined in A.R.S. Section 13-2904 while on the premises of the business, or knowingly has permitted an employee to be on the business premises while the employee was in an intoxicated condition;

5.    knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the premises of the sexually-oriented business.


5.20.100 Revocation.

A.    The Town shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 5.20.090 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.

B.    The Town shall revoke a license if it determines that:

1.    a licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;

2.    a licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;

3.    a licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution or solicitation of prostitution on the premises;

4.    a licensee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;

5.    except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or

6.    a licensee is delinquent in payment to the Town, County, or State for any taxes or fees past due.

7.    on two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons while in or on the licensed premises committed an offense listed in Section 5.20.020 (19)(a), for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were managers or employees of the sexually-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed.

C.    When the Town revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business license for one (1) year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Town finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.

D.    After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court. The license denial, suspension or revocation shall be stayed automatically pending judicial review of such administrative action.


5.20.110 Transfer of license.

A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually- oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.


5.20.120 Location of sexually-oriented businesses.

A.    A person commits a Class II misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business in any zoning district other than as specified in the Town Code.

B.    A person commits a Class II misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of:

1.    A boundary of a residential district as defined in the Town Code;

2.    The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the Town Code.

C.    A person commits a Class II misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of:

1.    A church building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;

2.    A public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, charter schools; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidental as a school;

3.    A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities.

D.    A person commits a Class II misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of a sexually-oriented business within two hundred fifty (250) feet of another sexually-oriented business or on a lot adjacent to an existing sexually-oriented business.

E.    For the purpose of subsection B and C of this Section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection B and C. Presence of a town, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this Section.

F.    For purposes of subsection D of this Section, the distance between a sexually-oriented business and any other building, structure or business shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. (Ord. 09-334 § 2)


5.20.130 Additional regulations for adult motels.

A.    Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.

B.    A person commits a Class II misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually-oriented license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.

C.    For purposes of subsection (B) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.


5.20.140 Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms.

A.    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:

1.    Upon application for a sexually-oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6") inches. The Town may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.

2.    The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.

3.    No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made without the approval of the Town.

4.    It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.

5.    The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

6.    It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this Section.

7.    No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.

8.    The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.

9.    It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.

10.    No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.

11.    No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms.

12.    The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.

13.    The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.

14.    The licensee shall cause all; wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight (48") inches of the floor.

B.    A person having a duty under Subsection (1) through (14) of Subsection (A) above commits a Class II misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.


5.20.150 Additional regulations for escort agencies.

A.    An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.

B.    A person commits a Class I misdemeanor if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.

C.    An escort agency shall obtain a sexually-oriented business license if its business or office location is in the Town or if it furnishes any person who acts as an escort in the Town.


5.20.160 Additional regulations for nude model studios.

A.    The operator of a nude model studio commits a Class I misdemeanor if he/she employs any person under the age of 18 years.

B.    A person under the age of 18 years commits a Class II misdemeanor if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person.

C.    A person commits a Class II misdemeanor if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from a public right of way.

D.    A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.


5.20.170 Additional regulations concerning public nudity.

A.    It shall be a Class II misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts "specified sexual activities."

B.    It shall be a Class II misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually-oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten (10) feet from any patron or customer and on stage at least two feet higher than the floor level.

1.    It is a Class II misdemeanor for an erotic entertainer, while performing, to knowingly:

a.    use his or her hands, or any part of his or her body, to make contact with the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person; or

b.    permit his or her breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals to make contact with any other person; or

c.    display any portion of the areola of the female breast, or any portion of the erotic entertainer’s pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals; or

d.    permit a patron to place money on the person of, or on the costume of, an erotic entertainer provided that incidental hand-to-hand contact occurring during the act of tipping shall not be unlawful; or

e.    perform anywhere other than in the "general patron area" or in any other location which is not entirely visible by "direct line of sight" from the "general patron area." For purposes of this section, "general patron area" means that any portion of the business premises, excluding lobbies and restrooms, which is available to any member of the general public lawfully on the premises without payment of a fee or consideration other than a cover charge or other consideration payable to gain admittance to the premises generally.

f.    For purposes of this subsection, "contact" shall include contact which occurs through clothing or by means of any other object.

B.    It shall be a Class II misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to work as an erotic entertainer on the premises of a business with a liquor license issued by the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control unless such person is at least 19 years old, regardless of whether such person has been issued an employee license by the Town. The manager of the premises for which a liquor license has issued shall require all persons who seek to work on the premises as erotic entertainers to display to the manager valid proof of age in the form of one of the following documents before allowing such persons to work as erotic entertainers on the premises:

1.    A valid driver’s license issued by any state, provided such license includes a picture of the person;

2.    An identification license issued pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 28-3165;

3.    An armed forces identification card;

4.    A valid passport which is issued by a government and which contains a photograph of the person and date of birth; or

5.    Any other identification document issued by a government which has substantial indices of reliability.


5.20.180 Prohibition against children in a sexually-oriented business.

A.    A person commits a Class I misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually-oriented business.

B.    A person commits a Class II misdemeanor if a person operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business and fails, at least once every eight (8) hours during each business day, to inspect or cause to be inspected the outside of the sexually-oriented business premises for trash or waste resulting from specified sexual activities, or describing or depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and, if any such trash or waste is found, to pick up and dispose of the trash or waste properly inside the premises of the sexually-oriented business.


5.20.190 Hours of operation.

No sexually-oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and noon (12:00) P.M. on Sundays. A violation of this provision is a Class I misdemeanor.


5.20.200 Exemptions.

A.    It is a defense to prosecution under Section 5.20.170 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:

1.    by a proprietary school licensed by the state of Arizona, a college, community college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;

2.    by private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or

3.    in a structure:

a.    which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and

b.    where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and

c.    where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.


5.20.210 Injunction.

A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business without a valid license or in violation of Section 5.20.120 of this chapter is subject to a lawsuit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be Class III misdemeanors punishable by a fine of $200.00 or thirty (30) days imprisonment. Each day a sexually-oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation.


5.20.220 Misdemeanor designations and penalties.

See Section 1.16.010 of the Town Code.


Chapter 5.24 LIQUOR LICENSES GENERALLY

Sections:

5.24.010    Application process.

5.24.020    Fees.


5.24.010 Application process.

A.    Upon receipt of a liquor license application other than a special event or extension of premises/patio permit from the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control, the Town Clerk shall:

1.    Promptly send two (2) copies of the application, notice of posting, and affidavit of posting to the Police Department for posting of the application on the business and for a background check. The affidavit and application must be posted for twenty (20) days.

2.    Promptly send one (1) copy of the application to the Community Development Department for a zoning review.

3.    Schedule the license application on the consent agenda for the first meeting after the posting is to be completed, and within the time limits for agenda preparation. Notify the applicant of the date the matter will be placed on the Council agenda, and mail the applicant a follow-up reminder the week prior to the Council meeting.

B.    For a special event liquor license the applicant will fill out the appropriate application giving all of the pertinent information. The Mayor will sign the application for ratification by the Town Council. The applicant will then send the application to the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control with the appropriate fee at least seven (7) days prior to the event.

C.    When an application for extension of premises patio permit is received from the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control, the Town Clerk will promptly make copies and forward them to the Police Department and Community Development Director for the background and zoning review. There is no posting requirement for an extension of premises patio permit. The Town Clerk will schedule the permit for the next possible Town Council agenda.

D.    After the Council has acted on the application, the Town Clerk shall fill out the appropriate form(s) and mail to the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control along with the original Affidavit of Posting.


5.24.020 Fees.

A.    Any person applying for any type of liquor license shall submit the application along with the applicable application fee as established from time-to-time by resolution of the Town Council. (Ord. 06-266)


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.04    Animal Control


Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:

6.04.010    Purpose.

6.04.020    Definitions.

6.04.030    Public nuisance.

6.04.040    Keeping of wild or exotic animals.

6.04.050    Keeping of numerous animals.

6.04.060    Keeping of horses and livestock.

6.04.070    Kennels and breeders; kennel license; facilities; penalties.

6.04.080    Caring for animals.

6.04.090    Sanitation.

6.04.100    Cruelty to animals.

6.04.110    Animal at large - Restraint and confinement - generally.

6.04.120    Restraint of guard dogs.

6.04.130    Biting animals; Restraint of vicious or dangerous animals.

6.04.140    Impoundment.

6.04.150    Return of animal to owner; disposition of large animals.

6.04.160    Disposition of large animals.

6.04.170    Licensing of dogs.

6.04.180    License tags; identification.

6.04.190    Impoundment.

6.04.200    Notice to owner and redemption.

6.04.210    Additional sanctions and remedies.

6.04.220    Enforcement.

6.04.230    Failure to comply with lawful order.

6.04.240    Citations and penalties.

6.04.250    Continuing violations.

6.04.260    Conflicting Chapters.

6.04.270    Severability.

6.04.280    Prohibiting public sales of household animals.

6.04.290    Wild animals.


6.04.010 Purpose.

This Chapter provides for the licensing of all dogs within the boundaries of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona; prohibits domestic or tame animals from running at large; authorizes the impounding and disposition of certain animals; and provides penalties for the violation of this Animal Control Chapter. In addition, this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and to help ensure the humane treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the boundaries of the Town.


6.04.020 Definitions.

A.    When used in this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

1.    "Animal" means any live creature, domestic, tame, feral or wild, except humans. "Animal" includes dogs, cats, pot-bellied pigs, all other mammals, birds, fowl, fish and reptiles. "Animal" includes both the singular and plural of the word, or one or more animals.

2.    "Animal Control Officer" means an employee or agent of the Town, designated by the Chief of Police to administer and enforce the licensing, inspection and enforcement requirements contained within this Chapter. In addition to the Animal Control Officer, any other law enforcement officer with jurisdiction within the Town may administer and enforce the licensing, inspection and enforcement requirements within this Chapter.

3.    "Animal hospital" means any establishments maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of animal diseases and injuries.

4.    "Animal nuisance" means any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of an animal.

5.    "Animal shelter" means any facility operated by the Town, the Humane Society of the White Mountains or other humane society, animal rescue organization or other public or private facility approved by the Town for the temporary care, confinement and detention of animals and for the humane killing and other disposition of animals. The term may also include any private facility authorized by the Town to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal.

6.    "At heel" means a dog is directly behind or next to a person and obedient to that person’s command.

7.    "At large" means that an animal is off the premises of the owner, and not on a leash or otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal.

8.    "Attack" means, with respect to animals and this Chapter, to bite, attempt to bite, growl and show teeth, charge, chase, jump on, scratch, kick or otherwise act in a threatening or aggressive manner which animal act puts a person in fear of being harmed or injured, or which unreasonably interferes with that person’s ability to carry on lawful activities. No actual touching or biting need occur for an "attack" to take place. The finder of fact shall use a "totality of the circumstances" analysis to determine whether an "attack" has occurred. For example, a dog which jumps a fence and chases a person walking to the neighborhood mailbox where the facts indicate that the person is justifiably threatened or scared by the dog’s behavior has been "attacked."

9.    "Breeder or handler" means a person, business or other entity that is engaged in the business of breeding, handling and raising dogs, cats or other domestic animals for any purpose. A person or entity shall be considered a breeder or handler for purposes of this Chapter if the person or entity owns or houses more than the number of animals specified in Section 6.04.050 or the animals owned or possessed by the person or entity give birth to young on more than two (2) occasions in a calendar year. If one animal gives birth to young twice a year or two animals each give birth during a year, the owner or possessor shall be considered a breeder for purposes of this Chapter. All breeders, handlers and kennels shall be required to have a kennel license. Breeder includes animal rescue organizations or other public or private facilities approved by the Town. See Sections 6.04.050 and 6.04.070, below.

10.    "Cruelty" means any act of omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death of an animal is caused or permitted, including failure to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, veterinary care or nutritious food in sufficient quantity. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the humane methods reasonably available.

11.    "Disposition" means adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship or placement or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal. "Disposition" includes placement or sale of an animal to the general public, or removal of an animal from any pet shop to any other location.

12.    "Domestic animal" includes dogs, cats, pot-bellied pigs, domesticated sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits, pheasants, and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement.

 

13.    "Exotic animal" means any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, member of the feline species other than domestic cat (felis domesticus), member of the canine species other than domestic dog (canis familiaris) or any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or domestic farm animals.

14.    "Feral animal" means an animal which is wild or untamed, especially having reverted to such a state from prior domestication. Any feral animal may be trapped by the Town and delivered to an approved Animal Shelter.

15.    "Guard or attack animal" means an animal, especially a dog or large cat trained to attack on command or to protect persons or property, and which will cease to attack upon command.

16.    "Impoundment" means the taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, Animal Control Officer, or any authorized representative thereof.

17.    "Kennel" means any premises wherein any person who owns, possesses, houses or keeps more than the number of animals specified in Section 6.04.050 for any reason, including persons who engage in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training, hunting, selling or other purposes. All kennels, breeders and handlers must have a kennel license. Kennels includes animal rescue organizations or other public or private facilities approved by the Town. See Sections 6.04.050 and 6.04.070, below.

18.    "Livestock" means cattle, sheep, goats, swine, mules and asses except pot-bellied pigs weighing less than one hundred-fifty (150) pounds or goats weighing less than one hundred-fifty (150) pounds.

19.    "Muzzle" means a device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal.

20.    "Owner" means any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights to, any animal covered by this Chapter. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) or more consecutive days.

21.    "Public nuisance animal" means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but not be limited to:

a.    Any animal except cats that is repeatedly found running at large more than two (2) times in a thirty (30) day period or more than six (6) times in any three hundred and sixty five (365) day period;

b.    Any animal that attacks a person;

c.    Any dog or other animal except cats in any Section of a park or public recreation area unless the dog or other animal is controlled by a leash or other similar physical restraint;

d.    Any animal that damages, soils, or defecates on any property other than that of its owner where the owner fails to promptly repair the damage or clean up the feces (an owner shall immediately remove an animal’s feces);

e.    Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to, continued or repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;

f.    Any animal that smells or otherwise causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;

g.    Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals;

h.    Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons in a public right-of-way or on property other than property owned by the animal’s owner;

i.    Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way;

j.    Any animal that attacks a domestic animal;

k.    Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions or offensive odors in yards, enclosures or other surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored;

l.    Any collection of animals that is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number of animals or the conditions created by those animals maintained at a single residence or the inadequacy of the facilities.

22.    "Sanitary" means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the attraction of vermin and insects capable of transmitting disease to humans, domestic animals or livestock.

23.    "Under restraint" means that an animal is secured by a leash, lead under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person’s commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner’s premises.

24.    "Vicious" or "dangerous animal" means any animal that without provocation attacks or attacked a human being or other animal owned by another. An animal that without provocation has attacked a human being or other animal shall be prima facie presumed vicious or dangerous. Animals may also be pronounced or adjudicated vicious or dangerous by a court or other trier-of-fact based upon the "totality of the circumstances."

25.    "Wild animal" means any live monkey, nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild state. The term "wild animal" includes feral dogs and cats, but does not include: domestic, tame dogs (canis familiaris, but excluding feral dogs or hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (felis domesticus, but excluding feral cats or hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild, and captive-bred species of common cage birds.


6.04.030 Public nuisance.

It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property located within the corporate limits of the Town when the keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance or menace to public health or safety. An animal is a public nuisance when the animal unreasonably interferes with a neighboring property owner or possessor’s enjoyment of that neighboring property. In considering whether an animal constitutes a public nuisance a court or other trier-of-fact shall use Section 6.040.020(21) and any other relevant facts and conditions as a guide.


6.04.040 Keeping of wild or exotic animals.

It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, possess, harbor, or permit at large any wild, exotic or feral animal without the prior, written permission of the Animal Control Officer, and other applicable federal or State agencies. Such permission shall be given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Animal Control Officer that the animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety. Experts who are familiar with the species and the particular animal shall prepare and file reports satisfactory to the Town that such animal will not present a danger. Further, neighbors within three hundred (300) feet shall be notified in writing by the animal owner (with copies of such notices to the Town) about the keeping of any such wild, exotic or feral animal.


6.04.050 Keeping of numerous animals.

It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than a total of seven (7) animals which may include up to a maximum number of four (4) dogs, four (4) cats, one (1) pig and one (1) goat, respectively. Any combination of these allowed animals shall not include more than the maximum number of animals (7) as set forth in this Section. Excluded from the maximum of seven (7) animals set forth in this Section, are birds kept in birdcages, small, caged rodents like hamsters, mice and rabbits, and fish, reptiles, snails, frogs, toads or other amphibians which are kept in aquariums or terrariums within the Town. A litter of puppies, kittens or other young animals may be kept for a period of time not exceeding five (5) months from birth and shall not be counted during that time period as part of the maximum number (7) of animals which may be kept. The maximum number of any animal may be limited further if that animal or any combination of animals creates a public nuisance. See Section 6.04.030. This limitation shall not apply to licensed kennels, breeders and handlers. See Section 6.04.060, below.


6.04.060 Keeping of horses and livestock.

A.    Horses. Owners of horses and other animals of the equine family shall comply with the requirements set forth in Title 16, Section 17.104.110, "Equine Regulations," as amended, of the Town Code.

B.    Livestock. No person or other entity shall keep livestock, except domestic, tame horses, pot-bellied pigs or goats within the Town limits in any area which is not specifically zoned for the keeping of livestock. See Section 6.04.050, above, and Town Code, Title 17, Zoning Regulations.


6.04.070 Kennels and breeders; kennel license; facilities; penalties.

A.    A person or entity who is a kennel operator, breeder or handler shall not be required to individually license animals, so long as those animals do not leave the property or kennel, or if the animal is only being transported from one kennel to another where both kennels are permitted or licensed by a governmental authority. Animals leaving the controlled kennel conditions or the property of the breeder shall be licensed as set forth in Section 6.04.170.

B.    A breeder, handler or kennel operator shall be licensed by the Town. Applicants for this license shall fill out an application and pay an annual fee of $125.00 for each kennel or breeding/handling premises operated by the applicant/licensee. A person who fails to obtain a license under this Section is subject to the penalties set forth in Section 6.04.240. A person who fails to obtain a license within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Animal Control Officer shall be guilty of a Class 3 Misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 6.04.240.

C.    The Animal Control Officer may inspect the premises of any breeder, handler or kennel operator to help ensure that the animals are cared for properly and are kept and housed under safe, sanitary, odor controlled conditions, as otherwise set forth in this Chapter.

D.    A breeder, handler or kennel operator shall provide any purchaser of a cat, dog or other animal a written statement that contains the information required by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 44, Chapter 11, Article 17, as amended.

E.    Breeders, handlers and kennel operators shall maintain facilities in which animals are housed in a sanitary condition, in which animals are provided with adequate nutrition and water, and shall provide facilities with adequate space that is appropriate to the age, size, weight and species of animal. Breeders, handlers and kennel operators shall keep such animals confined in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet in height and shall be constructed and maintained so that animals cannot escape. After inspection, the Town may require anti-climbing devices or complete enclosures, sides and top, to help ensure that the animals cannot get out. The areas of confinement shall have all gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked, and all fences properly maintained and escape-proof. Creating escape-proof enclosures shall be the responsibility of the facility owner. For the purposes of this paragraph, "adequate space" means sufficient space for the animal to experience normal body movements without having to make contact with the sides or top of the enclosure, including the ability to stand up, sit down, turn about freely, and relax in a natural position. In addition, all breeding/kennel facilities shall have an area where animals are able to exercise with or without a handler. Further, breeders and kennel operators shall control noise and odor, so as not to interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring properties by their owners and possessors, and so as not to create a public nuisance as defined in Section 6.04.030.

F.    The number of animals housed or kept by breeders, handlers and kennel operators shall be determined by the space available, the condition of the facilities as required by this Section 6.04.070 and when necessary by the Animal Control Officer and/or a licensed veterinarian.

G.    Kennels and other facilities for the boarding of animals are allowed only in certain Commercial Zoning Districts under prescribed conditions. Please see the Town Code, Title 16.

H.    Any breeder, handler or kennel operator, licensed or not, who violates this Section or any other Section of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 6.04.240, below, for first and repeat offenses.


6.04.080 Caring for animals.

A.    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to refuse or fail to regularly provide such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, potable water, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, humane care and treatment, or to unnecessarily expose any such animal in hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather. For most animals, regular provision of food, water and care means daily provision of such necessities, however, the court or other trier-of-fact may admit evidence about what the reasonable standard of care for a particular genus or species of animal is.

B.    No owner or custodian of any animal shall willfully abandon such animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of another person.


6.04.090 Sanitation.

A.    No owner or custodian of any animal shall cause or allow such animal to soil, defile or defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area or common grounds owned jointly by the members of a homeowners or condominium association, or upon private property other than that of the owner, unless such owner or custodian immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such animal by the following methods:

1.    Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and

2.    Removal of such bag or container to the property of the animal owner or custodian and disposition thereafter in a manner as otherwise may be permitted by law.

B.    No person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the Town shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others so as to cause or create unreasonably objectionable odors, or an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner’s or custodian’s property, or to abutting property of others.


6.04.100 Cruelty to animals.

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously strike, beat, abuse, or intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any act to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or trespassing animals.

B.    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to an animal by leaving the animal unattended for a period of four (4) hours or more without water, or to permit animals to compel or require animals to remain out of doors without shelter where the day’s high temperature exceeds ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit or the day’s low temperature is lower than forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit, or night time temperatures for the day are lower than forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit. Shelter includes a doghouse or other enclosed space constructed with a roof, a floor, and at least three (3) enclosed sides. Shelter may also include a residence where access to the residence is accessible by the animal, including a swinging animal door or the like. It shall also be unlawful for any person to fail to feed a dog or cat at least once in each twenty-four (24) hour period.

1.    For purposes of proving what the temperature was in any court proceeding alleging "Cruelty to Animals," it shall be sufficient proof that the daily high temperature or daily low temperature reported in any newspaper or governmental report shows that the temperature exceeded or was less than the temperature set forth in Section 6.04.100(B).

C.    No person, except a licensed veterinarian for humanitarian purposes, shall administer poison to any animal, or knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent to injure any animal. The provisions of this Section are not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control insects and wild rodents.


6.04.110 Animal at large - restraint and confinement - generally.

A.    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, except cats, to fail to keep such animal under restraint or to permit such animal to run at large upon the streets and public ways of the Town. An owner or custodian of any animal shall exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from running at large, or from becoming a public nuisance.

B.    Any animal, except cats, while on a street, sidewalk, public way or in any park, school, or other public space, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner, shall be secured by a leash or chain of sufficient tensile strength to restrain the particular animal, or animals may be at heel and under the direct control of its owner.

C.    An owner or custodian of any animal shall exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from damaging the person or property of others, or from becoming a public nuisance.

D.    Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal, except for planned breeding.

E.    In a rabies quarantine area, no animal shall be permitted at large. Each animal shall be confined within an enclosure on the owner’s property, or secured so that the animal is confined entirely to the owner’s property, or on a leash not to exceed six (6) feet in length and directly under the owner’s control and not on the owner’s property.


6.04.120 Restraint of guard dogs.

A.    Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet in height and shall be topped with an anti-climbing device constructed of angle metal braces with at least three (3) strands of equally separated barbed wire stretched between them.

B.    All anti-climbing devices shall extend inward at an angle of not less then forty-five (45) degrees or more than ninety (90) degrees when measured from the perpendicular.

C.    The areas of confinement shall have all gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked, and all fences properly maintained and escape proof.

D.    The provisions of this Section shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies.


6.04.130 Biting animals; Restraint of vicious or dangerous animals.

A.    An unvaccinated dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in the Town’s animal shelter, a county pound or, on request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than ten (10) days. The quarantine period shall start on the day of the bite incident. If the day of the bite is not known, the quarantine period shall start on the first day of impoundment. A dog properly vaccinated pursuant to this Chapter that bites any person may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the Animal Control Officer.

B.    Any domestic animal, other than a dog a cat, that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined at the animal control shelter or, on the request and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days. Livestock shall be confined and quarantined for the fourteen (14) day period in a manner regulated by the Arizona department of agriculture. Caged or pet rodents or rabbits may also be quarantined or laboratory tested.

C.    Any wild animal that bites any person or directly exposes any person to its saliva may be killed and submitted to the county health department or other government health department for transport to an appropriate diagnostic laboratory. A wild rodent or rabbit may be submitted for laboratory testing if the animal has bitten a person and either the animal’s health or behavior indicates that the animal may have rabies or the bite occurred in an area that contains a rabies epizootic, as determined by the Department of Health Services.

D.    Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the Animal Control Officer immediately by any person having direct knowledge.

E.    The Animal Control Officer may destroy any animal confined and quarantined pursuant to this Section before the termination of the minimum confinement period for laboratory examination for rabies if:

1.    The animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies or the animal has been impounded for at least seventy-two (72) hours, and the animal acts viciously towards the animal’s caregivers or the animal shelter employees, and the Town Magistrate has ordered the animal’s destruction.

2.    The animal’s owner consents to its destruction.

F.    Any biting animal subject to licensing under this Chapter found without a tag identifying its owner shall be deemed unowned.

G.    The Animal Control Officer shall destroy a vicious animal by order of the Town Magistrate. The Town Magistrate may issue an order to destroy a vicious animal after notice to the owner, if any, and the person who was bitten, and a hearing. The Town Magistrate may impose additional procedures and processes to protect all parties in the interest of justice and any decision by the Magistrate may be appealed to the Superior Court.

H.    The owner of a vicious animal shall be responsible for any fees incurred by the Animal Control Officer, the Town, and the animal shelter for the impounding, sheltering and disposing of the vicious animal.

I.    Every vicious animal shall be confined by its owner or authorized agent of its owner within a building or secure enclosure and, whenever off the premises of its owner, shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not more than five (5) feet in length, or caged. Every person harboring a vicious animal is charged with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in such a way that the vicious animal will not have access to the public, especially children, and that the public will not have access to the vicious animal.

J.    In addition to any other penalties provided for violation of this Section, a court may order that an animal, which is found to be a vicious or dangerous animal, be euthanized or destroyed after notice to the owner, if any, and the person who was bitten, and a hearing.


6.04.140 Impoundment.

The Animal Control Officer or any police officer may impound any animal which is at large or which is the subject of any violation of this Chapter. Any other person finding an animal at large upon his property may remove the same to any animal shelter that will take possession of the animal. If no such shelter is available, the property owner may hold the animal in his own possession, and as soon as possible, notify the Animal Control Officer or the Police Department. The property owner shall provide a description of the animal and the name of the owner, if known. The police department may dispatch an officer to take possession of and impound the animal.


6.04.150 Return of animal to owner.

If the name of the owner or custodian of an animal found at large is known or can be easily obtained or obtained with reasonable dispatch, the Animal Control Officer may attempt to return the animal to the residential address of the owner, or the officer may leave written notice of whom the owner must contact to reclaim the animal. If the owner is unknown to the officer or if there is no one present at the owner’s address, the officer shall then remove the animal to the nearest animal shelter that will accept the animal.


6.04.160 Disposition of large animals.

The Animal Control Officer or other designated person on call who removes a large animal such as equine or livestock or any other animal not acceptable by any animal shelter shall be authorized to call a trucking firm or company which shall convey the animal to a farm or other appropriate facility that has an agreement with the Town to accept large animals. The disposition of any animal removed to a facility other than an animal hospital or shelter shall be handled in the same manner as though the animal were confined in an animal hospital or shelter.


6.04.170 Licensing of dogs.

A.    "License required." No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog over the age of four (4) months within the Town unless such dog is licensed, as provided in this Chapter.

B.    "Application." Application for such license shall be made by the owner on a form to be approved by the Town or the Humane Society of the White Mountains within ten (10) days after acquiring any dog over four (4) months of age or within ten (10) days after a dog becomes four (4) months of age; provided that any owner moving to the Town for the purpose of establishing residence or becoming a resident as a result of any annexation, and otherwise required to obtain a license, shall have until ten (10) days after moving or annexation to obtain such a license.

C.    "Proof of rabies vaccination required." All owners applying for a license must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the animal for which the license is being obtained has been inoculated against rabies within the last two (2) years.

D.    "Proof of sterilization." Any owner claiming that his dog has been neutered must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that such operation has been performed.

E.    "Payment of license fee." A license fee shall be paid at the time of making application. The license fee shall be Ten ($10) Dollars for each neutered dog and Twenty-five ($25) Dollars for each un-neutered (intact) dog.

F.    "Exemption from license fee." License fees shall not be required for Seeing Eye dogs, government police dogs, or dogs belonging to a nonresident of the Town and kept within the boundaries of the Town for not longer than thirty (30) days; provided that all dogs of nonresidents shall at the time of entry into the Town be properly vaccinated against rabies, and while kept within the Town, meet all other requirements of this Chapter. Any owner claiming any of these exemptions has the burden of proving to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the dog in question is entitled to such exemption.

G.    "License Optional." Owners of cats, ferrets and other domestic, tame animals are encouraged to license their animals or have a veterinarian inject a microchip to help identify or locate their animal if it becomes lost.

H.    "Penalties." Any owner of a dog over the age of four (4) months who fails to obtain a license within the time period specified in this Chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of Fifty Dollars ($50.00).


6.04.180 License tags; identification.

A.    Upon payment and acceptance of the license fee, the licensing authority shall issue a durable license tag (or collar), stamped with an identification number for the animal for which the license has been issued. Any license issued for keeping of a dog shall take effect on the date of issuance and shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. Every dog for which the owner is required to obtain a license must wear a valid license tag (or collar) at all times when the animal is off the premises of its owner.

B.    Dog licenses are not transferable. No person may use a license for any other animal other than the animal for which the license was issued. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove from the neck of any dog the license tag (or collar) issued pursuant to this Section or alter such tag in any manner.

C.    The fee for issuance of a duplicate license tag is Three ($3) Dollars.

D.    Identification of other animals. Owners of cats, ferrets and other domestic, tame animals are encouraged to license their animals or have a veterinarian inject a microchip to help identify or locate their animal if it becomes lost.


6.04.190 Impoundment.

A.    In addition to any other remedies provided in this Chapter, an Animal Control Officer or a police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to an animal shelter or hospital any of the following animals:

1.    Any dog without a valid license tag;

2.    Any animal at large;

3.    Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the public;

4.    Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order of the Town’s or the County’s chief health officer;

5.    Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of care;

6.    Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected;

7.    Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;

8.    Any animal that is reasonably believed to have bitten a person or which is reasonably believed to be vicious, dangerous, or whenever the Animal Control Officer or a police officer determines that there is a threat to public health and safety;

9.    Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed;

10.    Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested, or evicted from his regular place of residence.

B.    An Animal Control Officer or police officer may also, or in lieu of impoundment, issue to the owner a notice of violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner a civil penalty of Seventy-Five ($75) Dollars that may, at the discretion of the animal owner, be paid to the Magistrate Court in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the event that such civil penalty is not paid, the owner shall appear before the Magistrate Court at a hearing to be set by the judge.

C.    The fees for the impoundment of animals shall be set by a schedule of fees adopted from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.


6.04.200 Notice to owner and redemption.

A.    Upon impoundment of an animal, the Animal Control Officer shall promptly attempt to notify the owner by telephone or mail. If the owner is unknown, the officer shall deliver the animal to an animal shelter. Any notice to the owner shall also include the location of the shelter or hospital where the animal is confined. The owner shall also be advised that the failure to claim the animal within a specific period of time may result in the disposition of the animal.

B.    An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay the reasonable costs of impounding, transporting, and caring for the animal as set by a schedule of fees adopted from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.

C.    Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within seventy-two (72) hours shall become the property of the Town and may be placed for adoption in a suitable home or euthanized in a manner prescribed by law and the policies of the animal control facility, humane society or animal hospital.


6.04.210 Additional sanctions and remedies.

A.    As part of any order, judgment or finding issued by a judge for violations of this Chapter, in addition to any civil penalties or fines imposed, the judge shall have the authority to order any of the following sanctions and remedies:

1.    Obedience training for the animal(s) in question;

2.    Muzzling of an animal while off the property of the owner;

3.    Required purchase and use of bark collars for dogs;

4.    Confinement of an animal indoors or to a leash;

5.    Requiring the owner to take measures to reduce or eliminate noise, odor or other problems which create a public nuisance.

6.    Confinement of an animal in a secure enclosure, including the construction of such enclosure;

7.    Restriction of the number of animals kept at any location, including a ban on keeping certain species of animals at a location;

8.    Removal of an animal from a person or a location;

9.    Sterilization of an animal;

10.    Any other remedy or sanction designed to eliminate a violation of this Chapter, prevent future violations of this Chapter, or which otherwise protects the health and safety of the public.


6.04.220 Enforcement.

The Animal Control Officer or other designees of the Chief of Police shall be the enforcement officials for this Chapter. These officials, along with police officers, shall have the authority to act on behalf of the Town in investigating complaints, impounding and destroying animals, issuing citations, and taking other lawful actions as required to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. It shall be a violation of this Chapter to interfere with any Animal Control Officer or other enforcement official in the performance of those duties.


6.04.230 Failure to comply with lawful order.

The failure to comply with any lawful order of an Animal Control Officer, police officer or other enforcement official, unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be a violation of this Chapter.


6.04.240 Citations and penalties.

A.    The Animal Control Officer or any other law enforcement officer may cite violators of this Chapter using the uniform traffic citation form or any other form approved by the Chief of Police. The citation shall show the specific Section or Sections alleged to have been violated, a brief description of the violation, whether the citation is for a civil or criminal offense, and whether the violation is charged as a second, third or greater offense. If there is no designation of a second or greater offense, the citation shall be considered a first offense. For continuing violations, the dates or the number of days shall also be noted on the citation.

B.    Civil Violation. When a violation of this Chapter is undesignated or designated a first offense by the Animal Control Officer, other enforcement officer or the Town Attorney, a person found to have been in violation of this Chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250), plus restitution for medical treatment or any other economic loss suffered by any person.

C.    Criminal Violation. When a person convicted of a violation of this Chapter is a person who has been previously convicted of a violation of a provision of this Chapter within a period of twelve (12) months, or is a kennel operator, breeder or handler, with or without the required kennel or breeder’s license, the person shall be deemed to have committed a Class 3 Misdemeanor, pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 13, Chapters 6, 7 and 8, as amended, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each violation or count, plus surcharges, fees and restitution for medical treatment or any other economic loss suffered by any person.


6.04.250 Continuing violations.

If any violation of this Chapter continues, each day’s violation shall be deemed as a separate violation, as long as the Animal Control Officer or enforcement official notes the dates or the number of days on the citation.


6.04.260 Conflicting Chapters.

All other Ordinances or Chapters of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona that are in conflict with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict, only.


6.04.270 Severability.

The provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable. If any Section, sentence, clause or phrase of the Chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining Sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Chapter, but they shall remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this Chapter shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of any part. (Ord. 05-247)


6.04.280 Prohibiting public sales of household animals.

A.    Public Sale of Household Animals.

1.    Prohibiting the public sale of household animals by knowingly selling on: 

a.    Public highways, streets or parks or any public property adjacent to public highways, streets or parks. 

b.    Commercial private property without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the property. 

2.    Allowing the public sale of animals: 

a.    By retail sales on the premises of a pet store. 

b.    At a publicly operated or private, charitable nonprofit pound, humane society, animal rescue organization or educational or agricultural association or any animal adoption activity that a pound or humane society conducts including adoption or sales off site. 

c.    At a rodeo, auction, market, county fair, stock show or other sanctioned livestock event. 

d.    At a private residence. 

B.    Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor that carries a penalty of up to four (4) months in jail, two (2) years’ probation and a seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) maximum fine. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. 

C.    Definitions.

1.    "Household animal" means any living species of mammal, bird or reptile that may be housed in a private residence. 

2.    "Pet store" means a commercial establishment that engages in a for-profit business of selling at retail cats, dogs or other animals, but does not include commercial livestock operations and commercial livestock auction markets. (Ord. 08-320 §§ 2, 3, 4)


6.04.290 Wild animals.

A.    An individual and/or property owner who leaves garbage, refuse, or debris outside that results in attracting bears, coyotes, javelinas, or other similar wild animals shall be given a verbal or written warning advising them that a second violation will result in a civil citation.

B.    An individual and/or property owner who fails to take remedial action to avoid contact between humans and bears, coyotes, javelinas, or other similar wild animals after having been notified by Animal Control or any peace officer is guilty of a civil violation. Remedial action may include, without limitation, actions to secure or remove outdoor trash and any other food source or attractant likely to attract bears, coyotes, javelinas, or other similar wild animals.

C.    Exhibitions or parades of wild animals may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the Town unless the exhibition or parade is conducted by another government agency or is adequately covered under another Town permit. (Ord. 10-343 § 2)


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.04    Fire Restrictions/Outdoor Burning

8.06    Emergency Management Authority/Service/Planning

8.08    Sale of Pseudoephedrine Products

8.12    Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities

8.16    Fireworks


Chapter 8.04 FIRE RESTRICTIONS/OUTDOOR BURNING

Sections:

8.04.010    Guidelines.

8.04.020    Definitions.

8.04.030    General fire restrictions.

8.04.040    Emergency fire restrictions.

8.04.050    Stage 1 – Minimal restrictions.

8.04.060    Stage 2 – Moderate to severe restrictions.

8.04.070    Exceptions from emergency fire restrictions.

8.04.080    Failure to obey lawful order.

8.04.090    Violations.


8.04.010 Guidelines.

A.    The purpose of these guidelines is to help provide a uniform system for political subdivisions in southern Navajo County to determine what fire restrictions are needed and when they are to be put into place during emergency fire conditions. In addition, one (1) goal of these guidelines is to have neighboring jurisdictions work together to try to establish a uniform date for implementation of fire restrictions.

B.    It shall be the duty of the Town’s Emergency Management Director after consultation, if necessary, with the U.S. Forest Service, local fire districts, other emergency management directors in the region, etc., to initiate fire restrictions within the Town during emergency fire conditions.

C.    The Town’s Emergency Management Director will utilize the U.S. Forest Service ("U.S.F.S.") Apache-Sitgreaves Energy Release Components ("ERC") Monitoring System to help determine when fire restrictions may be necessary. As a general guideline, when the ERC reading reaches ninety (90%) percent for at least five (5) consecutive days, fire restrictions should be considered.

D.    The Emergency Management Director for Navajo County will work with the Town’s Emergency Management Director to attempt to initiate and coordinate a uniform date for implementing fire restrictions.

E.    When the Town’s Emergency Management Director, after consultation with the Town Manager, determines that fire restrictions are necessary and the date of initiation has been determined, the Town’s Emergency Management Director will direct that appropriate fire restrictions be ordered, and will notify the public of the nature and extent of the fire restrictions and the effective date. Fire restriction information needs to be disseminated not only to local residents, but to visitors and tourists as well. (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part): Ord. 12-362; Ord. 05-249 § 2 (part))


8.04.020 Definitions.

A.    "Campfire" means an open outdoor fire that is used only for cooking of food or for providing personal warmth for human beings or for recreational purposes.

B.    "Charcoal fire" means an open outdoor fire that uses primarily charcoal as the combustible material, and which is used only for the purpose of cooking food.

C.    "Emergency Management Director" means a person who is designated by the Town Manager.

D.    "Flue" means a pipe, tube, channel, duct or passage through which hot air, gas, steam, smoke or fire may pass, such as a chimney, stovepipe or stack.

E.    "Open outdoor fire" means any burning, oxidation or combustion of combustible material of any type in the open where the products of combustion are not directed through a flue, but not including campfires and charcoal fires.

F.    "Red flag warning" or "red flag conditions" means a posting by the National Weather Service to inform the Town and other agencies of the imminent or actual occurrence of extreme fire danger or extreme fire conditions.

G.    "Wind advisory" means an advisory issued by the National Weather Service when there are sustained winds of thirty-one (31) to thirty-nine (39) miles per hour and/or gusts of forty-six (46) to fifty-seven (57) miles per hour.

H.    "High wind warning" means a warning when winds are expected to reach forty plus (40+) miles per hour and/or wind gusts of fifty-eight plus (58+) miles per hour. 

I.    "Smoking" means burning, smoldering or lit cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos, smoking pipes or other smoking products containing tobacco or other plant material. (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part): Ord. 05-249 § 2 (part))


8.04.030 General fire restrictions.

It shall be unlawful for any person to start, ignite, cause or permit to be ignited, or to allow or maintain any open outdoor fire except as allowed by permit through the Town, the applicable fire district, or the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, as set forth in A.R.S. Title 49. The following fires are excepted from these fire restrictions:

A.    Fires used only for cooking of food or for providing warmth for human beings or for recreational purposes (campfires and charcoal fires), or the branding of animals or the use of orchard heaters for the purpose of frost protection in farming or nursery or the disposal of flags pursuant to federal law.

B.    Any fire set or permitted by any public officer in the performance of official duty, if such fire is set or permission given for the purpose of instruction in the methods of fighting fires or the control of an active wildfire.

C.    Fires set by or permitted by the Director of the Arizona Department of Agriculture or Navajo County agricultural agents for the purposes of disease and pest prevention.

D.    Fires authorized by special permits as issued by the Town’s Emergency Management Director, fire district or fire department.

E.    Fires set by or permitted by the federal government or any of its departments, agencies or agents or the state or any of its agencies, departments or political subdivisions for the purpose of watershed rehabilitation or control through vegetative manipulation.

F.    Fires permitted by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 49, by any special or conditional permit issued by a hearing board established under A.R.S. Title 49, or by any rule or conditional permit issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 49, and when pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-402, the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality has assumed jurisdiction of the county in which the fire is located. (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part): Ord. 05-249 § 2 (part))


8.04.040 Emergency fire restrictions.

A.    In addition to the fire restrictions set forth in Section 8.04.030, the following emergency fire restrictions when ordered and in effect shall apply to all public and private properties:

1.    During "red flag warning," "wind advisory" and/or "high wind warning" conditions, as posted by the National Weather Service, no open outdoor fires, campfires, charcoal fires or outdoor smoking shall be permitted on either public or private property within the Town.

B.    When it has been determined by the Emergency Management Director, after consultation with the Town Manager and the Mayor, that additional fire restrictions are needed to assure the safety of the public, the Town’s Emergency Management Director will initiate the appropriate restriction stage level. (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part): Ord. 05-249 § 2 (part))


8.04.050 Stage 1 – Minimal restrictions.

A.    The following acts are prohibited until further notice:

1.    Building, maintaining, attending, or using a fire or campfire unless noted in the exemptions below.

2.    Smoking outside of designated areas.

B.    Exemptions.

1.    Persons with written permits that specifically authorize the otherwise prohibited act.

2.    Fires used only for cooking of food or for providing warmth for human beings or for recreational purpose (campfires and charcoal fires) in an area that is designated for that purpose and is barren or cleared of all debris.

3.    Smoking within an enclosed building and inside vehicles is allowed. Smoking may also be allowed in or on porches, carports, garages, parking lots and other areas or properties which are cleared of all combustible materials so long as the smoking does not create a substantial risk of fire. Throwing or discarding lit cigarettes, cigars or other smoking materials from a vehicle or from one’s possession out of doors is prohibited. 

4.    Persons using a device solely fueled by liquid petroleum or LPG fuels that can be turned on and off. Such devices can only be used in an area that is barren or cleared of all overhead and surrounding flammable materials within three (3) feet of the device.

5.    Persons conducting activities in those designated areas where the activity is specifically authorized by written posted notice.

6.    Any federal, state, or local officer or member of an organized rescue or firefighting force in the performance of an official duty.

An exemption does not absolve an individual or organization from liability or responsibility for any fire started by the exempted activity. (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part))


8.04.060 Stage 2 – Moderate to severe restrictions.

A.    The following acts are prohibited until further notice:

1.    Building, maintaining, attending, or using a fire, campfire, charcoal, coal, or wood including fires in developed campgrounds or improved sites.

2.    Smoking outside of designated areas.

3.    Outdoor Mechanical and Industrial Prohibitions.

a.    Operating any internal combustion engine in the course of mechanical or industrial operations that would produce open flames or sparks.

b.    Welding, or operating acetylene or other torch with open flame.

4.    Operating motorized vehicles off designated roads and trails.

B.    Exemptions.

1.    Persons with written permits that specifically authorize the otherwise prohibited act.

2.    Industrial operations where specific operations and exemptions are identified and mitigation measures are implemented as outlined in an agency plan.

3.    Smoking within an enclosed building and inside vehicles is allowed. Smoking may also be allowed in or on porches, carports, garages, parking lots and other areas or properties which are cleared of all combustible materials so long as the smoking does not create a substantial risk of fire. Throwing or discarding lit cigarettes, cigars or other smoking materials from a vehicle or from one’s possession out of doors is prohibited.

4.    Persons operating internal combustion engines with spark arrestors such as lawnmowers and landscaping equipment in maintained landscaped space.

5.    Welding, or operating acetylene or other torch with open flame, in an enclosed or developed area designated for that purpose that is equipped with appropriate fire protection.

6.    Persons using a device solely fueled by liquid petroleum or LPG fuels that can be turned on and off. Such devices can only be used in an area that is barren or cleared of all overhead and surrounding flammable materials within three (3) feet of the device.

7.    Operating generators with an approved spark arresting device within an enclosed vehicle or building or in an area that is barren or cleared of all overhead and surrounding flammable materials within three (3) feet of the generator.

8.    Operating motorized vehicles on designated roads and trails so long as you park in an area devoid of vegetation within ten (10) feet of the roadway.

9.    Emergency repair of public utilities and mitigation measures are implemented as outlined in an agency plan. 

10.    Persons conducting activities in those designated areas where the activity is specifically authorized by written posted notice.

11.    Any federal, state, or local officer or member of an organized rescue or firefighting force in the performance of an official duty.

An exemption does not absolve an individual or organization from liability or responsibility for any fire started by the exempted activity. (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part))


8.04.070 Exceptions from emergency fire restrictions.

The following fires are excepted from the provisions of the emergency fire restrictions set forth in this chapter:

A.    Fires set or permitted by any public officer, federal, state or local, in the performance of their official duties.

B.    Fires set or permitted by the State Entomologist or Navajo County agricultural agents for the purpose of disease and pest prevention.

C.    Fires set or permitted by the federal government, the White Mountain Apache Tribe, the State of Arizona or any of their departments, agencies or political subdivisions for the purpose of fire prevention or control, or watershed rehabilitation or control through vegetative manipulation.

D.    Fires permitted by the Town’s Emergency Management Director or his designee. The conditions of the permit, including permitted date(s), nature of the burning, etc., shall be on every such permit issued. (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part): Ord. 05-249 § 2 (part). Formerly 8.04.050)


8.04.080 Failure to obey lawful order.

The failure to obey a lawful order by the Town’s Emergency Management Director or designee, a police officer, a firefighter or other officer of a fire district, uniformed personnel or certified peace officer of the U.S.F.S. or failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter (including without limitation an order to extinguish or put out any lit, burning or smoldering materials during emergency fire restrictions) shall be a distinct and separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part): Ord. 05-249 § 2 (part). Formerly 8.04.060)


8.04.090 Violations.

A.    Civil Violation. When a violation of this chapter is undesignated or designated a first offense by the police officer, other enforcement official or the Town Attorney, a person found to have been in violation of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus restitution for medical treatment and property damage or any other economic loss suffered by any person.

B.    Criminal Violation. When a person convicted of a violation of this chapter is a person who has been previously convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within a period of twelve (12) months, or has refused to obey the lawful order of an officer as set forth in Section 8.04.080, the person shall be deemed to have committed a Class I misdemeanor, pursuant to A.R.S. Title 13, Chapters 6, 7 and 8, as amended, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for each violation or count, plus surcharges, fees and restitution for medical treatment and property damage or any other economic loss suffered by any person.

C.    Continuing Violations. If any violation of this chapter continues, each day’s violation shall be deemed as a separate violation, as long as the police officer or enforcement official notes the dates or the number of days on the citation(s). (Ord. 19-421 § 1 (part): Ord. 05-249 § 2 (part). Formerly 8.04.070)


Chapter 8.06 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY/SERVICE/PLANNING

Sections:

8.06.010    Purpose.

8.06.020    Mayor’s authority.

8.06.030    Manager’s authority.


8.06.010 Purpose.

A.    The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the general authority to act in the most effective and efficient manner at times of local, regional, or national emergency, whether involving the Town directly or indirectly.

B.    "Emergency," when used in this chapter, means an emergency that has been declared by a person authorized pursuant to the laws, rules, and regulations of state, local, or federal government or any political subdivision thereof or by a public utility such as natural gas, electric, water, or sewer. (Ord. 11-354 § 1 (part))


8.06.020 Mayor’s authority.

A.    The Mayor is authorized to act to the fullest extent of authority of state law currently set forth in A.R.S. § 26-301 et seq. and in the Mayor’s absence the Vice Mayor is authorized to act.

B.    The Mayor at times of declared emergency may execute or authorize the Town Manager to execute any and all documents or agreements that may be reasonably necessary for the Town’s involvement in the emergency.

C.    Any document or agreement executed by the Mayor or Manager pursuant to subsection B of this section will be presented to the Town Council for its consideration to either ratify or disapprove. If the Town Council disapproves the document or agreement, such disapproval will not impact the validity of the document or agreement; however, the Mayor or Manager will take immediate action to terminate or discontinue any agreement or document use which they have executed pursuant to this chapter once it has been disapproved by the Town Council.

D.    The Mayor is authorized to exercise the powers and authorities set out by law including but not limited to A.R.S. § 26-311. (Ord. 11-354 § 1 (part))


8.06.030 Manager’s authority.

A.    The Town Manager as the Chief Administrative Officer and executive head of Town government at times of declared emergency is a logical point of contact for other entities involved directly or indirectly in the emergency, and the Town Manager shall act with such express and implied authorities of any applicable law, rule, regulation, or approved emergency management plan or mutual aid or services agreements.

B.    The Town Manager, at times of declared emergency that directly or indirectly impacts the Town, may execute any and all documents reasonably necessary for the Town’s efficient and effective participation in the emergency and related to the use of the Town personnel and resources and potential reimbursement for such use.

C.    If time and circumstances allow, the Manager will obtain the approval or direction of the Mayor prior to executing any document or agreement that would otherwise require the approval of the Town Council. Any such document or agreement executed by the Manager will be presented to the Town Council in accordance with Section 8.06.020(C).

D.    The Town Manager is authorized and directed to provide and involve the Town in emergency planning and management on local, regional, and national levels.

E.    The Manager is authorized and directed to act on behalf of the Town in accordance with the express and implied purposes, intentions, spirit, powers and authority of state statute currently set forth at A.R.S. § 26-301 et seq. (Ord. 11-354 § 1 (part))


Chapter 8.08 SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS

Sections:

8.08.010    Definitions.

8.08.020    Security of pseudoephedrine products.

8.08.030    Sale to adult only by adult employee.

8.08.040    Quantity that may be sold.

8.08.050    Purchaser log book; identification requirements.

8.08.060    Confidentiality of identification information.

8.08.070    Requirement to report suspicious sale.

8.08.080    Violations; penalties.


8.08.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

A.    "Pseudoephedrine Product" is a class of sympathomimetic drugs commonly used in over-the-counter, solid dosage form products for the relief of nasal congestion. Pseudoephedrine chloride and any other salt of pseudoephedrine, ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine, whether included as the single active ingredient or in combination with other drugs, shall be included in this definition as "pseudoephedrine products." Pseudoephedrine products are also used illegally to make or manufacture methamphetamine and other illicit drugs.

B.    "Proper identification" shall mean a recognized government issued photo identification of the adult purchaser including, but not limited to, a current, valid driver’s license, other government-issued identification card or passport.

C.    "Solid dosage form" means any of the many pharmacy dosage forms like tablets, capsules, caplets, pills, powders, troches, lozenges, cachets, pellets or confections which are solid and which are not in liquid or gaseous form.


8.08.020 Security of pseudoephedrine products.

Any business, retailer or establishment that sells pseudoephedrine products in a tablet or other solid dosage form must store, display and hold all such pseudoephedrine products in an area that is not accessible to the public and where such products are continually monitored by a pharmacist to prevent theft and unauthorized or uncontrolled purchases.


8.08.030 Sale to adult only by adult employee.

Any compound, mixture or preparation in solid dosage form that contains pseudoephedrine products shall be sold or dispensed only to an adult only by an adult employee of the business, retailer or establishment.


8.08.040 Quantity that may be sold.

No business, retailer or establishment shall sell more than a total of six grams (6 Gm.) in any solid dosage form of pseudoephedrine product(s) to a person within any thirty (30) day period, except pseudoephedrine product(s) dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription issued to the patient by a licensed health care practitioner in accordance with Arizona law.


8.08.050 Purchaser log book; identification requirements.

Every business, retailer or establishment that sells or dispenses pseudoephedrine products shall keep a log book(s) which shall contain entries for all pseudoephedrine products sold or dispensed. No pseudoephedrine product shall be sold or dispensed to a person under eighteen (18) years of age, nor shall pseudoephedrine products be sold or dispensed to any person without recording in a log book:

A.    The name of the pseudoephedrine product sold or dispensed,

B.    The date of sale or dispensing,

C.    The name, address and signature of the purchaser or patient,

D.    The signature of the adult employee selling or dispensing the drug.

E.    The strength and quantity sold.


8.08.060 Confidentiality of identification information.

The purchaser log book will be retained by the business, retailer or other establishment for a period of one (1) year, and will be considered a confidential document that will only be available to the business owner or manager(s), a pharmacist, pharmacy intern, or certified pharmacy technician employed by that business, retailer or establishment, and upon written request shall be available to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Police Department officers, Arizona Department of Public Safety officers, Navajo County Sheriff’s Department officers, and other law enforcement officers.


8.08.070 Requirement to report suspicious sale.

The business, retailer or establishment and any employee pharmacist, pharmacy intern, or certified pharmacy technician shall be required to report to the police department by telephone any attempt by a person to obtain or purchase pseudoephedrine products in larger quantities than allowed by this chapter, and any other suspicious activity or pseudoephedrine products thefts or purchases that may be related to the manufacture or possession of illegal drugs.


8.08.080 Violations; penalties.

A violation of this chapter shall be a criminal offense and shall be punished as a Class III misdemeanor. See Town Code Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 05-246)


Chapter 8.12 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

Sections:

8.12.010    Request for reasonable accommodation.

8.12.020    Hearing.

8.12.030    Ruling.

8.12.040    Proceedings are confidential.

8.12.050    Appeals to Board of Adjustment.


8.12.010 Request for reasonable accommodation.

Reasonable accommodation will be made by the Town to qualified individuals with disabilities who request reasonable accommodation seeking relief from the requirements of the Town Code. All requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made to the Director of the Community Development Department. Requests for relief from the requirements of the Town Code shall be made by the individual with a disability or another person acting on their behalf orally or in writing to the Director certifying that the applicant is a qualified individual with a disability, setting forth the section(s) of the Town Code that the applicant seeks relief from, and setting forth the accommodation, modification or adjustment that will enable the qualified individual to enjoy equal benefits and privileges. (Ord. 07-300 § 1 (part))


8.12.020 Hearing.

The Director will review the application, hold a hearing himself or herself, or appoint a hearing officer to hold the hearing, when necessary. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days unless all of the parties agree to expand the time. (Ord. 07-300 § 1 (part))


8.12.030 Ruling.

A written response or ruling will be issued within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the application. A case-by-case determination will be made by the Director, or the Hearing Officer, about what constitutes a reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 07-300 § 1 (part))


8.12.040 Proceedings are confidential.

All reasonable accommodation proceedings shall be private and confidential, except that the Director shall notify the Town Manager of each such written application, and the Director may consult with attorneys to help ensure that reasonable accommodation is available to qualified individuals. (Ord. 07-300 § 1 (part))


8.12.050 Appeals to Board of Adjustment.

Appeals from rulings of the Director or the Hearing Officer shall be to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in Title 17, Chapter 17.120. (Ord. 07-300 § 1 (part))


Chapter 8.16 FIREWORKS

Sections:

8.16.010    Fireworks.


8.16.010 Fireworks.

A.    Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

1.    "Display firework" means those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601(3).

2.    "Fireworks" means those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601(4). 

3.    "Novelty items" means federally deregulated novelty items known as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glowworms, snakes, toy smoke devices, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601. 

4.    "Permissible consumer fireworks" means those fireworks as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601(7). 

5.    "Supervised public display" means a monitored performance of display fireworks open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Marshal or his designee.

B.    Fireworks Prohibited – Exceptions.

1.    The sale, use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside is prohibited. 

2.    Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use, discharge, or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of a supervised public display of fireworks. 

3.    Permits may be granted by the Fire Marshal or designee for conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner which does not endanger persons, animals, or property. A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked, during time periods of high fire danger warnings. The Fire Marshal has the authority to impose conditions on any permits granted.

4.    Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the Fire Marshal shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000).

C.    Sale of Permissible Consumer Fireworks.

1.    In accordance with state statute, the sale of permissible consumer fireworks shall be permitted only between May 20th through July 6th and December 10th through January 3rd of each year. The authorized sale of permissible consumer fireworks during these times shall be suspended if Stage 1 or higher fire restrictions implemented by a federal or state agency are in place. 

2.    No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of fireworks pursuant to state law.

D.    Use of Consumer Fireworks.

1.    In accordance with state statute, the use of permissible consumer fireworks shall be permitted only between June 24th through July 6th and December 24th through January 3rd of each year. The use of consumer fireworks during these times shall be suspended if Stage 1 or higher fire restrictions implemented by a federal or state agency are in place.

2.    The use of permissible consumer fireworks on publicly owned property, including public parks, publicly owned open space, and public streets, shall be prohibited.

E.    Authority to Enforce Violations of This Chapter – Means of Enforcement.

1.    The Fire Marshal or designee, or a City police officer, or the City Attorney may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this chapter designated as civil offenses.

2.    Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil or criminal complaint.

3.    A City police officer or the City Attorney may issue criminal complaints to enforce this chapter.

F.    Liability for Emergency Responses Related to Use of Fireworks – Definitions.

1.    A person who uses, discharges, or ignites permissible consumer fireworks, fireworks, or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required by such use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation(s) of this chapter is prima facie evidence of liability under this section.

2.    The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person liable for those expenses pursuant to subsection (F)(1) of this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities, or not-for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The person’s liability for the expense of an emergency response shall not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) for a single incident. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.

3.    For the purposes of this section:

a.    "Expenses of an emergency response" means reasonable costs directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.

b.    "Reasonable costs" includes the costs of providing police, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.

G.    Penalty. The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement imposed by this chapter is a class three misdemeanor unless another penalty is specifically provided for. The City Magistrate may impose community service or diversion procedures in the interest of justice when applicable. (Ord. 15-390 § 1: Ord. 10-344 § 1 (part))


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.04    Curfew

9.08    Smoking Prohibited in Town-Owned Buildings and Vehicles

9.12    Noise Regulations

9.16    Public Urination or Defecation Prohibited


Chapter 9.04 CURFEW

Sections:

9.04.010    Juveniles under sixteen years--Exceptions.

9.04.020    Juveniles sixteen years of age or older--Exceptions.

9.04.030    Responsibility of parent or guardian.

9.04.040    Violations--Exceptions.

9.04.050    Violations--Knowledge by parent or guardian.

9.04.060    Violations--Separate offenses.

9.04.070    Violations--Delivery of juvenile into custody of parent or guardian.

9.04.080    Violations--Penalties.


9.04.010 Juveniles under sixteen years--Exceptions.

It is unlawful for any juvenile under the age of sixteen (16) years to be, remain or loiter in, about or upon any place in the Town away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of said juvenile, between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 94-101 § 1)


9.04.020 Juveniles sixteen years of age or older--Exceptions.

It is unlawful for any juvenile sixteen (16) years of age or older and under the age of eighteen (18) years to be, remain or loiter in, about or upon any place in the Town away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of said juvenile, between the hours of twelve midnight and five a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 94-101 § 2)


9.04.030 Responsibility of parent or guardian.

It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or supervision of a juvenile to permit such juvenile to be, remain or loiter in, about or upon any place in the Town away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of said juvenile in violation of Sections 9.04.010 and 9.04.020. (Ord. 94-101 § 3)


9.04.040 Violations--Exceptions.

The curfew set forth in Sections 9.04.010, 9.04.020 and 9.04.030 do not apply:

A.    To legally emancipated minors, whether the emancipation be through marriage, military service or other legally sufficient grounds;

B.    To minors who are accompanied by their parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of the minor;

C.    To minors who would otherwise be in violation of the terms of this chapter when:

1.    Their presence is reasonably required in the pursuit of a lawful occupation, business or profession in which the minor is then engaged; with the permission of a parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care and custody of the minor, or

2.    The minor is on an emergency errand, medical or otherwise, or

3.    The minor is going to or from a place or function sponsored by or related to school, church, civic, or other nonprofit organization. These functions shall include, but are not necessarily limited to: classes, services, meetings, dances, dramatic or musical performances, sporting events, or other social events sponsored by school, religious, civic, or other nonprofit organizations, with the permission of the parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of the minor. (Ord. 94-101 § 4)


9.04.050 Violations--Knowledge by parent or guardian.

It shall not constitute a defense hereto that such parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or supervision of such juvenile coming within the provisions of Section 9.04.010 or Section 9.04.020, did not have actual knowledge of the presence of such juvenile in, or about or upon any place in the Town away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of said juvenile, if said parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision of such juvenile or juveniles, in the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, should have known of the aforementioned unlawful acts of such juvenile or juveniles. (Ord. 94-101 § 5)


9.04.060 Violations--Separate offenses.

Each violation of the provisions of Sections 9.04.010, 9.04.020 and 9.04.030 shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 94-101 § 6)


9.04.070 Violations--Delivery of juvenile into custody of parent or guardian.

In addition to any other powers he or she may have, any law enforcement officer who arrests a juvenile for violating any of the provisions of Sections 9.04.010 or 9.04.020 is also empowered to demand of the parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision of such juvenile that such parent, guardian or other person come and take such juvenile into custody. Should there be a failure of the parent, guardian or other person to take custody of such juvenile, the officer may then be empowered to take such juvenile home. It is unlawful for any such parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision of said juvenile to fail or refuse to take such juvenile into custody after such demand is made upon him or her. (Ord. 94-101 § 7)


9.04.080 Violations--Penalties.

A.    It is unlawful for any juvenile to violate the provisions of Sections 9.04.010 or 9.04.020; court proceedings and discipline shall be in accordance with and pursuant to the State Juvenile Code as contained in Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 8, Chapter 2, as amended.

B.    Any adult violating the provisions of Sections 9.04.030, 9.04.050 or 9.04.070 shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor. See Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 98-154 §§ 6, 7: Ord. 94-101 § 8)


Chapter 9.08 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN TOWN-OWNED BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES

Sections:

9.08.010    Purpose.

9.08.020    Definitions.

9.08.030    Smoking prohibited.

9.08.040    Enforcement and penalty.

9.08.050    No private cause of action.


9.08.010 Purpose.

In order to help protect the public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this chapter is to prohibit smoke and smoking within Town-owned buildings and Town-owned vehicles within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. (Ord. 98-150 § 1)


9.08.020 Definitions.

1.    "Smoke" or "smoking" means to inhale, exhale, burn, carry or possess any lighted tobacco or smoke tobacco-type products including cigarettes, medicinal or recreational marijuana, cigars, pipes, e-cigarettes, vapor and other synthetic-type products or smokeless types of devices, water pipes, hookah, shisha, chewing tobacco, snuff and other products containing tobacco.

2.    "Town-owned building or vehicle" means any building or vehicle in which the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside has an interest as an owner, tenant, lessor, lessee or any other possessory interest. (Ord. 403 § 3; Ord. 98-150 § 2)


9.08.030 Smoking prohibited.

A.    No person shall smoke in any Town-owned building or Town-owned vehicle at any time. Smoking is prohibited in Town-owned buildings and Town-owned vehicles from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B.    No person shall smoke in any Town-owned parks or Town-leased parks. (Ord. 403 § 4; Ord. 98-150 § 3)


9.08.040 Enforcement and penalty.

A.    Violation of this chapter shall be treated as a civil matter. A civil violation case is commenced by issuance of a civil notice or complaint in a form authorized by the Town Police Department, or, in the alternative, a civil violation may be commenced by the issuance of a civil summons and complaint. All such civil violations shall be referred to the Municipal Court for adjudication.

B.    A person found to have violated this chapter shall be subject to a civil sanction not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense within one year. In addition to or in lieu of civil sanctions authorized by this section, the court may order community service as is appropriate in the discretion of the court. (Ord. 98-150 § 4)


9.08.050 No private cause of action.

In enacting and enforcing this chapter, the Town undertakes only to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. This chapter shall not create any private cause of action by a member of the public and this chapter shall not create the basis for or create a standard of care for any private cause of action, nor may this chapter be enforced in any manner other than as set forth in Section 9.08.040. This chapter does not assume nor does it impose on Town officers, Council members or employees any obligation for breach of which the Town or any of its officers, Council members and employees would be liable in money damages or otherwise to any other person claiming injury from such breach. (Ord. 98-150 § 5)


Chapter 9.12 NOISE REGULATIONS

Sections:

9.12.010    Purpose.

9.12.020    Definitions.

9.12.030    Sound level measurement – Calibration – Admissibility as evidence.

9.12.040    Noise nuisance – Violation.

9.12.050    Vehicle sound amplification systems – Violations.

9.12.060    Exemptions.

9.12.070    Permitted temporary exemptions.

9.12.080    Variances.

9.12.090    Persons responsible for noise violations.

9.12.100    Enforcement and penalties.


9.12.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to help preserve the quiet, mountain character of the community by encouraging everyone to reduce unnecessary noise, and to set objective, measurable limits for noise levels to aid the Town in reducing and eliminating noise which is excessive and disturbs the peace and quiet of reasonable persons. Noise constitutes a nuisance if it exceeds the sound levels proscribed by this chapter (see Table 9-12-01), or if it disturbs the peace and quiet of reasonable persons of normal sensibilities. This chapter attempts to extend that definition to exclude unnecessary noise which exceeds certain limits defined decibel levels as measured by prescribed sound level measuring devices. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter, unless the context references otherwise:

A.    "A-band sound level" means the total sound level in decibels as measured by prescribed sound level measuring devices using the A-weighted network. The standard unit of measurement is dB(A) or dBA.

B.    "Decibel" means the logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure used in describing the amplitude of sound. "Decibel" is abbreviated "dB."

C.    "Noise nuisance" means sound that annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities or that injures or endangers the peace, quiet, health, or safety of another person whether or not the sound exceeds the sound levels proscribed by this chapter (see Table 9-12-01).

D.    "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, business, enterprise, association, institution, firm, trust, estate, the state and its political subdivisions, or any other entity recognized by the law.

E.    "Plainly audible noise" means any noise for which the information, words, rhythms, or other content of that noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, including, but not limited to, the understanding of spoken speech or singing voice, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, or comprehension of musical beat or rhythms.

F.    "Town enforcement officer" means a certified police officer or the Town Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.030 Sound level measurement – Calibration – Admissibility as evidence.

A.    For the purpose of enforcement of the provisions of Section 9.12.040 or 9.12.050, noise levels shall be measured on the A-weighted scale with a sound level meter certified by the manufacturer as satisfying the requirements for sound level meters as defined in American National Standards Institute ("ANSI") ANSI S1.4 – 1983 (R1997) or ANSI S1.43 (R1997) or by the International Electric Code ("IEC") IEC 651 – 1979 Class/Type 2 or IEC 804 – 1985 Class/Type 2. Prior to measurement, the meter shall be verified and calibrated according to the manufacturer’s specifications.

B.    As long as the Code Enforcement Officer or police officer who operated the sound level meter is in court and available for cross-examination by the defendant, sound level meter readings produced by sound level meters which are approved or certified by American National Standards Institute ("ANSI") and which are used in accordance with this section shall be admissible in all court proceedings without further foundation or proof. Sound level meter readings shall be preserved on paper or electronically in a way that the court can see what the sound level meter readings were measured in or easily converted to dB(A) or dBA measurements. 

C.    The offensive noise level will be measured from two (2) points: (1) a point outdoors near where the complainant was being disturbed by the noise, and (2) a point which is beyond the property boundary of the property where the source of the noise is located, which point shall be between the source of the noise and the complainant. Both points of measurement shall be evidence which the court may consider in determining whether there has been a violation of this chapter.

D.    Sound level meters may be of a type which provides a single dB(A) reading or which provides multiple dB(A) readings (e.g., "High," "Average," and "Low"). In all events, it shall be the highest sound level meter reading from each measurement point (see subsection C of this section) which shall be used by the court to determine whether there has been a violation of this chapter.

E.    Sound level meter readings made by a Town enforcement person who observed or heard the alleged violation and who made the sound level meter readings with equipment allowed by this section shall be admissible in court proceedings without additional foundation required, except that the court will decide what weight to give such evidence. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.040 Noise nuisance – Violation.

It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to conduct or permit any activity, or to produce, create or allow any noise beyond that person’s property boundary or on a public street or highway, which exceeds ninety-two (92) dB(A) between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily or sixty-five (65) dB(A) between 11:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. daily as set forth in Table 9-12-01. Sound levels which exceed these dB(A) levels and as shown in Table 9-12-01 shall constitute a noise nuisance.

Table 9-12-01 

	 	Every Day  7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.	Every Day  11:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m.

	Within Town Boundaries	92 dB(A)	65 dB(A)

(Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.050 Vehicle sound amplification systems – Violations.

A.    Noise from sound amplification systems in vehicles cannot be practically regulated by imposing decibel limits, as decibel measurements are difficult to obtain from moving vehicles. Noises prohibited by this subsection are in violation of this chapter whether or not there is a violation of Section 9.12.040 or the sound level readings contained in Table 9-12-01. The following are violations of this chapter:

1.    Except as authorized by law, no person shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system in or on a vehicle in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood in the vicinity.

2.    Except as authorized by law, no person shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system in or on a vehicle in such a manner that the sound is plainly audible (see Section 9.12.020(E)) at a distance of fifty (50) feet, or in such a manner that it causes a person to be aware of vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of fifty (50) feet.

3.    Except as authorized by law, no person shall operate any mechanical tool, device or vehicle operated by gasoline, or otherwise, without having a muffler, in good working order and in constant operation, to prevent excessive or unusual noise and smoke. No person shall operate a mechanical tool, device, or vehicle fueled by gasoline, or otherwise, which has a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device. This subsection refers to lawn mowers, lawn and leaf blowers, chainsaws, motorcycles, motor scooters, recreational vehicles, motorized skateboards, and any other mechanical tool, device or vehicle.

B.    This section shall not apply to:

1.    Amplification systems being operated to request assistance of an emergency nature or to warn of a hazardous situation;

2.    Authorized emergency vehicles;

3.    Vehicles operated by governmental entities or utility companies;

4.    Vehicles used in parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or similar activities that remain within any sound limits approved by the Town; or

5.    Amplification systems in vehicles which are operated on private property with the permission of the owner and which are not plainly audible beyond the property line. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.060 Exemptions.

The following activities are exempted from the provisions of Section 9.12.040:

A.    Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster; to restore public utilities; or to protect persons or property from an imminent danger.

B.    Sound made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency, danger or attempted crime.

C.    Activities or operations of governmental units or agencies. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.070 Permitted temporary exemptions.

The Town Manager is authorized to grant a temporary exemption from the maximum permissible sound levels established by this chapter if such temporary exemption would be in the public interest and there is no feasible and prudent alternative to the activity, or the method of conducting the activity, for which the temporary exemption is sought. A temporary exemption must be in writing and signed by the Town Manager and must set forth the name of the party granted the exemption, the location of the property for which it is authorized, the date(s) and time(s) for which it is effective, and the maximum dB(A) level(s) authorized. A temporary exemption may be granted only for the period of time that is reasonably necessary to conduct the activity, which in no case may exceed thirty (30) days. A maximum of three (3) temporary permits may be issued before a variance is required. The following factors shall be considered by the Town Manager in determining whether to grant a temporary exemption:

A.    The balancing of the hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons in not granting the variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons adversely affected and any other adverse effects of the granting of the variance;

B.    The nearness of any residence or residences, or any other use which would be adversely affected by sound in excess of the limits proscribed by this chapter;

C.    The level of the sound to be generated by the event or activity;

D.    Whether the type of sound to be produced by the event or activity is usual or unusual for the location or area for which the variance is requested;

E.    The density of population of the area in which the event or activity is to take place;

F.    The time of day or night during which the activity or event will take place;

G.    The nature of the sound produced, including but not limited to whether the sound will be steady, intermittent, impulsive or repetitive. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.080 Variances.

Persons wishing to continue activities which commenced prior to the ordinance codified in this chapter and which create sound levels in excess of the permitted levels may seek a variance from the Board of Adjustment. A variance may be granted if the Board finds that strict application of this chapter would cause a hardship and that there is no reasonable and prudent alternative method of engaging in the activity. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.090 Persons responsible for noise violations.

A.    The business, enterprise, person or persons creating the noise, involved in the activity or operating the equipment which creates the noise shall be responsible or liable for a violation of this chapter.

B.    The business, enterprise, owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other possessor of the property on which the noise is created or the activity or operation creating the noise is located also shall be responsible for a violation of this chapter.

C.    A Town enforcement officer may issue a citation to any person listed in subsections A or B of this section when there is a noise nuisance or when a noise is created which the officer believes violates this chapter. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


9.12.100 Enforcement and penalties.

A.    Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer, sworn police officers, and the Town Attorney are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Sound level meter readings made by a Town enforcement person who observed or heard the alleged violation and who made the sound level meter readings with equipment allowed by Section 9.12.030 shall be admissible in court proceedings without additional foundation required, except that the court will decide what weight to give such evidence.

B.    Criminal Penalties.

1.    A violation of this chapter by a person or enterprise is punishable as a Class I misdemeanor. See Town Code Chapter 1.20 and Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 13.

2.    In addition to any penalties or fines prescribed by the court, the court or hearing officer may order a person adjudged guilty to perform community service, abatement of any violation or nuisance temporarily or permanently, and may also order forfeiture of personal property in accordance with Arizona law after a forfeiture hearing. (Ord. 08-317 § 1)


Chapter 9.16 PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION PROHIBITED

Sections:

9.16.010    Purpose.

9.16.020    Definitions.

9.16.030    Public urination or defecation prohibited.

9.16.040    Enforcement and penalty.


9.16.010 Purpose.

In order to help protect the public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this chapter is to prohibit public urination or defecation within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. (Ord. 17-404 § 1 (part))


9.16.020 Definitions.

1.    "Appropriate sanitary facility" means a urinal, toilet, commode or other facility that accommodates or is designed for the sanitary disposal of human bodily fluids or waste and that is enclosed from public view.

2.    "Public place" means any walkway, street, highway, sidewalk, bridge, overpass, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, transportation facility, park, recreational area, parking lot, vacant or undeveloped lot or the stairwells, alcoves, doorways and entrance ways to such places. (Ord. 17-404 § 1 (part))


9.16.030 Public urination or defecation prohibited.

A.    Any person who urinates or defecates in, on or about any of the following places, other than in an appropriate sanitary facility, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor:

1.    Any public place;

2.    Any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or license; or

3.    Any private property upon which the public is not admitted by easement or license without the consent of the owner.

B.    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a place exposed to public view, except by proper use of a toilet or other suitable facility provided for this purpose. (Ord. 17-404 § 1 (part))


9.16.040 Enforcement and penalty.

A.    A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished by a mandatory minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).

B.    In addition to the penalties proscribed in subsection A of this section, the court may require that a person convicted of this section pay restitution for any cleanup costs incurred by the Town. (Ord. 17-404 § 1 (part))


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.04    Disabled Parking Regulations

10.08    Restricted Parking in Fire Zones

10.10    Parking Vehicles for Sale

10.12    Use of Exhaust Brakes, Such As Jake Brakes or Similar Device, Prohibited

10.14    Seasonal Parking Restrictions


Chapter 10.04 DISABLED PARKING REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.04.010    Stopping, standing or parking--Prohibited in places reserved for handicapped.

10.04.020    Violation--Penalty.


10.04.010 Stopping, standing or parking--Prohibited in places reserved for handicapped.

A.    Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person may stop, stand or park a motor vehicle within any specially designated and marked parking space provided for a physically disabled person, in accordance with this section, Arizona Revised Statutes Title 28, Chapter 6, Article 14.1, or any related statute or Town Code provision, whether on public or private property, unless the motor vehicle is transporting a person eligible for distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, and either:

1.    The motor vehicle displays the distinguishing insignia placard; or

2.    The motor vehicle displays number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol.

B.    Parking spaces subject to this section shall be clearly and conspicuously designated as being reserved for the physically disabled in the following manner:

1.    Each space shall be posted with a permanent sign, located not less than three feet nor more than six feet above the grade. The sign shall bear the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and shall indicate that the parking space is "reserved" or "reserved parking." Signs conforming to the standards found in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, revised edition, published by the United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, shall be deemed to be in compliance with this subsection. Signs which substantially comply with the provisions of this subsection, however, shall not be deemed to be insufficient for failure to comply strictly with the manual.

2.    Each sign posted on a handicapped reserved parking place on private property shall additionally indicate: "Posted Pursuant to Town Ordinance No. 90-81." The addition of this statement on such sign or signs shall constitute a waiver of any objection by the owner of the property to enforcement of this section by the Police Department and shall authorize police officers, police aides or parking enforcement specialists to enforce the provisions of this section.

C.    If a law enforcement officer, police aide or parking enforcement specialist employed by the Town finds a motor vehicle in violation of this section, the person may issue a complaint to the operator or other person in charge of the motor vehicle, or place a notice of violation on the vehicle, as appropriate.

D.    Any person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person shall be allowed, without a distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, to park momentarily in any such parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading such physically disabled person. No complaint shall be issued to the driver for such momentary parking. (Ord. 97-133 § 1; Ord. 97-132 § 2; Ord. 90-81 § 1)


10.04.020 Violation--Penalty.

A.    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil traffic violation as provided in ARS Title 28, Chapter 6.

B.    Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil sanction which shall not exceed sixty ($60.00) dollars. (Ord. 90-81 §§ 2, 3)


Chapter 10.08 RESTRICTED PARKING IN FIRE ZONES

Sections:

10.08.010    Definition and designation of fire zones.

10.08.020    Town enforcement.

10.08.030    Violation - penalty.


10.08.010 Definition and designation of fire zones.

A.    A Fire District, with notice to the Chief of Police, may request or require that a public or private property owner establish fire zones on their property where the health, safety and welfare of the public requires it.

B.    An owner of public or private property may, with the prior written approval of the applicable Fire District and the Chief of Police, erect on their property a standard sign(s) and paint a curb or boundary area red to create a fire zone.

C.    Fire Zones shall be marked with a red painted curb or boundary area and a standard fire zone sign. The Town shall make the standard signs available at a reasonable cost. The cost of painting and signing fire zones shall be solely that of the owner or possessor of the real property. Likewise, maintenance of fire zones shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or possessor of the real property.

D.    No person shall park, stop or leave standing a vehicle in an area or space set aside and identified by painting and signage as a fire zone.


10.08.020 Town enforcement.

A.    An owner of public or private property who has created a fire zone appoints and authorizes the Town as the agent of the owner and impliedly authorizes the full enforcement by the Town of the fire zone parking restriction on that property.

B.    A law enforcement officer, police aid or parking enforcement specialist employed or authorized by the Town who finds a motor vehicle which is not an authorized emergency vehicle parked, stopped or standing, whether occupied of unoccupied, in an area designated as a fire zone may issue a civil complaint to the operator, owner or other person in charge of the motor vehicle, or place a notice of violation on the vehicle, as appropriate.

C.    A law enforcement officer, police aid or parking enforcement specialist employed or authorized by the Town who finds a motor vehicle which is not an authorized emergency vehicle parked, stopped or standing, and unoccupied, in an area designated as a fire zone may request that the motor vehicle be towed away at the owner’s expense, in addition to any other civil sanctions authorized by this Chapter. All towing shall be accomplished by a private towing carrier approved by the Chief of Police.


10.08.030 Violation - penalty.

A.    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a civil traffic violation as provided in A.R.S., Title 28, Chapter 6.

B.    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a civil sanction which shall not exceed sixty dollars ($60.00). (Ord. 00-178, §§ 1 and 2).

C.    Civil sanctions, if any, shall be levied in addition to any towing costs which result from the towing of a vehicle pursuant to this Chapter.


Chapter 10.10 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE

Sections:

10.10.010    Parking vehicles for sale.

10.10.020    Violation – Penalty.


10.10.010 Parking vehicles for sale.

A.    No person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle (as defined in Title 28 of Arizona Revised Statutes) for the purpose of sale upon any paved or unpaved lot or area within the Town adjacent to State Route 260 (White Mountain Blvd.) or Porter Mountain Road, except that one (1) vehicle may be displayed for sale at a time, when the vehicle is owned by the owner or resident of the property. The sale of three (3) or more vehicles per year by a person or from one (1) location shall be considered an automobile business which must be properly licensed in accordance with the laws, rules, and regulations of the state. The display of any signs or other markings indicating that a vehicle is for sale shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is parked for sale or permitted to be parked for sale. Businesses properly licensed and regulated to sell vehicles by the state at a location with proper zoning within the Town are excluded from this prohibition at that location. 

B.    If the code enforcement officer, a police officer, or other designated official employed by the Town finds a vehicle in violation of this section, the officer or official may issue a complaint/citation to the owner or other person in charge of the vehicle, or place a notice of violation on the vehicle, as appropriate. (Ord. 13-368 (part))


10.10.020 Violation – Penalty.

A.    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil traffic violation subject to citation/charging and penalties as provided in current A.R.S. Title 28, Transportation, Chapter 5, Penalties and Procedures.

B.    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil sanction which shall be not less than sixty dollars ($60.00) and not exceed the maximum civil penalty provided in A.R.S. Section 28-1598. Multiple offenses in any twelve (12) month period may be subject to enhanced penalties and charges as provided in current A.R.S. Title 28, Transportation, Chapter 5, Penalties and Procedures. (Ord. 13-368 (part))


Chapter 10.12 USE OF EXHAUST BRAKES, SUCH AS JAKE BRAKES OR SIMILAR DEVICE, PROHIBITED

Sections:

10.12.010    Use of exhaust brakes, such as jake brakes or similar devices, prohibited.

10.12.020    Penalty.


10.12.010 Exhaust Brakes, such as Jake Brakes or Similar Devices, Prohibited.

A.    It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any street or highway within the Town limits using or operating with the assistance of exhaust brakes, such as jake brakes or similar devices.


10.12.020 Penalty.

A.    Any person and any owner of a motor vehicle which violates any provision of the chapter shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. See Chapter 1.16, above. (Ord. 99-170, §1)


Chapter 10.14 SEASONAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS

Sections:

10.14.010    Seasonal parking restrictions.

10.14.020    Violation – Penalty.


10.14.010 Seasonal parking restrictions.

A.    No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any vehicle owned or controlled by that person, on any street between midnight and 7:00 a.m., from November 1st to April 1st or at any time while snow operations are being conducted.

B.    If the Code Enforcement Officer, a police officer, or other designated official employed by the Town finds a vehicle in violation of this section, the officer or official may issue a civil citation to the owner or other person in charge of the vehicle, or place a notice of violation on the vehicle, as appropriate.

C.    Any vehicle and/or obstruction parked/stopped during snow operations that is found to be a nuisance on any public street, right-of-way, or easement is hereby declared to be an obstruction to snow operations for more than two (2) hours is subject to penalties set forth in Section 10.14.020, Violation – Penalty. (Ord. 19-420 § 3: Ord. 17-408 (part))


10.14.020 Violation – Penalty.

A.    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil traffic violation subject to citation, charging and penalties as provided in current A.R.S. Title 28, Transportation, Chapter 5, Penalties and Procedures.

B.    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil sanction which shall be not less than sixty dollars ($60.00) and not exceed the maximum civil penalty provided in A.R.S. § 28-1598.

C.    Any vehicle and/or obstruction parked/stopped during snow operations that is found to be in violation or is found to be a nuisance by the Code Enforcement Officer, a police officer, or a designated Town official employed by the Town is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed to a designated towing storage yard at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 19-420 § 4: Ord. 17-408 (part))

 


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.04    Offsite Improvements

12.08    Use of Dedicated Public Streets and Alleys for Utilities and Related Construction

12.12    Town Parks

12.16    Town Cemetery

12.20    Pinetop-Lakeside Public Library


Chapter 12.04 OFFSITE IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

12.04.010    Offsite improvements defined.

12.04.020    When required.

12.04.030    Minimum requirements.

12.04.040    Authorized delays--Contributions placed in escrow account--Reversion of funds.

12.04.050    Project engineer.

12.04.060    Permit for work as required by this chapter within public right-of-way.

12.04.070    Acceptance of offsite improvements.

12.04.080    Building permits--Building Official may issue permit when.

12.04.090    Occupancy.

12.04.100    Violation--Penalty.


12.04.010 Offsite improvements defined.

"Offsite improvements" means any construction or reconstruction within a public right-of-way or easement. Offsite improvements include:

A.    The construction of a street section, including grading, base course, pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalk and drainage facilities to Town standards.

B.    Storm drainage or flood control facilities. (Ord. 86-24 § 1)


12.04.020 When required.

Offsite improvements shall be required:

A.    For any subdivision of land, in conformity with subdivision regulations of the Town as determined by the Town Council following recommendations from Town Staff.

B.    For all other development or improvements requiring a building permit as defined by the Building Code of the Town, except a single-family residence of any value and additions or alterations to any other existing structure which do not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) valuation as determined by the Building Official. (Ord. 86-24 § 2)


12.04.030 Minimum requirements.

Offsite improvement requirements for all development or improvements, not specifically exempted by Section 12.04.020B as contained herein shall be established by the Town Council or other Official Town Agency or Board as designated by the Town Council following a Staff recommendation in conformance with the following minimum requirements:

A.    Right-Of-Way.

1.    If the area to be developed does not have adequate rights-of-way or easement as determined by Town Staff to facilitate intensified use due to new development, or will not accommodate proposed or contemplated public improvements or drainage, then necessary right-of-way shall be granted to the Town or the Town may impose special building setback requirements to assure clear space for future right-of-way needs. Public rights-of-way, pedestrian easements or utility easements must be provided for all public improvements which are or will become property of the Town.

2.    Reference shall be made to the Town circulation plan to be adopted to assist the Town regarding street improvements, pedestrian ways and adequate rights-of-way.

B.    Drainage. Drainage plans and improvements shall be required in conformity with the regulations of the Town.

C.    Offsite Improvements. Off-site improvements shall be constructed as follows:

1.    Where onsite construction does not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) valuation as determined by the Building Official, and the property being developed does not have three hundred (300) or more feet of frontage and sideage combined, the owner or developer shall extend existing contiguous street improvements across the length of the property being developed. If the property has both frontage and sideage to a public street right-of-way, required extension of improvements applies only to the street or streets having contiguous improvements.

2.    Where onsite construction exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) valuation as determined by the Building Official or where the property being developed has three hundred (300) or more feet of frontage or sideage combined, the owner or developer shall construct offsite street improvements as determined by the Town Council, following recommendations from the appropriate Staff members and/or advisory board, in accordance with the Town standards across the entire frontage and sideage of the property being developed.

3.    Reference shall be made to the Town circulation plan to be adopted to assist the Town Council regarding street improvements, pedestrian ways and adequate right-of-way. (Ord. 86-24 § 3)


12.04.040 Authorized delays--Contributions placed in escrow account--Reversion of funds.

Improvements as required by the Town under this chapter may be delayed at the discretion of the Town Council with the stipulation that contributions to these improvements will be placed in an escrow account. The escrow account will be set up by the responsible party with an escrow agent, with specific instructions that the principal and accumulated interest be disbursed to the Town at the time of construction of the improvements. If the improvements are not made within five (5) years, or if a roadway improvement district is established by the Town of which the subject property is included and the owner assessed, the principal and interest will revert to the owner of record of the subject property. The dollar value placed on the required improvements shall be based upon current costs for the required construction as estimated by the Town Engineer and shall include a ten (10) percent fee for engineering costs. (Ord. 86-24 § 4)


12.04.050 Project engineer.

The owner or developer shall assure the Town that a project engineer, registered in Arizona, will be employed to provide required engineering services for offsite improvements, unless waived by the Town Engineer. The responsibilities of the project engineer shall include, but not be limited to the following:

A.    Preparation of the required engineering design report for subdivisions, or plans for other offsite improvements.

B.    Certification that horizontal and vertical alignment and dimensions of offsite improvements have been staked in conformity to Town standards and to the report or plans reviewed by the Town Engineer.

C.    Delivery of reproducible "as built" plans for water mains, sewer mains, and drainage facilities in conformance to Town standards. (Ord. 86-24 § 5)


12.04.060 Permit for work as required by this chapter within public right-of-way.

A permit, approved by the Town Engineer or his or her designee, shall be required prior to any construction as required by this chapter within public rights-of-way. Such permit shall be issued subject to the following requirements:

A.    Review and acceptance of an engineering design report, or plans for offsite improvements unless plan requirements have been waived by the Town Engineer. Plans shall be reviewed by any utility companies which serve the subject area.

B.    Payment of inspection and testing fees for all offsite improvements located within public right-of-way easements, in accordance with a fee schedule to be adopted by the Town Council and on file with the Town Clerk.

C.    Permit and report or plan acceptance shall be valid for one year, after which time, review by the Town Engineer, reissuance of the permit, and payment of fees for any uncompleted work at the then current fee schedule is required.

D.    Private utility companies which are franchised by the Town shall be exempt from payment of fees for permits issued for work upon their facilities within public easements or rights-of-way.

E.    Construction and scheduling of construction of offsite improvements shall be the responsibility of the developer or owner and the project engineer. All construction shall conform to Town standards and to the Report or plans reviewed by the Town Engineer. (Ord. 86-24 § 6)


12.04.070 Acceptance of offsite improvements.

A.    Final inspection of offsite improvements prior to their acceptance will be scheduled after reproducible "as built" plans and the project engineer’s certificate have been accepted by the Town Engineer.

B.    Acceptance of street, drainage, and other offsite improvements will be executed by the Town Engineer when the requirements of these regulations have been fulfilled and ownership of the facilities is offered to the Town. (Ord. 86-24 § 7)


12.04.080 Building permits--Building Official may issue permit when.

A.    The required report of plans for offsite improvements have been reviewed by the Town Engineer and found to be in conformity to Town standards and permits have been issued for work in the right-of-way, and

B.    Negotiable security, acceptable to the Town Engineer and Town Attorney, for one hundred (100) percent of the estimated construction cost of incompleted offsite improvements required is offered to and accepted by the Town. A company providing such security must be properly licensed to do business in the state. The Town Engineer may release up to ninety (90) percent of the actual cost or engineer’s estimate of completed and acceptable portion of the work, whichever is smaller, provided such release is approximately twenty (20) percent or more of the security. All remaining security shall be returned or released within forty-five (45) days after acceptance of improvements by the Town Engineer. (Ord. 86-24 § 8)


12.04.090 Occupancy.

The Building Official may issue a certificate of occupancy of any building when all required offsite improvements have been completed and accepted by the Town Engineer or Section 12.04.040 of this chapter has been satisfied. If paving is impossible due to climatic conditions, completion of paving, curb, gutter and sidewalk may be postponed until after occupancy, provided:

A.    All other offsite improvements are complete and acceptable to the Town Engineer; and

B.    An all-weather road, suitable for Town maintenance; and

C.    Temporary storm drainage facilities are provided; and

D.    Negotiable security is provided for one hundred (100) percent of the anticipated cost of completing the offsite improvements the following year. (Ord. 86-24 § 9)


12.04.100 Violation--Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment in the Town Jail not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any part thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs, or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 86-24 § 10)


Chapter 12.08 USE OF DEDICATED PUBLIC STREETS AND ALLEYS FOR UTILITIES AND RELATED CONSTRUCTION

Sections:

12.08.010    Application for permit.

12.08.020    Permit approvals.


12.08.010 Application for permit.

The application for permit to use Town roads or dedicated streets is adopted and set out in full at the end of this chapter, including specifications for installation of culverts and driveway returns located on the Town right-of-way. (Ord. 90-80 § 3)


12.08.020 Permit approvals.

Applications for permits to use Town roads or dedicated streets shall be submitted to the Town Engineer or such other person as designated by the Town Manager for approval. The Town Engineer or such other person as designated by the Town Manager shall be responsible for the issuance, inspection and general administration of permits authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 98-154 § 8: Ord. 90-80 § 4)

TOWN OF PINETOP - LAKESIDE

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR R.O.W. PERMIT

A.    Off-road Utility Cuts

1.    Generally won’t need a deposit.

2.    Private drive culvert permits won’t require an application fee, certificate of insurance, or deposit.

B.    Paved Road Utility Cuts

1.    Security deposit shall be $15/sq. ft. of estimated road surface disturbance, rounded to nearest $100.*

2.    Major roads will require a written traffic control plan prior to issuing the permit.

3.    $500,000 certificate of liability insurance required.

C.    Unpaved Road Utility Cuts

1.    Security deposit shall be $10/sq. ft. of estimated road surface disturbance, rounded to nearest $100.*

2.    $500,000 liability insurance required.

3.    Written traffic control plan may be needed, especially for long duration projects.

D.    Borings

1.    Security deposits not required.

2.    Traffic control plans generally not required.

3.    $500,000 liability insurance required.

E.    General

1.    Permits can be issued for projects, not just for individual cuts.

2.    A blanket permit can be issued for one year for activities, either scheduled or emergency, that would occur in the right-of-way but not on the traveled roadway. This would include boring and drilling post holes. It will be revoked if misused.

3.    Non-profit cooperative utility companies shall be required to obtain this permit, but the permit fee will be waived.

*For multiple cuts or large projects, after $2000.00 is reached the additional deposit will be at $2/sq. ft. Example: Est. cut to be 150’ x 3’ = 450 sq. ft.. Deposit to be: 133.33 sq. ft. ($15/sq.ft.) + 316.67 sq. ft. ($2/sq.ft.) = $2,633.29, rounded to $2600.00.

TOWN OF PINETOP-LAKESIDE

APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO USE RIGHT-OF-WAY

$35.00 APPLICATION FEE

The undersigned herewith makes application for a permit to enter in, upon and use a portion of the public right-of-way of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside roads or dedicated streets for the purpose of __________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Location of work: ____________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________________

FOR AND IN CONSIDERATION of the granting of a permit for the purpose set forth herein the Permittee hereby agrees, covenants, and binds said Permittee as follows, to wit:

SECTION A

CONDITIONS

1.    The applicant assumes all responsibility and liability for injury or damage to roads, ditches, pipes, utilities, etc., and to person and vehicles, that are caused by his/her activities in exercising this permit.

    That in the event the work to be done under the authority of the Permit necessitates the creation of any hazard or source of danger to any person or vehicle using said roadway, said Permittee shall and will provide and maintain at all times during the existence of said hazard, sufficient barriers, danger signals, lanterns and detours.

    The 1982 Arizona Department of Transportation "Traffic Control Manual for Highway Construction and Maintenance" shall be adhered to.

2.    Work shall be done in such a manner as to minimize the inconvenience to the traveling public. No scheduled work shall be permitted on holidays.

3.    The applicant shall make every attempt to protect the existing roads and improvements from unnecessary damage. No tracked equipment may operate on paved roads without pavement pads. Backhoe outriggers shall be equipped to not damage paved roads. All cuts in pavement shall be straight and shall be made by saw cuts. The Permittee shall replace all signs moved or damaged during construction.

4.    The Permittee shall notify the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Engineering Representative at least 24 hours prior to the ditch being backfilled so that it can be inspected to be sure the backfilling is done in accordance with Town of Pinetop-Lakeside specifications. See exhibit 1 - Drawings for backfill details.

5.    That if the title and possession of any property upon the public right-of-way by the Permittee remains with said Permittee, the Permittee shall and will promptly perform all necessary repair work upon written notice from the Permittor and will not permit or allow any condition to exist which would be a hazard or source of danger to the traveling public.

6.    The cost of relocation of utility facilities, including cable television, wherein relocation is necessitated by improvements constructed by or on behalf of the Town shall be borne by the Town if utility facilities, including cable television, are located in private easements or rights-of-way obtained by the utility prior to the dedication of the public street, alley or easement from which the facilities must be relocated. These prior rights of the utility would also be unaffected by any subsequent relocation.

7.    The Town will not exercise its rights to require utility facilities to be relocated in an unreasonable or arbitrary manner.

8.    Any mechanized excavation work performed within a Town right-of-way and/or Town maintained road shall require a permit from the Town Representative.

9.    All work done within traveled roadway areas will conform to the following specifications along with the current minimum road construction standards of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

    Roadway areas shall be defined as that portion of the total right-of-way which is being used for vehicular traffic along with ditches, dykes, etc., which are man-made and necessary for the proper use or maintenance of the traveled roadway.

    Sidewalks, pedestrian walks, driveways and bicycle paths which are man-made and in operation shall be included in the roadway areas if within the dedicated public right-of-way.

    Roadway cut areas, as defined above shall be applicable to all Town roads and dedicated streets regardless of surface treatments.

10.    Security Deposits

(a)    If required, security deposits shall be made prior to issuing the permit. It will be held for two years after the permanent pavement has been installed and accepted. The security deposit will be refunded at the end of two years, without interest, if a field inspection determines repairs are smooth, free of cracks, and otherwise satisfactory.

(b)    Certificates of Deposits (CD’s) payable to the Town and to the applicant, and held by the Town, with interest reverting back to the applicant, may be used in lieu of cash deposits. Letters of Irrevocable Credit, issued by commercial lending institutions, will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Town in lieu of cash deposits. Letters stating the applicant will reimburse the Town for repair work performed by the Town due to the applicants failing to perform satisfactory work or repairs, and backed by performance bonds, will be considered by the Town in lieu of cash deposits.

(c)    Applicants who anticipate needing to make more than one security deposit per year may, at their option, make one annual deposit. The amount will be determined by the Town based on past and expected activity of the permittee.

11.    Any utility work done in the traveled roadway shall be accomplished by a contractor duly licensed by the State of Arizona to perform such work, unless the work is performed by employees of utility companies with whom the permit is issued.

12.    Time schedule.

(a)    Permit shall be in effect for thirty (30) days from the date issued unless otherwise specified.

(b)    Construction time of permit for any single location shall be two (2) work days unless otherwise specified.

(c)    On large construction projects, the permit shall be in effect for the life of the contract as specified on the permit.

SECTION B

CULVERT INSTALLATIONS AND DRIVEWAYS

1.    For any new construction projects or on-site development within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, the installation of drainage culverts and/or the construction of driveway returns on the Town right-of-way shall be reflected on the approved site plans for such projects and shall be part of the required construction improvements and in such case a permit for work as required by Section A contained herein shall not be required.

    The installation of drainage culverts, driveway returns or any other work in the Town right-of-way not in conjunction with an on-site construction project under a Town building permit will require a permit to work in the Town right-of-way as set forth under "Section A" contained herein.

    For installations of culverts and/or driveway returns which serve existing single family residences or multi-family properties of four (4) units or less, the permit fee, the security deposit, and the requirement for proof of liability insurance may be waived. All other conditions as set forth under "Section A" as contained herein shall apply.

2.    STANDARDS FOR CULVERTS AND DRIVEWAYS IN THE TOWN RIGHT-OF-WAY

(a)    CULVERTS: All culverts installed in the Town’s right-of-way shall be a minimum of 18 inches in diameter or larger, unless determined by the Town following a field inspection that a 12 inch diameter may be used. All culverts shall be of corrugated metal pipe and in good condition. Alternative culvert material such as concrete pipe may be used if approved by the Town. Culverts for driveways shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length or more subject to the driveway design.

(b)    DRIVEWAYS: All driveways located in the Town right-of-way serving properties which do not have existing curb and gutter along the property frontage shall be provided with a culvert as specified under Section B,2,a as contained herein unless due to the lack of an existing or future drainage ditch or swale along the property frontage and the installation of such pipe is not needed.

    All driveways servicing properties to be used for other than a single family residence shall be designed and constructed to a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and a maximum width of twenty-eight (28) feet for two-way traffic and a minimum width of twelve (12) feet and a maximum width of fifteen (15) feet for one-way traffic. The width of all driveways shall be measured at the property line. A minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required for all driveway returns in the right-of-way except for single family properties.

    Construction standards for driveways in the Town right-of-way will be set forth at the time a permit is obtained and may include base material and paving to match existing roadway.

    No property shall have more than two (2) driveways onto the public right-of-way per street frontage unless approved by the Town as part of a site plan approval in accordance with Chapter 16.108 of the Town Code.

SECTION C

REMOVAL & BACKFILL

The Town Representative shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours before anticipating the beginning of any scheduled backfill activities. The representative shall be notified in a timely manner of changes in the backfilling schedule.

All asphalt cuts shall be accomplished with a concrete saw. No roller cutters or jackhammering will be permitted. Backhoe outriggers shall be equipped with fiber or rubber pads to protect existing asphalt.

Backfill material shall be a "slurry" mixture of one, ninety-four (94) pound sack of cement for each cubic yard of clean, Type II, washed concrete sand or ABC. ABC shall meet the following gradation:

	Sieve Size	% Passing

	1”	 	 	100

	3/4”	80	--	100

	3/8”	55	--	75

	# 8	30	--	45

	# 200	0	--	7

Fifty (50) percent of the material retained on the number 8 sieve shall have fractured faces. Plasticity Index shall range from 0 to 3.

Utility cut configurations and typical cross sections are shown in Exhibit 1.

The paved trench shall be installed with maximum four (4’) foot lifts, with the slurry mixture installed to within two (2) inches of the existing pavement. The slurry shall display a slump of 4" to 5" and shall cure for at least 24 hours. Temporary crossing will be constructed using metal or plastic plates. After the 24 hour cure, the slurry shall have achieved a retained strength of 800 PSI or greater.

The asphalt finish course shall be 2" thick and shall adhere to MAG Spec D-1/2. After compaction, the asphalt shall achieve 95% of a Marshall Value of 143 PCF. The finished patch shall display no unreasonable bump or depression.

If the trench length beneath roads is estimated to be longer than 100 linear feet, the applicant shall obtain, at his/her cost, the services of a qualified independent lab or person to perform the density tests. The frequency of the density tests shall be shown on the permit. The lab and/or person performing the tests shall submit a letter stating the results of the tests performed.

For situations or details not specified in this permit, the Maricopa Association of Government details and specifications for trenching shall apply.

SECTION D

EMERGENCY REPAIRS

In the event unscheduled emergency repairs to utilities are required, a reasonable effort shall be made to contact the Town’s Representative. The utility shall perform the work to the same standard as required by this permit, and shall apply for this permit during the first normal working day following the repair. Repairs made to a cut already under permit shall not require a new permit, but will have the existing permit extended.

SECTION E

TEMPORARY PAVEMENT

The applicant shall make a reasonable attempt to avoid temporary pavements. When temporary pavement is needed, then cold mix or UPM is acceptable. The temporary pavements shall be maintained frequently to provide a smooth riding surface. Temporary pavement shall be replaced with permanent pavement using MAG D-1/2 hot asphaltic concrete within six (6) months of the date of the original temporary patch installation.

SECTION F

DUST PALLIATIVE

Where the disturbance (utility cut area plus other areas covered with excavated material or otherwise roughed up) to unpaved roads exceeds 2000 square feet, the permittee shall apply a dust palliative to the completed road surface. Acceptable materials are lignon sulfonate, magnesium chloride and coherex, applied at the undiluted rate of 0.5 gallons per square yard.

SECTION G

DISPLAY OF PERMIT NUMBER

No work within the right-of-way shall occur unless the permit number and date of issue is displayed in 1" high or larger letters at the work site.

SECTION H

COMPLETION AND WARRANTIES

Completed backfills shall be warranted by the applicant for two (2) years from the date of completion. In no case shall the quality of utility cut backfill be less than the adjacent road. In cases of deteriorating roads the utility cut will be expected to be superior to the adjacent road.

In the event the applicant is not responsive to requests by the Town, the Town’s engineering representative will perform needed work and the cost of such repairs will be deducted from the deposit.

Repairs needed for hazardous conditions created by activities performed under this permit, and considered emergency in nature, may have as little as one hour of notice or attempted notice to the permittee before the Town begins to perform the necessary remedial action. Items of annoyance, such as rough or depressed trenches, will be given a minimum of five (5) working days for the permittee to correct. The Town will give the applicant a written notice of the corrective action needed on nonemergency items.

Applicants are reminded that this permit is between the Town and themselves. The Town will not pursue problems through the various subcontractors that may be used.

Completed backfill activities shall leave the roads and ditches in a neat and clean condition. Existing road widths shall not be reduced.

SECTION I

GOVERNMENT AGENCIES

Governmental agencies shall apply for this permit and must have an approved permit prior to beginning scheduled projects. They will be exempt from the application fee.

An intergovernmental agreement may be substituted for cash deposits if approved by the Town. Such agreement shall clearly state that the Town will be reimbursed for repair work performed by the Town necessary due to the agency or its subcontractors failing to perform satisfactory work or repairs.

SECTION J

MULTI-STREET PROJECTS

Large projects which affect many streets will require a preconstruction review between the Town and the applicant. Road conditions will be documented and any deviations from the standard trench cross-sections, if acceptable to the Town, will be in writing.

PERMIT # ________________________________

Name of Permittee: ________________________________

Mailing Address: ________________________________

______________________________________________

CONTRACTORS LICENSE NO. ________________________________

Signature of Applicant: ________________________________

APPLICANT DO NOT WRITE BELOW THIS LINE _________________________________________________________________________________

Estimated size of trench: ________________________________

Is road involved presently paved? ________________________________

Application fee attached: ________________________________

Security deposit attached: ________________________________

Amount: ________________________________

Traffic control plan approved and attached: ________________________________

$500,000 certificate of liability insurance attached: ________________________________

Permit approved with the following requirements: ________________________________

________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Permit approved by: ______________________________ Date: ________________________________

Effective date of permit: ________________________________

Effective length of permit: ________________________________

Compaction inspection approved by: ______________________ Date: __________________________

___________________________________________________________________________________

Permanent pavement inspection approved by: _______________________ Date: ___________________

___________________________________________________________________________________

Security deposit to be refunded on: ________________________________

(Two years after permanent pavement acceptance)

Exhibit 1
[IMAGE]



Chapter 12.12 TOWN PARKS

Sections:

12.12.010    Purpose.

12.12.020    Applicability.

12.12.030    Park hours.

12.12.040    Rules of conduct.

12.12.050    Vehicles.

12.12.060    Boating.

12.12.070    Alcoholic beverages.

12.12.080    Advertising, entertainment, assembly.

12.12.090    Soliciting, gambling, sale of merchandise prohibited.

12.12.100    No fires or burning.

12.12.110    Reservations and permits.

12.12.120    Park fees and charges.

12.12.130    Enforcement and penalties.


12.12.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the use of and conduct in the parks and recreation areas of the Town (referred to as "Town parks" or "parks" in this chapter). (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.020 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply in all parks and recreation areas within the Town, unless expressly exempted. For the issuance of permits, authorizations, and the granting of approval for groups or other special uses of the Town parks (a "park facility permit"), the approving agency shall be the Town Parks and Recreation Department (the "Department"). (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.030 Park hours.

From November 1st through March 31st, the park hours are from official daylight to official sunset as defined by the National Weather Service. From April 1st through October 31st, the park hours are from official daylight to 10:00 p.m. From November 1st through March 31st no one is allowed in the park after official sunset; from April 1st through October 31st, no one is allowed in the park after 10:00 p.m., except during a scheduled Department activity or event, or with a park facility permit from the Parks and Recreation Department. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.040 Rules of conduct.

A.    The following rules of conduct shall apply to all users and persons who are within parks and recreation areas of the Town, including Woodland Lake Park which is federal land under permit to the Town from the United States Department of Agriculture, United States Forest Service.

1.    Park use is available on a first-come, first-served basis except as needed for:

a.    Leagues and Team Use. Parks and recreation areas may be reserved for Parks and Recreation Department scheduled or specially permitted events. These events may include Little League baseball, youth soccer leagues, adult recreation league events, and other scheduled team uses or uses by the Department.

b.    Other Group Use. All parties of one hundred (100) or more wanting to use Town parks shall be required to submit an application and get a park facility permit from the Parks and Recreation Department. The applicable fee(s) shall be paid at the time of application.

c.    Use of Ramadas. A written application for a park facility permit to reserve a park ramada shall be made to the Department on forms approved by the Department. The applicable fee(s) shall be paid at the time of application.

d.    Special Events. Refer to the Parks and Recreation Rules and Regulations.

2.    Littering is prohibited. Each person or group is responsible for the cleanup of the area of the park which they use. Dumping of domestic or commercial trash also is prohibited. Domestic and commercial trash shall not be put into designated trash cans or containers, or otherwise left in parks. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.

3.    Children, eight (8) years old and younger, must be supervised by an adult while playing on parks playground equipment.

4.    No overnight camping is allowed in the park. No overnight parking of recreational vehicles is allowed in the park without a Town permit. The Town will only permit twenty (20) vehicles per park facility permit for overnight use.

5.    No open fires or campfires are allowed in the park, except in the grills provided. Written requests for the use of other special fire containers shall be submitted to the Department, but may not be used without the written approval of the Department. Fire restrictions issued by the Town to help prevent wildfires may prohibit all fires, including the use of park grills, from time to time.

6.    Possession, use or discharge of explosives, fireworks, spring guns, B.B. guns, air guns, rockets, fireworks, slingshots, bows and other archery equipment or other similar weapons, arms or equipment is strictly prohibited in parks. Any use or discharge of firearms, rifles, pistols, revolvers is prohibited except as allowed by state statute(s) (currently found in A.R.S. § 13-3108(G)(5)).

7.    Hunting, trapping, catching, wounding or killing, or treating cruelly, attempting to catch, wound or kill, any bird or animal, molest or rob any nest of any kind or any lair or burrow of any animal is prohibited. No person may hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird.

8.    Excessive noise or other disturbance of the peace is not permitted.

9.    Dogs must be kept on a leash at all times in the park unless in a specifically designated dog park that allows off-leash use. Pets are subject to the Town’s animal control ordinance.

10.    Fishing at Woodland Lake Park is governed by Arizona Game and Fish Department laws, rules and regulations. A valid Arizona fishing license with applicable stamps is required.

11.    Glass containers including glass beverage bottles are not allowed in Town parks and recreation areas.

12.    Marking, tampering with, destroying, damaging, injuring, disfiguring, defacing, displacing, removing or disturbing any natural or manmade feature, tree, shrub, wildflower, public building, sign, structure, equipment or other property is prohibited. No person may damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, or injure the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.

13.    Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountains, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such water any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of those waters.

14.    Parks shall not be used for profit or gain unless specifically approved. No admission fee, event fee, donation or other cost for attendance at an event held in Town parks may be charged, collected or paid by any person or entity without the express, written permission of the Department.

15.    Swimming is strictly prohibited in lakes, streams or other waters in Town parks.

16.    All persons shall cooperate and shall maintain restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.

17.    No person shall enter an area posted as "Closed" or "Closed to the Public."

18.    No person shall engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace.

19.    Persons shall produce and exhibit any permit he or she claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who asks to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance, rule or regulation.

20.    No person shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any park or recreation area. (Ord. 14-383; Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.050 Vehicles.

A.    Maximum speed limit is fifteen (15) mph.

B.    No vehicles are allowed inside of the park except on designated roads and in designated parking areas.

C.    No person shall leave a vehicle standing or parked in established parking areas or elsewhere in the park and recreation areas during hours when the park and recreation area is closed. During a snowstorm and for three (3) days thereafter established parking areas in parks and recreation areas may be utilized for automobile and light truck parking only, but not by motor homes, trailers, recreational vehicles, or other vehicles of any kind. Large commercial size vehicles that can cause damage to parking areas may be excluded.

D.    All-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and other motorized off-road vehicles are not allowed in parks and shall not be used in parks unless such vehicle is licensed for street and road use by the Arizona Department of Motor Vehicles. Vehicles shall be operated only on paved roads, and shall be parked only in designated parking areas.

E.    Parking is prohibited except in designated parking areas. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.060 Boating.

A.    All boats must conform to the Arizona Game and Fish Department laws and regulations governing registration and operation.

B.    Power boats are restricted to the use of a single electric motor only. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.070 Alcoholic beverages.

A.    Only beer and wine are allowed in areas of Town parks which are not in use for league and team use as defined in Section 12.12.040(A)(1)(a). No alcoholic beverages may be sold in Town parks, except when allowed under a special event permit.

B.    Individuals consuming alcoholic beverages must abide by state and Town laws, rules and regulations regarding alcohol consumption.

C.    Glass beverage bottles and containers are not allowed in the park. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.080 Advertising, entertainment, assembly.

A.    No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, deliver, place, cast or leave about any sign, bill, billboard, placard, ticket, handbill, circular, or advertisement in Town parks unless it has been approved by the Department.

B.    No person shall do any of the following without a permit:

1.    Display any advertising signs or other advertising matter; provided, that a sign attached to a vehicle to identify the vehicle, or a sign lawfully on a taxicab or bus, is not prohibited.

2.    Operate for advertising purposes any musical instrument, soundtrack or drum.

3.    Hold public assemblages of twenty (20) persons or more without a park facility permit.

4.    Conduct exhibitions without a park facility permit.

5.    Hold a parade without a park facility permit.

C.    An event sponsored by the Town will not be required to have a permit. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.090 Soliciting, gambling, sale of merchandise prohibited.

No person shall:

A.    Sell or offer for sale any goods, services or other things in any park or recreation area, without a park facility permit and any applicable license.

B.    Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private, unless as part of an approved or permitted event.

C.    Play any game of chance or have possession of any instrument or device for gambling.

D.    Play, engage or take part in any game or competitive sport for money, or other valuable thing, without a written permit. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.100 No fires or burning.

A.    No open fires or campfires are allowed in the park, except in the grills provided. Written requests for the use of other special fire containers shall be submitted to the Department, but may not be used without the written approval of the Department. From time to time, fire restrictions issued by the Town to help prevent wildfires may prohibit all fires, including the use of park grills.

B.    All fires and burning are further subject to Chapter 8.04, regulations of the United States Forest Service in Woodland Lake Park and on other United States Forest Service land, and other federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.110 Reservations and permits.

A.    Information about applications and park facility permits is available at the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Parks and Recreation Department.

B.    Reservations for scheduled events and park facility permits for parks and recreation areas may be obtained by application to the Department on forms provided by the Department. The following information shall be provided:

1.    The name and address of the applicant.

2.    The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any.

3.    The day and hours for which the permit is desired.

4.    The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired.

5.    Any other information reasonably necessary to a determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder.

6.    Any requests for variances from park rules and regulations.

C.    Standards for scheduling an activity or issuing an event/park facility permit shall include the following:

1.    That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public’s enjoyment of the park.

2.    That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.

3.    That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.

4.    That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the Town unless the expenses or police costs are covered by the applicant.

5.    That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on the date and hour requested in the application.

D.    An applicant for a park facility permit may be required to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to members of the general public arising out of such permitted activities in such amounts as may be required prior to the commencement of any activity or issuance of any permit.

E.    Revocation. The Department shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.120 Park policies, fees and charges.

Fees and policies for parks use and security deposits to pay for damage and cleanup shall be set by resolution of the Town Council. Cleanup or damage costs which exceed the amount of the security deposit shall be paid by the applicant or responsible party for the event. Unpaid fees including excess fees for cleanup or damages may be recovered by the Town by filing a civil lawsuit in the Pinetop-Lakeside Justice Court, the Navajo County Superior Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


12.12.130 Enforcement and penalties.

A.    The Town Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officer, and employees of the Parks and Recreation Department shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B.    The Town Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officer, and employees of the Parks and Recreation Department shall have the authority to order any person or persons acting in violation of this chapter to leave the park or recreation area.

C.    Violators of this chapter may be cited using the uniform traffic citation form or any other form approved by the Chief of Police. The citation shall show the specific section or sections alleged to have been violated, a brief description of the violation, whether the citation is for a civil or criminal offense, and whether the violation is charged as a second, third or greater offense. If there is no designation of a second or greater offense, the citation shall be considered a first offense. For continuing violations, the dates or the number of days shall also be noted on the citation.

D.    Violations of the following sections of this chapter shall be charged on the first and subsequent offenses as a Class 2 misdemeanor:

1.    Sections 12.12.040(A)(5), (6), (7), (13), (14), (15), and (19).

2.    Sections 12.12.070(A), (B), and (C).

3.    Sections 12.12.090(C) and (D).

4.    Sections 12.12.100(A) and (B).

5.    Subsection B of this section.

E.    Civil Violations. When a violation of this chapter, except as set forth in subsection D of this section, is undesignated or designated a first offense by the enforcement officer or the Town Attorney, a person found to have been in violation of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus restitution for personal injuries, property damage or any other economic loss suffered by any person(s) including the Town.

F.    Criminal Violations. When a person convicted of a violation of this chapter is a person who has been previously convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within a period of twelve (12) months, the person shall be deemed to have committed a Class 2 misdemeanor, pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 13, Chapters 6, 7 and 8, as amended, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation or count, plus surcharges, fees and restitution for personal injuries, property damage or any other economic loss suffered by any person(s) including the Town.

G.    Jail Time. No violator shall be subject to jail time for offenses charged pursuant to this chapter, but this prohibition shall not apply to offenses designated as violations of Arizona Revised Statutes, the United States Code or other applicable laws. (Ord. 14-379 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 12.16 TOWN CEMETERY

Sections:

12.16.010    Purpose.

12.16.020    Uses.

12.16.030    Definitions.

12.16.040    Administration and maintenance.

12.16.050    Reservations and transfers of plots.

12.16.060    Application and fees.

12.16.070    Burial and exhumation – Cremains.

12.16.080    Conduct within the cemetery.

12.16.090    Memorials and gravestones – Decoration of gravesites and plots.

12.16.100    Use of motorized vehicles in cemeteries.

12.16.110    Enforcement and penalties.


12.16.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for Town cemeteries, including the Lakeside Cemetery, and to provide rules and regulations for the use, operation, maintenance and care of the cemetery(ies). These rules shall apply to any cemetery owned and operated by the Town. For the mutual protection of plot owners and the cemetery as a whole, the following rules and regulations are hereby established for the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. All plot owners and persons visiting the cemetery will be expected to abide by such rules and regulations as herein enacted and as hereafter amended, which are intended to assist in maintaining the cemetery as a peaceful and beautiful area as well as a reverent symbol of respect for the deceased. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.020 Uses.

A.    The cemetery shall be used exclusively for the burial of human beings and their remains. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases will have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A.    "Cemetery" shall mean any cemetery which is owned, managed or maintained by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

B.    "Navajo County resident" means a Navajo County resident and shall be described as a full-time resident or property owner outside the corporate boundary limits of the Town of PinetopLakeside but within the limits of Navajo County.

C.    "Companion grave" means a special plot or grave site designed and sold for the burial of two (2) persons.

D.    "Cremains" means the cremated remains of a deceased body.

E.    "Burial" means the interment of a deceased body or the remains into a grave.

F.    "Exhume" means the disinterment, digging up or removal of a deceased body or the remains from a grave.

G.    "Lot" shall mean a group of plots within a division designated on the plat as a lot.

H.    "Plot" means the lot or space reserved for the burial of a deceased body at a cemetery. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.040 Administration and maintenance.

A.    The Town Public Works Director shall be responsible for the administration, operation and maintenance of the cemetery.

B.    Prior to interment, a family member or a responsible party will be asked to provide basic information on the individual planned to occupy the site-record of burial. The Town of PinetopLakeside, as a part of the public record, keeps this information.

C.    The Town shall have the right to change, modify, or replat the plots or uses in any part of the cemetery not previously reserved for burial purposes. The Lakeside Cemetery shall be platted into lots and plots by the Public Works Department, and the Town Clerk will maintain and keep in his/her office a plat of said cemetery as public record.

D.    All applications for reservations or transfers for burial plots shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Town Public Works Department.

E.    All instructions for burial shall be in writing and on forms provided by the Town.

F.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside reserves to the Town the perpetual right of entry, use and control of the cemetery land for purposes of maintenance and operation of the cemetery.

G.    The Town shall take reasonable precaution to protect plot owners and the burial rights of owners within the cemetery. The Town disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage caused by flooding, fire, windstorm, or other causes deemed an act of God, a common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikes, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral.

H.    Town employees are not permitted to do any work for plot owners except at the direction of the Public Works Director and are prohibited from receiving tips or gratuities.

I.    The Public Works Director in consultation with the Town Manager reserves the right to make exceptions, suspensions, or modifications of any of the rules and regulations without notice when, in their judgment, such action appears necessary for the efficient, fair operation of the cemetery. Any such exception, suspension, or modification shall in no way be construed as affecting the general application of this chapter and shall not act as a waiver of any of the provisions herein.

J.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside reserves the right to adopt new rules, amend or suspend present rules and regulations herein, at any time, without direct or personal notification to plot owners.

K.    Appeals for decisions made by the Public Works Director relating to the administration and maintenance of the cemetery shall be made first to the Town Manager, then to the Board of Adjustment in writing as set forth in Chapter 17.120.

L.    No signs or notices or advertisements of any kind shall be permitted within the cemetery. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.050 Reservations and transfers of plots.

A.    The Town will show available plot locations and prepare cemetery reservation agreements for selected plot sites. Reservation sales or transfers are not complete or final until the purchaser pays for the plot(s) and signs the reservation agreement.

B.    No burial or placing of a memorial shall be permitted until the reservation sale is completed and the purchase price has been paid in full. No burial of any person, family or heirs shall be allowed without proof of the reservation interest to the Town Public Works Department.

C.    No deed to a cemetery plot shall be issued. The reservation agreement or a reservation transfer agreement shall constitute the sole agreements between the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and the purchaser.

D.    It shall be the sole responsibility of the reservation agreement holder to keep the Town informed of the correct mailing address. Notices or other correspondence mailed to purchasers, their legal representatives or heirs shall be deemed delivered and received three (3) days after the Town’s mailing of the notice or correspondence to the address on file with the Town Public Works Department.

E.    All applications and agreements for reservation plot sales or transfers shall be in writing on forms provided by the Town. No other agreements or contracts will be recognized by the Town.

F.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may (but is not required to) repurchase any cemetery plot from the owner for the original price paid upon written request of the owner or his legal heirs or representative and presentation of the plot reservation or cemetery plot certificate.

G.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside is the only seller of cemetery plots. If an owner wants to sell a plot, the owner shall contact the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside will buy the plot back at the original plot selling price, less an administration fee of ten (10%) percent of the current plot selling price.

H.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside recognizes the original named buyer of the cemetery plot(s) as the owner and, if not assigned or transferred to a specific individual, after their demise the Town will recognize ownership as stated in a legal will or trust. In the absence of a legal will or trust, the ownership will be determined in accordance with A.R.S. Title 14, Chapter 2, Article 1, pertaining to intestate succession.

I.    The Town Clerk’s department shall keep a record of plots sold, including the name, address and telephone number of the purchaser and the date execution of any reservation.

J.    The cemetery certificate of reservation grants right of burial only and does not convey any other title to the plot.

K.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside or its employees assume no responsibility for actual damages or mental anguish in the performance of its normal operations, or loss by vandalism or any other acts beyond its reasonable control. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.060 Application and fees.

A.    Applications for the purchase or transfer of a reservation for a cemetery plot shall be made on forms provided by the Town. The appropriate purchase/transfer fee shall accompany all applications.

B.    All cemetery fees, including application fees, reservation fees, transfer fees, and other special fees related to cemetery plots shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.

C.    The reservation agreement of any plot shall be executed by the Public Works Department, shall be sold in strict accordance with this chapter, and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

D.    There shall be a recording fee for recording any change in title or ownership in any plot in the cemetery after initial conveyance of the same by the Town.

E.    A resident of Pinetop-Lakeside and/or a person owning property within the corporate limits of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside can purchase a burial plot at the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside resident rate. Former residents of Pinetop-Lakeside with relatives buried within the Lakeside Cemetery may purchase burial plots at the Navajo County resident rate. Out of Navajo County resident can purchase burial plots at the out of Navajo County rate.

F.    The price for a lot shall be the aggregate of the price for each burial plot located within such lot.

G.    All reservation agreements for a plot shall be paid in full within two (2) years from the execution of the agreement. A minimum monthly payment will be necessary per the fee schedule and any remaining balance at the end of two (2) years will require immediate payment of the remaining balance. If payment is not made within the two (2) year time period, any and all funds paid will first be collectively paid on one (1) plot until paid in full and then the next and so on until as many plots that can be paid in full are. Plot(s) not paid in full will be eligible for resale by the Town.

H.    No lot or burial plot shall be sold to or purchased by a funeral director or other person for purpose of resale or speculation. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.070 Burial and exhumation – Cremains.

A.    All burials and exhumations of bodies are subject to the laws of the state of Arizona and this chapter.

B.    All burials shall be in a liner or vault of concrete, steel or other material approved for use by the Town.

C.    Charges for burial and exhuming services provided by the Town shall be established by the Town Council, and shall be payable in advance. Prepayment of interment will be accepted. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside is solely responsible for excavating interments. The Town shall not assume any liability for any damage to a casket, urn or other such container incurred in making a removal.

D.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside will regulate the charges for opening and closing a grave from time to time. No grave shall be opened or closed, except by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

E.    Forty-eight (48) hours’ (excluding weekends and holidays) advance notice shall be provided to the Town Public Works Department for any burial.

F.    Seven (7) days’ advance, written notice shall be provided to the Town Public Works Department for any exhuming services.

G.    No more than one (1) body may be buried in any one (1) plot, grave, vault, or crypt except in the case of a mother and a child less than one (1) year of age, or in a companion grave. However, with consent of the owner or heirs of the owner of a plot, an exception may be made to permit no more than one (1) regular burial and up to four (4) additional cremains in any one (1) plot, grave, vault, or crypt.

H.    All cremains shall be buried and appropriate arrangements for the burial shall be scheduled with the Town Public Works Department. Cremains shall not be scattered in the cemetery, or buried without the Town’s written permission.

I.    In the absence of acceptable evidence of ownership, the Town reserves the right to refuse to open any burial plot and to refuse to conduct a burial. If, for any reason, a plot in a requested location cannot be used, to prevent a delay in burial or funeral services, the Public Works Director may provide one (1) in an available location.

J.    The Town shall not be liable for any delay in burial where protest by a deceased person’s legal representatives or heirs has been made, or where the law, or rules and regulations have not been complied with.

K.    Human remains are the responsibility of the decedent’s family, heirs, or executor until buried. During any legal process or protest which delays or prohibits the Town from burying any person, the family, heirs, or personal representative shall store the human remains until the legal process or protest is resolved. The Town shall be reimbursed for any expenses related to burial or the exhuming of any body or remains as a result of such protest or legal process.

L.    Caskets containing remains or cremains, once buried, will not be opened or removed except in accordance with state law, and without the written consent of personal representative or other legal representative of the deceased, or an order from a court of competent jurisdiction.

M.    Removal by the heirs of a body so that the burial plot may be sold for profit to themselves or to any other persons, or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the original burial plot owner, is repugnant to the ordinary sense of decency and is absolutely forbidden.

N.    The interment of bodies of persons who have died of contagious disease shall be in strict accordance with the rule of the Arizona State Board of Health.

O.    In the event of a disaster which results in numerous burials for the cemetery, the Public Works crew will work as deemed necessary by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to void any and all of these rules and regulations as necessary in order to handle the numerous burials as orderly and as quickly as possible.

P.    The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall not be responsible to provide any equipment for funerals or burials.

Q.    No burials shall be conducted after official sunset. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.080 Conduct within cemeteries.

A.    Visitors are reminded that cemetery grounds are considered sacred and a strict observance of accepted decorum shall be required at all times.

B.    Visitors will use the walkways and roads provided to access plots.

C.    No person shall dispose of any rubbish, trash, waste materials, litter, or debris of any kind in the cemetery.

D.    No person shall plant any tree, shrub or other plant in the cemetery except those permitted and approved in writing by the Town.

E.    No person shall cut down, injure, break or destroy any tree, shrub or other plant growing in the cemetery or to pick, pluck or cut any flower or decorative plant in the cemetery.

F.    Firearms, other than those carried by police officers or which will be used in approved military honor funeral services, are prohibited in the cemetery.

G.    No person shall interfere with the conduct of a funeral, graveside service, burial or exhuming of a body at the cemetery.

H.    No person shall desecrate, vandalize, deface, tear down or injure any property, plot, grave, grave stone, monument, tomb, vault, fence, tree or shrub in the cemetery. Likewise, no person shall disturb, destroy, deface, desecrate, vandalize, tear down or injure any decorations, flowers or other tokens of remembrance placed at any grave plot or within the cemetery.

I.    No person shall enter into or be upon the cemetery grounds of the Town during the time after sunset and before sunrise of any day without first obtaining the written permission of the Town.

J.    Sale of any goods or services on cemetery property is strictly prohibited unless prior, written authorization is given by the Town. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.090 Memorials and gravestones – Decoration of gravesites and plots.

A.    If a family chooses to buy a headstone, they will do so at their own cost. All headstones or markers in the cemetery shall have a concrete or granite foundation set at ground level with a minimum four (4) inch border, which shall be set by an approved monument vendor who will be under the direct supervision of Town personnel. The monument vendor must contact the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside prior to setting a headstone so it can be placed in the correct location. If a headstone has to be moved, the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside will not be held liable for any damage to the headstone.

B.    Only one (1) gravestone will be allowed for each grave plot, and this shall be placed at the head of the grave or plot. In the event a family monument gravestone is placed at the head of a group of grave plots, an individual marker may be placed at the foot of each grave for individuals buried there. Government markers like military markers may also be placed at the foot of the grave in addition to the headstone.

C.    All gravestones or markers in the cemetery shall be forty (40) inches or less in height and shall have a concrete foundation, which shall be poured and set by a licensed memorial representative or Town Public Works Department staff. Gravestones or markers greater than forty (40) inches in height shall only be permitted with written approval of the Town.

D.    The Town shall not be responsible for the preservation and care of any gravestones, markers or memorials installed in the cemetery.

E.    Since the Town does not have a full-time cemetery groundskeeper, daily maintenance of sites is not performed. In order to establish grass on plots and to allow access for mowing machines no rock, gravel, wood, or similar type of ground covering will be allowed. No fences, curbing, borders or barriers are allowed around lots or individual plots, except for those already in existence.

F.    If existing fences are not in good and attractive condition, the Public Works Department shall remove the fence. If the fence is removed, a new fence will not be allowed, to comply with current subsection E of this section.

G.    The placing of decorations, cut flowers or plastic flowers, or other small tokens of remembrance at individual grave plots, shall be permitted; however, the Town shall not be responsible for the care of such decorations, flowers, tokens of remembrance or the containers that they are placed in. The Town may remove, without notice, all decorations, flowers, real or artificial, tokens of remembrance, tattered flags, or other things that are deteriorated or broken from plots on an as-needed basis.

H.    Plastic solar lights are allowed when secured to the headstone.

I.    Shepherd hooks are allowed April 1st to June 1st.

J.    All funeral arrangement flowers will be removed after ten (10) days.

K.    All floral arrangements without a vase that is attached to the foundation, or floral saddles, will be removed three (3) weeks following Memorial Day.

L.    Blankets and wreaths are permissible after Thanksgiving and may remain until April 1st.

M.    Please note that all decorations will be removed from sites on April 1st and October 1st for spring and fall cleanup.

N.    The Town shall not be held liable for lost, misplaced or broken flower vases or other decorations or for damage by the elements, thieves, vandals or by causes beyond its control. The Town reserves the right to regulate the method of decorating burial plots and the right to remove any decoration so that a uniform beauty may be maintained.

O.    The placement of permanent decorations or small tokens of remembrance shall only be permitted with the express, written permission of the Town.

P.    No person shall plant any tree, shrub or other plant at individual grave plots except those permitted and approved in writing by the Town. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.100 Use of motorized vehicles in cemeteries.

A.    No person shall drive any motorized vehicle within the cemetery except upon driveways designated for that purpose.

B.    Vehicles shall not be operated in excess of five (5) miles per hour within cemeteries.

C.    Vehicles shall not drive or park off of hard-surfaced roads.

D.    Vehicles shall not be parked or left standing where the vehicle blocks other traffic or prevents other vehicles from using or traveling on the cemetery roads. The Town of PinetopLakeside reserves the right to have any vehicle violating this section removed at the owner’s expense.

E.    Funeral processions entering the cemetery shall be under the direction and control of the Town Public Works Department. Unless exception is made by the Town in writing, a licensed funeral director shall be present at all times and shall conduct services as provided by existing state laws, the Town Code, and applicable rules and regulations. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part))


12.16.110 Enforcement and penalties.

A.    The Town Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officer, and employees of the Public Works Department shall, in connection with their duties, enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B.    The Town Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officer, and employees of the Public Works Department shall have the authority to order any person or persons acting in violation of this chapter to leave the cemetery.

C.    Violators of this chapter may be cited using the uniform traffic citation form or any other form approved by the Chief of Police. The citation shall show the specific section or sections alleged to have been violated, a brief description of the violation, whether the citation is for a civil or criminal offense, and whether the violation is charged as a second, third or greater offense. If there is no designation of a second or greater offense, the citation shall be considered a first offense. For continuing violations, the dates or the number of days shall also be noted on the citation.

D.    Violations of the following sections of this chapter shall be charged on the first and subsequent offenses as a Class 2 misdemeanor:

1.    Section 12.16.020.

2.    Section 12.16.050(B).

3.    Sections 12.16.080(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H), and (J).

4.    Sections 12.16.100(A) and (C).

E.    Civil Violations. When a violation of this chapter, except as set forth in subsection D of this section, is undesignated or designated a first offense by the Enforcement Officer or the Town Attorney, a person found to have been in violation of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus restitution for personal injuries, property damage or any other economic loss suffered by any person including the Town.

F.    Criminal Violations. When a person convicted of a violation of this chapter is a person who has been previously convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within a period of twelve (12) months, the person shall be deemed to have committed a Class 2 misdemeanor, pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 13, Chapters 6, 7 and 8, as amended, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation or count, plus surcharges, fees and restitution for personal injuries, property damage or any other economic loss suffered by any person including the Town.

G.    Jail Time. No violator shall be subject to jail time for offenses charged pursuant to this chapter, but this prohibition shall not apply to offenses designated as violations of Arizona Revised Statutes, the United States Code or other applicable laws. (Ord. 16-397 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-285)


Chapter 12.20 PINETOP-LAKESIDE PUBLIC LIBRARY

Sections:

12.20.010    Purpose.

12.20.020    Library.

12.20.030    Library Director.

12.20.040    Library facilities.

12.20.050    Library users.

12.20.060    Library materials.

12.20.070    Overdue library materials.

12.20.080    Library computers.

12.20.090    Rules of conduct.

12.20.100    Enforcement.


12.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish and provide for the development and adoption of rules and regulations for the use and operation of the Town library. The official name, "Pinetop-Lakeside Public Library" (referred to as "library" in this chapter), was established by Ordinance No. 13-377 on December 5, 2013. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.020 Library.

The library is a department of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside (hereinafter the "Town") and a member of the Navajo County Library District. The library may also coordinate with, and participate in, programs and policies of the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.030 Library Director.

A.    The Library Director reports to, and is supervised by, the Town Manager, who will have the following powers and duties in relation to the library:

1.    To oversee the facilities, programs, and services.

2.    To establish and recommend to the Town Council, for approval by resolution, proposed policies, rules, and regulations relating to the acquisition, conservation, and use of library facilities and materials.

3.    To make recommendations to the Town Council, for approval by resolution, of the usage charges for room rental, equipment use, damage or loss of library materials, and overdue fees.

4.    To develop a continuing plan for the Town’s library programs.

5.    To advise the Town Council of priorities for the library for budget preparation.

6.    To supervise and direct the activities of each library staff member. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.040 Library facilities.

A.    The library is a public facility and is open to members of the public during its normal business hours. The use of library facilities will be conducted in accordance with the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Use of Facility Rules and Regulations.

B.    Although the library is a public facility, it should not be used for the purpose of furthering a political campaign for public office, and campaign materials may not be distributed in the library. Individuals may gather signatures for petitions or distribute materials outside the library, and must conduct themselves in such a way that does not create litter nor impede library users’ access to and enjoyable use of the library.

C.    Individuals may distribute informational materials outside the library, and must conduct themselves in such a way that does not create litter nor impede library users’ access to, and enjoyable use of, the library.

D.    Charges for room rental, equipment use, damage or loss of library materials, and any overdue fees will be set by Town Council resolution. The fees for damage, loss, or overdue library materials will be set in accordance and coordination with the Navajo County Library District. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.050 Library users.

A.    A library card is available to residents of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, as well as residents of Navajo County. Library cards allow residents to borrow library materials, download digital media, and access online databases.

B.    Card holders must agree to observe all rules and regulations of the library, to pay all charges for the damage or loss of library materials and any overdue fees, and to give immediate notice of any change of address, phone number, email, or lost card.

C.    Visitor access by nonresidents is allowed to library facilities. Check-out policies and fees may be recommended to Town Council and approved by resolution. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.060 Library materials.

Library materials are selected on the basis of informational, educational, cultural, and recreational value. Materials are selected in compliance with the mission and goals of the library. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.070 Overdue library materials.

A.    All library materials that are returned after the due date will be charged extended use fees or for loss of library materials as set by resolution of the Town Council. As a courtesy, library staff will send notices to the card holder.

B.    After the library sends a final notice, library staff may bar the card holder’s account, meaning the card holder cannot check out library materials from any library in the Navajo County Library District until the overdue materials have been returned and the fees have been paid.

C.    The library may submit unpaid accounts to a collection agency.

D.    Damage or destruction of library materials may, in appropriate circumstances, be pursued as a criminal matter to be investigated and turned over to law enforcement and prosecuted under state statutes. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.080 Library computers.

A.    The library maintains computers for library users and provides filtered Internet access. Internet access is available via the library’s public access computers or the library’s wireless network.

B.    All users are expected to use these resources in a responsible, courteous, and legal manner.

C.    Any user who fails to comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations may have their Internet and/or library privileges suspended, and any serious violation may result in legal action. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.090 Rules of conduct.

Rules of conduct and policies on patron use and attendance may be recommended for approval by motion and vote of the Town Council. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


12.20.100 Enforcement.

Violation of any portion of this code, or of any laws, shall subject the offending party to liability for any loss or damage, to suspension or potential deprivation of library privileges and use of facilities. Violation of any portion of this code is also subject to the general enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.20, Enforcement and Penalties. (Ord. 14-382 (part))


Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:

13.04    Solid Waste Collection System

13.08    Utilities Board


Chapter 13.04 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SYSTEM

Sections:

13.04.010    Solid waste collection system created.

13.04.020    Definitions.

13.04.030    General provisions.

13.04.040    Construction sites and transportation of building materials.

13.04.050    Solid waste collection and disposal.

13.04.060    Solid waste collector’s regulations.

13.04.070    Violations by solid waste collector.

13.04.080    Transportation of solid waste.

13.04.090    Responsibility of owner or occupant of premises.

13.04.100    Hazardous waste.

13.04.110    Solid waste collection permit.

13.04.120    Issuance of permits.

13.04.130    Other permits and licenses.

13.04.140    Ownership of solid waste.

13.04.150    Recycling.

13.04.160    Lawsuits –Other claims.

13.04.170    Nondiscrimination.

13.04.180    Civil violation –Penalty.


13.04.010 Solid waste collection system created.

Under the authority granted to the Town by ARS Title 49, Chapter 4, Article 3, it is declared that the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town requires the establishment, maintenance and enforcement of a general system for the collection and disposal of solid waste and refuse within the Town. (Ord. 97-133 § 2: Ord. 92-95 § I)


13.04.020 Definitions.

A.    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:

1.    "Collection" means the process of collecting solid waste for transportation from the producer of solid waste to a disposal site.

2.    "Commercial user" means any person generating solid waste from other than a single-family residence.

3.    "Commercially generated solid waste" means all solid waste except that generated by single-family residences.

4.    "Hazardous waste" means hazardous wastes, toxic chemicals, and radioactive materials and substances as defined under or described by any federal, state or local law, ordinance, statute or regulation relating to hazardous wastes, industrial hygiene or environmental matters (the "Hazardous Materials Laws"), which Hazardous Materials Laws include, but are not limited to:

a.    The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended, 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq.;

b.    The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, 49 U.S.C. Section 1801, et seq.;

c.    Title 49, Chapter 5 and Title 28, Chapter 19, Arizona Revised Statutes.

5.    "Permit" means the solid waste collector’s annual permit issued by the Town.

6.    "Person" means every person, firm, partnership, public or private corporation, association, trust, estate or any other legal entity owning, operating or controlling inhabitating any house, residence, shop, establishment, hotel, restaurant, market, apartment or tenement house or any place of business within the Town.

7.    "Premises" means retail establishments and shops, industrial or manufacturing concerns, business houses, apartment houses, offices, theaters, hotels, residences, cafes, eating houses, tourist camps, settlements, hospitals, rooming houses, schools, vacant lots and all other places within the limits of the Town where solid waste, as defined in this section, accumulates.

8.    "Recycling" means storing reusable materials in preparation to induction into an industrial process by which the material is transformed into a new product in such a manner that the original identity as a product is lost.

9.    "Residential user" means any person producing or generating solid waste from a single-family residence.

10.    "Solid waste" means and includes, but is not limited to, any garbage, rejected or waste food, offal, swill, carrion, ashes, dirt, slop, waste water, trash, rubbish, waste or unwholesome material of any kind except sewage but including residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and recreational waste.

11.    "Solid waste collector" means the private solid waste collection or management businesses or firms which have been issued a solid waste collection permit as defined herein.

12.    "Solid waste collector’s equipment" means and includes vehicles, collection containers and any other equipment used by the solid waste collector in collecting solid waste or refuse pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 92-95 § III)


13.04.030 General provisions.

A.    Littering. No person shall throw, place, sweep or otherwise dispose of solid waste, trash or refuse on any sidewalk, street, parcel, lot or any other place not specifically designated for the disposal of solid waste, trash or refuse.

B.    Placing Injurious Materials on Streets. No person shall throw or deposit any nails, tacks, hoops, wire, cans, glass or any other substance or material upon any street or alley in the Town, which will cause or which is likely to cause injury to any person, animal or vehicle traveling upon such street or alley, or which will cause such street or alley to be unsightly, unattractive, hurtful, nauseous, offensive or dangerous; provided, that the placing of such substance of material in the streets or alleys for the purpose of removal or recycling as provided by this chapter shall not be a violation of this section.

C.    Weeds, Brush-Fire Hazard. No person shall permit in or about his/her premises weeds, briars, brush or any other solid waste to become in any way hazardous or injurious to public health or to constitute a fire hazard as determined by the District Fire Chief or his/her designee.

D.    Dumping on Public Property-Nuisance. No person shall dump, deposit, place or otherwise dispose of dirt, rock, caliche, cement, asphalt, building materials, other solid waste, trash or refuse upon any public street, public right-of-way, public park or other public property without first obtaining a written permit from the Town Manager. Any such dumping performed without a written permit is declared a nuisance and is punishable as a Class I misdemeanor. See Chapter 1.16. (Ord. 98-154 §§ 10, 11; Ord. 92-95 § IV)


13.04.040 Construction sites and transportation of building materials.

A.    All persons having secured a building permit shall, prior to the start of any construction activity, furnish or place on those premises a container or fenced area of suitable size and design to contain all refuse which may be distributed or removed from the premises by the wind or elements.

B.    No person shall allow solid waste of any kind to be blown or be carried from the premises for which the building permit was secured.

C.    The Town shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of waste building material originating from the private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new buildings, alterations or additions to existing buildings of whatsoever type or form or demolition of existing structures. Such solid waste materials shall be removed by the owner as set out above or by the construction contractor. No new certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such solid waste has been completely removed by the owner or construction contractor.

D.    Persons engaged in demolition must remove the debris and structural parts and contain these elements from scattering in the same manner as set out above. (Ord. 92-95 § V)


13.04.050 Solid waste collection and disposal.

A.    All solid waste accumulated in the Town shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by solid waste collectors who have applied for and been issued an annual permit by the Town to collect and dispose of solid waste unless otherwise exempted herein.

B.    No person shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the Town, or dispose of any solid waste accumulated within the Town except with a current permit and as otherwise provided in this chapter.

C.    Any disposal of solid waste as permitted herein shall be at an approved sanitary landfill, digester, compactor or transfer station.

D.    All residential and commercial users shall comply with the rules and regulations established by this chapter for the use, care and location of solid waste containers and shall keep the lids and covers furnished for such containers closed at all times except when they are being filled or emptied.

E.    No person shall deposit solid waste in any solid waste collector’s container without payment of the appropriate scheduled fees or having an agreement established with the solid waste collector for use of such containers.

F.    Caretakers of summer resort properties and landscape maintenance firms shall be allowed to collect and dispose of pine needles and yard trimmings without the issuance of a municipal solid waste management permit.

G.    This chapter shall not prohibit the actual commercial or residential producers of solid waste from personally collecting, conveying, and disposing of such solid waste in accordance with applicable laws and regulations provided that such producers shall not be exempt from maintaining their premises in a sanitary condition. (Ord. 92-95 § VII)


13.04.060 Solid waste collector’s regulations.

A.    Solid waste collector shall schedule solid waste collection services to persons and premises within the Town as follows:

1.    Apply for and receive a solid waste collector’s annual permit to collect solid waste from Town.

2.    Collect solid waste according to a regular schedule established by solid waste collector to all persons who contract for solid waste collection services which schedule may be modified from time to time.

3.    Prepare and publish schedules for collection, route books and maps for each collection route and make them available to the Town upon request.

4.    Provide all customers and other persons who inquire with schedules and other route information necessary to adequately inform them of collection times. In the event of a change in routes or schedules, solid waste collector shall notify each person affected not less than one week prior to the change except as set forth in subsection (A)(5) of this section.

5.    The solid waste collectors agree to notify all residents of the Town of any special pickup service due to holidays or inclement weather. Method of notification shall be determined by the solid waste collector. Solid waste collector shall not be required to provide services on the following holidays:

New Years Day, January 1st

President’s Day, 3rd Monday in February

Memorial Day, Last Monday in May

Independence Day, July 4th

Labor Day, First Monday in September

Columbus Day, Second Monday in October

Veteran’s Day, November 11th

Thanksgiving Day, 4th Thursday in November

Christmas Day, December 25th

6.    Commence solid waste collection in areas in or near residential neighborhoods no earlier than six-thirty a.m. and terminate such collection no later than eight p.m.

7.    Provide collection containers for solid waste collection subject to reasonable conditions which the Town may require from time to time.

8.    All commercial and residential users shall be required to ensure access by solid waste collectors to all collection containers and to place such collection containers as directed by the solid waste collectors whenever reasonably possible. All roll-out collection containers shall be placed as indicated above on the days designated for collection of such solid waste and shall be removed from such location following the collection and placed in a location away from the street.

9.    The following items of solid waste shall not be placed in collection containers, and the producers of such solid waste shall be required to individually contract with a contractor for the disposal of such solid waste, or lawfully dispose of it themselves:

a.    Hazardous wastes, poisons, acids, caustics, chemicals, motor oil, batteries, explosives, infectious waste, and radioactive waste.

10.    Solid waste collectors shall furnish up to three collection containers (size to be specified by Town) to be placed in public areas such as Woodland Lake Park or other areas designated by the Town and collect solid waste from such designated public containers free of charge. These public containers shall not be used to dispose of trash by the Town officers.

B.    Collection Containers.

1.    Solid waste collectors agree to supply standardized collection containers to all persons contracting for solid waste collection service. Solid waste collector may charge a placement fee for such containers.

2.    All collection containers used for the accumulation or storage of solid waste shall be manufactured using metal or plastic in a water-shielding design. All collection containers shall be clearly identified with the solid waste collector’s firm name and telephone number.

3.    Solid waste collector, at solid waste collector’s sole expense, shall perform all maintenance and repairs upon collection containers as necessary to maintain them in proper operating order.

4.    Solid waste collector shall be entitled to seek reimbursement or restitution for maintenance and repairs caused by the intentional or negligent acts of any person responsible for damage to collection containers. Repayment or restitution for such maintenance and repairs shall be limited to a maximum of forty dollars ($40.00) per hour for time actually expended on such maintenance and repairs of collection containers not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).

5.    Solid waste collector shall exercise reasonable care in the handling of collection containers and after removing solid waste from any such collection container, cause the container to be replaced at its designated position with its lid or cover on and in place.

6.    All collections made by solid waste collector shall be from the customer’s property or from the streets or alleys adjoining such properties. The Town shall require by ordinance, all persons utilizing solid waste collector’s services to deliver movable collection containers to and from designated positions.

C.    Collection Equipment.

1.    Solid waste collector shall use only safe, serviceable collection equipment. Packer trucks shall completely, adequately and fully accommodate the use of approved, covered, commercial-type solid waste containers, for collection from persons within the Town. Sufficient equipment shall be available to solid waste collector to allow complete and timely performance of all collection services. Solid waste collector shall meet all federal, state and local air pollution emission standards as they apply to solid waste collector’s equipment.

2.    Solid waste collector shall thoroughly clean all of solid waste collector’s vehicles and other equipment, not including collection containers, at least once each week and shall deodorize or disinfect all equipment as necessary to maintain such equipment in a sanitary, nonoffensive condition.

3.    All collection equipment shall be clearly identified with the solid waste collector’s firm name and telephone number.

4.    Collection vehicles shall be painted uniform colors and shall be equipped with such safety devices, warning lights, etc., as required by Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes or other state or local laws. Each collection vehicle shall be equipped with a shovel and broom for pickup of spilled solid waste which shall be accomplished immediately upon discoverage of such spillage. In addition, all collection vehicles shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher, an appropriate first aid kit, and safety flares.

D.    Office and Complaint Procedure.

1.    The solid waste collector shall establish and maintain a local office and a toll-free telephone number for residents within Pinetop-Lakeside for processing complaints and applications for commercial, residential and special services. Such office shall remain open during normal business hours from eight a.m. to five p.m., Monday through Friday.

2.    The solid waste collector shall employ personnel to answer the complaints from the public, concerning service of the solid waste collector, and shall equip the office with a telephone system, which shall include an automatic telephone answering device or answering service for processing complaints of the public during nonbusiness hours. Solid waste collector shall at all times keep a telephone listing in solid waste collector’s name in the telephone directory. Solid waste collector shall notify all persons and premises serviced by solid waste collector of the customer service telephone number.

3.    Solid waste collector shall appoint a supervisor whose name shall be provided to the Town Manager available to represent the solid waste collector in its relations with the public.

E.    Subcontractors. Solid waste collectors shall not subcontract any of the work described in this chapter without the express written permission of the Town. (Ord. 92-95 § VIII)


13.04.070 Violations by solid waste collector.

A.    If a solid waste collector at any time during the term of a permit, fails to comply with this chapter or the terms and conditions of the nonexclusive solid waste collector’s annual permit, the Town Manager or designee shall give the solid waste collector thirty (30) days written notice of the deficiency. If solid waste collector contests the alleged deficiency, the solid waste collector shall be given an opportunity to meet and discuss the deficiency with the Town Manager or designee prior to any action being taken against the permit. This meeting must take place within the said thirty (30) day period. If the solid waste collector fails to correct such deficiency within said thirty (30) day period, the Town Manager or designee may revoke or suspend the permit of the solid waste collector or assess an administrative penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any appeals from the decision of a Town Manager or designee shall be taken to the Town Council. The appeal must be filed in writing and filed with the Town Clerk within fifteen (15) days of written notice of the Town Manager’s or designee’s decision. Such appeals may be heard at any regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council or at such special meeting as the Town Council may call for such purpose.

B.    Revocation, supervision, or assessment of an administrative penalty of a permit shall be action in addition to any other civil or criminal penalties provided by this chapter.

C.    This administrative procedure shall be accomplished prior to the Town or the solid waste collector filing any cause of action with a court. (Ord. 92-95 § IX)


13.04.080 Transportation of solid waste.

A.    Any person including solid waste collectors transporting solid waste in any vehicle must have suitable covers or tie downs to prevent the spillage of solid waste on roadways or other property.

B.    Solid waste collectors shall be required to utilize modern hydraulically operated, packer-type collection vehicles which shall be designed to prevent spillage of solid waste on roadways or other property. (Ord. 92-95 § X)


13.04.090 Responsibility of owner or occupant of premises.

The owner of any premises as well as the occupant or possessor thereof shall be subject to the terms of this chapter and responsible for violations hereof. (Ord. 92-95 § XI)


13.04.100 Hazardous waste.

A.    Hazardous Waste. In the event solid waste collector collects any hazardous waste, solid waste collector shall be responsible for properly disposing of such hazardous waste. Solid waste collector may charge additional fees for collecting and disposing of hazardous waste; but in any event the collection, transportation, disposal or treatment of hazardous waste shall conform to all federal, state and local laws.

B.    No person shall place any hazardous waste material in a collection container or otherwise dispose of such hazardous waste material except as authorized by applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 92-95 § XII)


13.04.110 Solid waste collection permit.

A solid waste collection permit may be issued to solid waste collectors meeting the following operating standards:

A.    Solid waste collectors shall apply for and receive an annual permit and pay applicable fees.

B.    Solid waste collectors shall operate in conformance with this chapter.

C.    Solid waste collectors shall own or lease a sufficient number of trucks with drivers for each to collect and dispose of ashes, garbage, rubbish, refuse and solid waste materials.

D.    Solid waste collectors shall operate collection vehicles which are suitable for the efficient, sanitary collection of solid waste and shall be modern, sanitary and of spill-proof and leak-proof construction.

E.    Solid waste collectors shall offer residential collection service to all residences and commercial establishments within the Town. Solid waste collectors shall offer as a minimum, one fifty (50) gallon wheeled cart to each customer to be collected on a once per week basis.

F.    Solid waste collectors shall offer commercial collection service to commercial users in the Town on a voluntary basis. Solid waste collectors shall provide metal automated containers, with sizes up to eight (8) cubic yards. These containers shall be collected on a schedule ranging from one time per week, up to seven times per week.

G.    Solid waste collectors shall maintain public liability insurance for bodily injury, wrongful death and property damage to others in the minimum amount of one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars. A certificate evidencing said insurance coverage shall be on file with the Town at all times. (Ord. 92-95 § XIII)


13.04.120 Issuance of permits.

The Town Manager or designee shall be vested with the authority to issue solid waste collection permits to solid waste collectors who make application, who pay applicable fees and who otherwise are in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 92-95 § XIV)


13.04.130 Other permits and licenses.

The solid waste collector shall obtain, at solid waste collector’s sole expense, all other necessary permits and licenses which are required by federal, state or county laws, ordinances or regulations which may be necessary to collect solid waste as permitted by this chapter. Solid waste collector shall provide Town with copies or other proof of such permits and licenses upon request of the Town. (Ord. 92-95 § XV)


13.04.140 Ownership of solid waste.

Ownership of solid waste collected pursuant to this chapter shall be vested in the solid waste collector upon placement of the solid waste in any collection vehicles owned or used by solid waste collector. Except as specified herein, the solid waste collector shall have full and exclusive right to all salvageable or recyclable materials collected in connection with solid waste collector’s collection of solid waste. Solid waste collector shall also have title and ownership to lost or misplaced personal property except with respect to the rightful owner who shall have the right to claim such lost personal property for up to ten (10) days following its having been lost or misplaced. (Ord. 92-95 § XVI)


13.04.150 Recycling.

Reserved. (Ord. 92-95 § XVII)


13.04.160 Lawsuits –Other claims.

In the event any litigation is threatened or commenced by third persons against the Town relating to solid waste collector’s performance under this chapter, Town shall immediately advise the appropriate solid waste collector in writing and solid waste collector shall then immediately intervene in any such litigation and provide legal counsel to defend or settle such lawsuit. All related attorney’s fees generated by such attorneys and the Town Attorney defending such claims or lawsuits of third persons shall be paid by solid waste collector. (Ord. 92-95 § XVIII)


13.04.170 Nondiscrimination.

Solid waste collector agrees and understands that no person shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, denied the services of or otherwise be subjected to discrimination for solid waste collection services on the basis of race, color, creed or national origin. (Ord. 92-95 § XIX)


13.04.180 Civil violation –Penalty.

A.    Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be considered a civil violation. Civil penalties of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to appropriate civil restitution amounts and amounts collectible pursuant to Section 13.04.060(B)(4) of this chapter, if applicable, may be assessed against violators. Each day that a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation and a new and separate civil penalty may attach.

B.    Notices of civil violations shall be served upon the violators by the Pinetop-Lakeside Police Department on forms similar to forms used for civil traffic or other civil violations. (Ord. 92-95 § XX)

SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR’S ANNUAL PERMIT APPLICATION

Return to:    Community Development Department

    1360 N. Niels Hansen Lane

    Lakeside, AZ 85929

Permit No. _______________

Important Notice    Read Carefully Before Completing This Application.

Your Solid Waste Collector’s Permit will be issued under the provisions of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. You are cautioned that the permit does not allow operation of a business in violation of other laws and ordinances. Your business location will be checked by zoning, and if necessary, the fire district officials. If you have any doubt that your business location conforms with the requirements of the State Statutes and Town Ordinances administered by these departments, you are urged to contact these departments for further information before filing this application for a Solid Waste Collector’s Permit. Permit fees are nonrefundable. This is an annual permit which must be renewed each year. Attach $200.00 fee with application. A Certificate of Liability Insurance shall accompany this application.

I.    Ownership Information

A)    Is the business: Single Ownership __________; partnership __________; corporation __________?

B)    If the business is a corporation, have you registered with the state? Yes ____No ______?

C)    List owner(s); (If corporation, list officers and positions held.)

    _________________________ Name

    _________________________ Street Address

    _________________________ Mailing Address

    _________________________ Town/State/Zip

    _________________________ Telephone

 

    _________________________ Name

    _________________________ Street Address

    _________________________ Mailing Address

    _________________________ Town/State/Zip

    _________________________ Telephone

 

    _________________________ Name

    _________________________ Street Address

    _________________________ Mailing Address

    _________________________ Town/State/Zip

    _________________________ Telephone

 

    _________________________ Name

    _________________________ Street Address

    _________________________ Mailing Address

    _________________________ Town/State/Zip

    _________________________ Telephone

 

II.    Business Information

A)    Full Corporate/Business name ____________________________________________________

B)    Business address _______________________________________________________________

    Business telephone _____________________________________________________________

C)    Describe fully the other products or service provided

    _____________________________________________________________________________

    _____________________________________________________________________________

    _____________________________________________________________________________

D)    Federal Tax I.D. Number ________________________________________________________

E)    Other State/Federal license numbers and type ________________________________________

    _____________________________________________________________________________

III.    Mailing Address (If different than business address) _______________________________________________________________________________

    Attention: ______________________________________________________________________

IV.    General Information

A)    Is this license for: New Permit ______; Renewal _____;

    (year permit first granted _____)

B)    When will you/did you start the solid waste collection business in Pinetop Lakeside?

    _____________________________________________________________________________

C)    Do you collect solid waste in other locations? __________

If so, where? ______________________________________________________________________

D)    Estimate the number of employees you will have working in Navajo County this year:

    _____________________________________________________________________________

E)    Do you/Have you had other licenses from the Town of Pinetop Lakeside? ___________________

If yes, when? ___________    For what business? _____________________

I declare under penalty of perjury that the statements made herein are true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.

SIGNED:

__________________________________    ___________________________ President	Date

__________________________________    ___________________________ Secretary	Date

------------------------------------------------Official Use Only--------------------------------------------------

Approved By: _________________________________    DATE: ____________________

Title: _________________________________

Expiration Date: ______________________________


Chapter 13.08 UTILITIES BOARD

Sections:

13.08.010    Creation.

13.08.020    Membership.

13.08.030    Powers and duties.


13.08.010 Creation.

There is created a Utilities Board of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside for the purpose of overseeing, managing and operating the utility operations of the Town including electric and other authorized utility functions in compliance with this Chapter and the provisions of applicable law and for the purpose of acquiring the resources necessary to provide those services including services to municipally owned facilities of every nature, whether directly or indirectly.


13.08.020 Membership.

The membership of the Utilities Board shall consist of the Town Public Facilities Superintendent, the Finance Director, Town Manager and one member of the Town Council appointed by the Town Council. The Town’s Finance Director shall be the chairman of the Utilities Board.


13.08.030 Powers and duties.

A.    The Board shall have the following powers and duties:

1.    Keep and submit minutes of all meetings to the Town Council for information.

2.    Subject to the provisions of paragraph (C), manage and operate the electric and other utility functions of the Town and to acquire the resources for use by municipal facilities and municipal purposes to fulfill those functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and applicable law.

B.    Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (A), responsibility for the daily operations of the utilities of the Town, and acquisition of resources for municipal purposes shall be vested in and performed by the Finance Director under the supervision of the Town Manager. The chairperson, on behalf of the Board, shall consult with the Town Manager with respect to the oversight and operation of the Town’s utilities. Where practical and feasible the Finance Director will establish separate accounts for each municipal utility.

C.    The Town Council shall be responsible for approval of utility rates, adoption of the budget, capital acquisitions and approval of contracts and resource acquisition for municipal purposes. (Ord. 05-248)


Title 14 (Reserved)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.04    Building Code

15.08    Drainage Regulations

15.12    Floodplain Regulations

15.16    Uniform Numbering System

15.20    Building Alarm Systems


Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE

Sections:

15.04.010    Town Building Code adopted.

15.04.020    International Building Code adopted.

15.04.030    Title.

15.04.040    Rules and definitions.

15.04.050    Advisory Board.

15.04.060    Updates and supplements to codes.

15.04.070    Administration.

15.04.080    Rules and regulations.

15.04.090    Building permits.

15.04.100    Building permits – Approval required prior to issuance.

15.04.110    Schedule of values and other fee requirements.

15.04.120    Permit requirements.

15.04.130    Records.

15.04.140    Redress.

15.04.150    Addendum and additions to the International Building Code.

15.04.160    Enforcement.

15.04.170    Violation – Penalty.

15.04.180    Conflicts.


15.04.010 Town Building Code adopted.

The "Building Code of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside," a public record as defined in A.R.S. Section 9-801(3), is adopted and set out in full in this chapter. At least three (3) copies of this public record shall be kept on file with the Clerk of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside for public use and inspection. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.020 International Building Code adopted.

A.    The following described codes in the specific editions (i.e., International Residential Code, 2006 Edition) as adopted by resolution of the Town Council are adopted by reference, as if fully set forth herein, as the Building Code of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, pursuant to A.R.S. Sections 9-462.01 and 9-463 et seq. Updated editions may be adopted from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.

B.    Copies of the International Building Codes which have been adopted by the Town are on file for review or inspection at the Pinetop-Lakeside Town Offices, Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona. Copies may be purchased from the International Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Price Square, #600, Falls Church, Virginia 22041.

1.    International Building Code, together with its supplements, if any, published by International Code Council.

2.    International Mechanical Code, together with its supplements, if any, published by International Code Council.

3.    International Residential Code, together with its supplements, if any, published by the International Code Council.

4.    International Plumbing Code, together with its supplements, if any, published by International Code Council.

5.    National Electrical Code, together with its supplements, if any, published by National Fire Protection Association. New editions of the National Electrical Code may be adopted from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.

6.    Such addenda and additions to the previously adopted, described codes, as apply to the Town, and as may be adopted by resolution of the Town Council. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.030 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the Building Code of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.040 Rules and definitions.

A.    The term "International Building Code" as used hereinafter shall mean the code referred to in Section 15.04.020.

B.    Terms used in this chapter shall be defined as provided in the code adopted in Section 15.04.020, except as herein otherwise provided.

C.    Whenever the terms "Administrative Authority," "Building Official," "Chief," or "Administrator" are used in the International Building Codes, they shall mean the Building Official of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside or his/her representative.

D.    Whenever the terms "other code" or "other codes" are used in the International Building Codes, they shall mean other code or codes adopted by either the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside or the State of Arizona. If there is a conflict between such other code or codes and this chapter, the more restrictive shall prevail.

E.    Reference to chapters, articles, sections and subsections or paragraphs and to tables thereof are to the International Building Codes.

F.    Certificates.

1.    "Certificate of compliance" (for existing structures) may be associated with pre-moving, renovation, use change, addition and existing structure or housing code.

2.    "Certificate of inspection" may be a separate individual trade inspection approval.

3.    "Certificates of fitness" (for hazards and safety) means a document issued by the Building Official authorizing by permit to maintain, store or handle materials or to conduct processes, which produce conditions hazardous to life and property or to install equipment used in connection with such activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall not be transferable and any change in use or occupancy of premises shall require a new permit. May be used when new construction "fitness" is a change of use and occupancy.

4.    "Certificates of occupancy" for construction completion showing compliance.

5.    "Final inspection certificate" may be a certificate of approval that may include the entire structure, additions or alterations.

6.    "Letter of certification" (duplicate certification) may be for other than the original issue.

7.    "Stop order" or "stop work order" means an order from the Town or the Town’s Building Official requiring work to stop on a building or building project.

8.    "Temporary certificate" may be only for a building use inspection approval.

G.    The "Community Development Department" means the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Community Development Department. The Community Development Department shall administer this chapter. The department director for the Community Development Department shall be known as the Community Development Director, or simply as the Director.

H.    Administrative Provisions.

1.    Part I (One) of the International Building Code as referenced in Section 15.04.020(B)(1) shall be used as the administrative rules for administering this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

2.    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent, restrict or otherwise regulate the use or occupation of land or improvements for railroad, mining, metallurgical, grazing or general agricultural purposes.

3.    Commercial Acres (Operated for a Profit). As a guide, the return from the acreage should exceed one-fourth (1/4) the operator’s total income. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.050 Advisory Board.

A.    Whenever the terms "Board of Appeals," "Adjustment Board" or "Board" are used in the International Building Codes, they shall mean the Advisory Board and said Advisory Board shall be organized pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes.

B.    The functions and duties of the Advisory Board shall be specified by regulations adopted by the Town Council of Pinetop-Lakeside which may further provide for appointment of review committees for electrical, mechanical and plumbing. Members of such review committees shall include experienced tradesmen and contractors.

C.    Other than the Community Development Director whose term shall be continuous, each Advisory Board member shall serve for a term of four (4) years, except that of the members first appointed, one (1) each shall serve for a term of one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4) years. A vacancy for an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, and the appointee shall serve for the unexpired term only. The Advisory Board shall adopt its own reasonable rules and procedures for its proceedings, subject to approval by the Town Council. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.060 Updates and supplements to codes.

The International Code Council and other publishers identified in Section 15.04.020 issue each edition of the International Building Codes periodically which is maintained by annual supplements. In order that this chapter maintains its continuity, it shall be the responsibility of the Building Official to insure that all such supplements and amendments to the codes are properly implemented. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.070 Administration.

A.    All Department officials and public employees of the Town vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or purpose in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit or license issued in violation of the chapter shall be null and void and of no effect whatsoever.

B.    Filing Plans. Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of plans and specifications. Plans shall include site or plot plans. One (1) copy of such accepted plans shall be returned to the owner when plans are approved by the Building Official.

C.    Plans and Specifications. With each application for a building permit and also when otherwise required by the Building Official and/or the Zoning Code for enforcement of any provision of this chapter, two (2) sets of specifications and plans shall be submitted. The Building Official may, where the complexity of the plans clearly warrant (that is, any building requiring engineering computations, i.e., public buildings, etc.), require plans and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such. The Building Official may further require that plans for new construction indicate existing and finished grade elevations based on Town data with existing and finished drainage flow patterns in area subject to flooding.

D.    One (1) copy of submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant when approved. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.080 Rules and regulations.

The Building Official may adopt rules and regulations, in the interest of public safety, health, and general welfare, to implement the provisions of this chapter to secure the intent thereof; but no such rules shall have the effect of waiving technical provisions specifically provided in the International Building Codes or of violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.090 Building permits.

A.    Building permits shall be issued only upon approval of submitted plans and specifications, and presentation of an approved sanitary system permit where required. The Building Official shall insure compliance with state regulations pertaining to the Arizona Registrar of Contractors.

B.    Permit applications shall normally be accepted at the Town Offices, Pinetop-Lakeside, during normal business hours. 

C.    The following shall be exempt from the requirement of issuance of permit and collection of fees:

1.    Fences and freestanding masonry walls;

2.    Curbs, retaining walls and planter walls;

3.    One (1) story tool and storage sheds, greenhouses, barns, and other accessory buildings not used for human occupancy, up to one hundred forty-five (145) square feet;

4.    Residential television and radio antennas supported on roofs;

5.    Repairs which involve only the replacement of existing component parts with similar materials for the purpose of maintenance. Repairs exempt from permit requirements shall not include any additions, change of design or modification in construction, exit facilities or permanent fixtures or equipment. Specifically exempt from permit requirements without limitation are:

a.    Painting and decorating,

b.    Installation of floor coverings and drapes,

c.    Cabinetry and finished carpentry work,

d.    Storm doors and windows, including arcadia doors. Any person who shall commence work for which a permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit may, upon subsequently obtaining a permit for such work, be charged an additional fee as established. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.100 Building permits – Approval required prior to issuance.

A.    All plans and specifications filed for the construction of multi-family dwellings, industrial and commercial buildings or any alterations, additions or conversions thereto which require the issuance of a building permit and are located within the Town must be submitted by the applicant to the respective Fire District and stamped approved prior to the Town Planning and Zoning Department issuing a permit for construction. The approved plans by the Fire District shall be made part of the permit record for such construction project.

B.    The Town reserves the right to issue a building permit without prior approval of the respective Fire District subject to review by the Town Attorney and approval by the Town Council.

C.    The Town may not accept and shall not approve any application for a building permit for any lot or parcel which has been created, purchased or sold in violation of the subdivision laws: A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.2, Section 9-463 et seq. or this Town Code, Title 16 (Subdivisions); or which is being used or developed in violation of the Town Code, Title 17 (Zoning). The Director may accept an application for a building permit if the applicant states in a sworn writing that the lot or parcel was not created, purchased or sold in violation of the state and local subdivision laws, and that the lot or parcel is and will not be used or developed in violation of the Town zoning regulations; but no building permit shall be issued if, after investigation, it appears that the lot or parcel was created, purchased or sold in violation of the state and local subdivision laws or zoning regulations. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.110 Schedule of values and other fee requirements.

A.    A single blanket building permit shall be issued for construction projects. Building permit fees will be based on the fees set forth in the International Building Code.

B.    Building valuation data shall be established for each category of this chapter and shall be used to establish the valuation of building improvements for the purpose of permit fees.

C.    A plan check fee shall be charged at the time of plan submittal and shall be nonrefundable.

D.    The schedule for building permit fees and any other fees charged at time of building permit issuance are as contained in the Town fee schedule adopted by Town Council from time to time by resolution.

E.    Mobile and Manufactured Homes.

1.    Mobile/manufactured homes proposed for installation shall have affixed thereto a decal certifying that the dwelling unit has been inspected and constructed in accordance with the requirement of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in effect at the date of manufacture wherein such date shall not have been prior to June 15, 1976, or such other succeeding requirements which replace HUD standards.

2.    As of April 16, 1995, the Building Official shall not issue a building/location permit for installation of a mobile/manufactured home within the Town unless said mobile/manufactured home can be proven to comply with those standards set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section. This prohibition shall also apply to any mobile/manufactured home unit installation permit sought to be issued for the relocation of any mobile/manufactured home unit within the Town.

3.    It shall be the responsibility of the permit applicants to demonstrate to the Building Official that any mobile/manufactured home for which an installation/location permit is requested is in compliance with the standards set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section.

4.    Mobile/manufactured homes proposed for installation shall be installed in compliance with the standards prescribed by the Arizona Department of Building and Fire Safety, Office of Manufactured Housing, for either:

a.    Ground level installation; or

b.    Installation of a fully-skirted mobile/manufactured home; or

c.    Installation of a unit on a permanent visible foundation.

5.    A location permit fee will be charged for placement of mobile homes, manufactured houses and modular homes.

F.    Building permit fees are to be calculated to the nearest thousand dollars ($1,000) in valuation. 

G.    The Town Council may amend or revise the fees in this section from time to time by resolution.

H.    Applicable fees will be paid to the Town. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.120 Permit requirements.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a lawful permit has been issued or otherwise lawfully authorized. Beginning with the effective date of the regulations codified in this chapter, building permits as set forth in this chapter shall be required. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.130 Records.

The Building Official shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications for permits, of permits issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued. He or she shall further retain on file copies of all papers in connection with building work for such time as may be required by law. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.140 Redress.

Nothing in this chapter precludes any individual, company or corporation from seeking redress through the courts concerning any portion of this chapter or any ruling made by the Community Development Department. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.150 Addendum and additions to the International Building Code.

A.    Engineering calculations and design data may be required for any unusual design or long span roof systems at the discretion of the Building Official, prior to issuance of a permit.

B.    Addendum and Additions.

1.    Accessibility Guidelines for Public Accommodations and Commercial Facilities. Standards and specifications set forth in A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 9, Article 8 (Arizonans with Disabilities Act), and its implementing rules, including "Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities," declared a public record by Resolution No. 96-426, as applying to public accommodations and commercial facilities, are adopted and incorporated as an amendment to the International Building Code and made part thereof as though fully set forth therein. Such standards and specifications shall apply to new construction and alterations commenced after September 3, 1996.

2.    Accessibility Guidelines for New Construction and Alterations. Standards and specifications set forth in A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 9, Article 8 (Arizonans with Disabilities Act), and its implementing rules, including "Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities," declared a public record by Resolution No. 96-426, as applying to public entities, are adopted and incorporated as an amendment to the International Building Code and made part thereof as though fully set forth therein. Such standards and specifications shall apply to new construction and alterations and are not required in buildings or portions of existing buildings that do not meet the standards and specifications.

3.    Roof Covering. When wood shingles or shakes are used as roof covering, they must be factory treated to meet a minimum of Class "C" fire retardency as per UBC Standards 32-7/NFPA-256/ASTM-108/UL-790.

Roof Loads. Snow load or live load.

0" – 12" pitch through 3" – 12" pitch: 45 lb. PSF.

4" – 12" pitch and greater: 40 lb. PSF. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.160 Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the Building Official to administer this chapter. Community Development Department staff and the Town Police Department shall, whenever requested by the Building Official, enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.170 Violation – Penalty.

A.    The Building Official or his designee may issue a stop order requiring that the construction or other work stop on any project which is subject to the terms of this chapter or other provisions of the Town Code, if the Building Official believes that the project is in violation of this chapter or other provisions of the Town Code.

B.    Any person violating any provision of the Building Code of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside adopted by this chapter shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. See Chapter 1.20. Each separate day or any part thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in this section. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


15.04.180 Conflicts.

In case of any conflicts between the zoning ordinance and regulations of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and the Building Codes and requirements adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter and of the other chapters of the Town Code shall apply. (Ord. 12-363 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 15.08 DRAINAGE REGULATIONS

Sections:

15.08.010    Purpose.

15.08.020    Application and exceptions.

15.08.030    Copies of Town Drainage Regulations available.

15.08.040    Requirements for storm water detention and drainage facilities.

15.08.050    Storm water detention systems which are not permitted.

15.08.060    Additional requirements for subdivisions.

15.08.070    Additional requirements for preliminary plat submittals.

15.08.080    Additional requirements for final plat submittals.

15.08.090    Erosion hazard and building setbacks from watercourses.


15.08.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements and guidelines for drainage design, engineering, and construction for projects and developments within the Town. The requirements for sound drainage design, engineering, and construction of all drainage facilities, including storm water and runoff drainage, is an essential part of every development and construction project within the Town, and is necessary for the health, safety, and protection of all residents and property owners within the Town. (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


15.08.020 Application and exceptions.

The Town Drainage Regulations shall apply to all construction projects and developments except single-family detached dwelling units on individual lots, single commercial detached buildings on one-half (1/2) acre or less, or when the Town Engineer shall determine that the regulation is not necessary or does not apply. (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


15.08.030 Copies of Town Drainage Regulations available.

Copies of the "Town Drainage Regulations" are available at the Pinetop-Lakeside Town Office, 1360 N. Niels Hansen Lane, Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


15.08.040 Requirements for storm water detention and drainage facilities.

A.    All construction and development to which this chapter applies shall provide a preliminary and a final drainage report prepared and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Arizona. In addition, when required, owners, developers, and builders shall prepare engineering plans and specifications, and will construct storm water and drainage facilities necessary to ensure that all improvements, buildings, structures, lots, parcels, and properties located within the subject development, and those located adjacent to, upstream and downstream of the construction or development, shall be protected from the adverse impact of storm water runoff caused by or related to the proposed construction or development.

B.    All subdivisions whether new, replatted, or redeveloped shall be required to provide on-site storm water detention and drainage facilities for the entire subdivision, including all adjacent streets and roads. Adjacent subdivisions may join together to provide a common storm water detention facility.

C.    On-site surface or underground storm water detention facilities shall be designed in accordance with good and acceptable engineering practices as approved by the Town Engineer. See Town’s Drainage Design Guidelines. 

D.    No part of a private detention basin shall be constructed on public property, in a public right-of-way or public utility easement. 

E.    All storm water detention facilities’ and drainage facilities’ plans, engineering, and construction shall be approved by the Town Engineer and are subject to approval by the Town in accordance with this Town Code.

F.    Maintenance and operation of on-site detention facilities shall be the responsibility of the property owner or homeowners’ association.

G.    The owner or the homeowners’ association shall be solely responsible for obtaining a storm water detention facility(ies) inspection and certification by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Arizona every three (3) years or within forty-five (45) days of a written request by the Town Engineer. A copy of the inspection report and certification shall be provided to the Town.

H.    Detention basins and related facilities should be designed and maintained to minimize the following typical problems:

1.    Weed growth.

2.    Grass and vegetation maintenance.

3.    Sedimentation control.

4.    Bank deterioration.

5.    Standing water or soggy surfaces.

6.    Mosquitoes.

7.    Blockage of outlet structures.

8.    Litter accumulation.

9.    Maintenance of fences and perimeter plantings.

I.    No detention facility shall retain standing water longer than thirty-six (36) hours unless the facility has been designed and constructed as a permanent body of water (e.g., a lake) with appropriate health, safety, and water quality measures for such a body of water.

J.    The Town periodically may inspect storm water detention and drainage facilities to verify that the detention and drainage facilities are operational and are being maintained. Final plats, covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs), and development plans shall include a special note stating that (1) the owner(s)/homeowners’ association shall be solely responsible for the operation, maintenance, inspection, certification, general liability and premises liability of all storm water detention facilities; and (2) the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall have the right of ingress and egress to storm water detention and drainage facilities in perpetuity to inspect and verify good operation and maintenance of those facilities. (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


15.08.050 Storm water detention systems which are not permitted.

A.    The use of retention or infiltration systems is not permitted.

B.    The use of pavement parking lot storage as a primary detention facility is not permitted.

C.    Building roof-top detention storage is not permitted.

D.    Individual on-lot storage systems within single-family residential developments are not permitted. (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


15.08.060 Additional requirements for subdivisions.

A.    All subdivisions (see Town Code Chapter 16.12) greater than fifty (50) lots or larger than five (5) acres located in a United States Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA") designated Unnumbered Zone A must provide base flood elevation and floodway delineation data.

B.    All subdivisions within riverine environments with a contributing watershed of one-fourth (1/4) square mile or more must provide base flood elevation and floodway data in accordance with the criteria set forth on Arizona Department of Water Resources State Standards or other generally accepted criteria or methods approved by the Town Engineer.

C.    All final plats within a FEMA one hundred (100) year (one (1%) percent chance) floodplain must show the one hundred (100) year (one (1%) percent chance) base flood elevations, surveyable floodplain limits, finish floor elevations, including basements, a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevations and appropriate erosion hazard setbacks. 

D.    A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan ("SWPPP") shall be required of any subdivision, development, or construction project if required to do so in compliance with Arizona Department of Environmental Quality ("ADEQ") or federal Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") regulations. In addition, a copy of the Notice of Intent ("NOI") filed with ADEQ shall be provided to the Town, prior to any construction, and a copy of the Notice of Termination ("NOT") filed with ADEQ shall be provided to the Town after construction has been completed.

E.    Any development or project which infringes on the "Waters of the United States," as defined by Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, shall require a summary report, describing any encroachments and requirements for permits (nationwide or specific) as outlined by the Army Corps of Engineers, prepared by an qualified consultant or by the Army Corps of Engineers and submitted to the Town. If a specific permit or an Army Corps of Engineers Letter of Determination is required, the owner or developer shall provide copies of the specific permit or Letter of Determination, or other evidence of same satisfactory to the Town prior to the issuance of a building permit.

F.    Any development or project which encroaches into a defined Flood Hazard Area, as defined by FEMA, shall prepare and submit the necessary letters of map revision ("CLOMR" or "LOMR") to FEMA if required by the Town Engineer.

G.    No subdivision, development or project will be permitted within a defined floodway as defined by FEMA. (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


15.08.070 Additional requirements for preliminary plat submittals.

A preliminary drainage report showing all storm water detention facilities and other drainage facilities shall be submitted at the time of preliminary plat submission for staff review and approval and in addition should include preliminary calculations for the one hundred (100) year (one (1%) percent chance) storm water flow. The preliminary drainage report shall also show the FEMA floodplain when applicable. The preliminary drainage report shall be prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Arizona. (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


15.08.080 Additional requirements for final plat submittals.

A.    All final plats must show the one hundred (100) year (one (1%) percent chance) base flood elevations, surveyable floodplain limits, finish floor elevations a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevations, and appropriate erosion hazard setbacks for all drainage areas with one hundred (100) year (one (1%) percent chance) flow equal to or greater than fifty cubic feet per second (50 c.f.s.).

B.    A final drainage report shall be submitted at the time of final plat submission.

C.    Floodplain studies may also be required as a part of the final drainage report by the Town Engineer for a Conditional Letter of Map Amendment ("CLOMA") or a Conditional Letter of Map Revision on Fill ("CLOMR-F"). (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


15.08.090 Erosion hazard and building setbacks from watercourses.

A.    The hazards associated with flooding natural or unlined artificial channels include erosion of the channel banks, which may occur over a long period of time or during a single storm event. This can present a danger to adjacent structures or other development as the channel banks erode or migrate. In addition to other applicable setback requirements in the Town Zoning Regulations (see Town Code Title 17) and the Town Building Code (see Town Code Title 15), erosion hazard and building setbacks approved by the Town Engineer shall be provided for all construction, subdivisions, and development adjacent to natural watercourses or unlined, engineered open water channels in order to protect structures from potential damage.

B.    All new buildings or structures constructed adjacent to a natural watercourse or an unprotected engineered channel located within Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall be set back from the channel top of bank a sufficient distance in order to protect the structure from erosion of the channel banks and to allow for maintenance access and buffer.

C.    The setback shall be measured from the top edge of the highest channel bank with the minimum setback being twenty (20) feet to allow for access and maintenance considerations. There will be watercourses with greater flows that will require setbacks greater than twenty (20) feet. The lowest floor elevation of any structure adjacent to a channel shall be set a minimum of one (1) foot above the one hundred (100) year (one (1%) percent chance) water surface in the channel. Exceptions or reductions of the building setback requirements may be granted by the Town Engineer if it can be demonstrated that adequate erosion and flow velocity protection can and will be constructed. All requests and plans for exception or reduction of setback requirements must be accompanied by detailed soil-stability and/or sediment transport studies approved by the Town Engineer. Requests for reduction of the minimum building hazard setbacks must take access and maintenance into consideration.

D.    A slope-stability analysis of the channel may be required by the Town Engineer if conditions exist which indicate that the channel bank may be or may become unstable.

E.    Natural vegetation is not an acceptable means of bank stabilization for the purpose of reducing building setbacks. Vegetation should be used along watercourses where flow velocities are less than five (5) feet per second during the one hundred (100) year (one (1%) percent chance) discharge, and an acceptable seeding and maintenance program shall be established. (Ord. 08-318 § 2)


Chapter 15.12 FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS

Sections:

15.12.010    Statutory authorization.

15.12.020    Findings of fact.

15.12.030    Statement of purpose.

15.12.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

15.12.050    Definitions.

15.12.060    Lands to which this chapter applies.

15.12.070    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

15.12.080    Compliance.

15.12.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.12.100    Interpretation.

15.12.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

15.12.120    Statutory exceptions.

15.12.130    Unlawful acts.

15.12.140    Declaration of public nuisance.

15.12.150    Abatement of violations.

15.12.160    Severability.

15.12.170    Nonconforming uses.

15.12.180    Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.

15.12.190    Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.

15.12.200    Establishment of development permit.

15.12.210    Provisions for flood hazard reduction.

15.12.220    Standards for storage of materials and equipment.

15.12.230    Standards for water supply and waste disposal systems.

15.12.240    Additional development standards, including subdivisions.

15.12.250    Standards for manufactured homes.

15.12.260    Standards for recreational vehicles.

15.12.270    Floodways.

15.12.280    Variance procedure.


15.12.010 Statutory authorization.

In A.R.S. § 48-3610, the Arizona State Legislature enabled the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to assume the powers and duties for floodplain management and adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. § 48-3609 designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, does ordain as follows. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.020 Findings of fact.

A.    The flood hazard areas of Pinetop-Lakeside are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B.    These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage, also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.030 Statement of purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A.    Protect human life and health;

B.    Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.    Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.    Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.    Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;

H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions;

I.    Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:

A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.    Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.    Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

D.    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E.    Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.050 Definitions.

A.    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

1.    "Accessory structure" means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.

2.    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

3.    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated Zone AO or AH, AR/AO or AR/AH on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one (1%) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

4.    "Base flood" means a flood which has a one (1%) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 

5.    "Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the computed elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood.

6.    "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level on all sides.

7.    "Breakaway wall" means a wall which is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.

8.    Building. See "Structure."

9.    "Community" means any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.

10.    "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

11.    "Elevation certificate" means an administrative tool of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) that is used to provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management ordinances, to determine the proper insurance premium rate, and to support a request for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) or letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F).

12.    "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

13.    "Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of landmasses. This peril is not, per se, covered under the National Flood Insurance Program.

14.    "Flood or flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (a) the overflow of flood waters; (b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or (c) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

15.    "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

16.    "Flood Insurance Study (FIS)" means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

17.    "Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flood or flooding."

18.    "Floodplain Administrator" means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

19.    "Floodplain Board" means the Town Council of Pinetop-Lakeside, at such times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this chapter. 

20.    "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

21.    "Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

22.    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to nonresidential structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents by means other than elevation.

23.    "Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

24.    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway."

25.    "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

26.    "Governing body" means the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

27.    "Hardship" means as related to Section 15.12.280, meaning the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

28.    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

29.    "Historic structure" means any structure that is:

a.    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

b.    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

c.    Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

d.    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

i.    By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 

ii.    Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

30.    "Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

31.    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including the basement. See "Basement." An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.

32.    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."

33.    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

34.    "Market value" means replacement cost of a structure less depreciation since construction.

35.    "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

36.    "New construction" means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a Flood Insurance Rate Map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

37.    "Nonconforming use" means the lawful use of any building, lot, parcel or tract of land existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter, or amendments thereto, becomes effective which does not conform with the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.

38.    "Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

39.    "One-hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood" means a common name for the flood having a one (1%) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. See "Base flood."

40.    "Person" means an individual or the individual’s agent, a firm, partnership, association or corporation, or an agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.

41.    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is:

a.    Built on a single chassis;

b.    Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

c.    Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

d.    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

42.    "Regulatory flood elevation (RFE)" means an elevation one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 

43.    "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

44.    "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

45.    Sheet Flow Area. See "Area of shallow flooding."

46.    "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one (1%) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, AE, AH or A99.

47.    "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

48.    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

49.    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

50.    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

a.    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

b.    Any alteration of a "historic structure"; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a "historic structure."

51.    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction or other uses of property in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

52.    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

53.    "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

54.    "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other natural topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse also includes manmade open channel stormwater conveyances engineered to accommodate one (1%) percent chance flood. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.

55.    "Zone A" means no base flood elevation determined.

56.    "Zone AE" means base flood elevations determined.

57.    "Zone AH" means flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations determined.

58.    "Zone AO" means flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depth determined. For areas of alluvial fan flooding, velocities also determined.

59.    "Zone AR" means special flood hazard area formerly protected from the one (1%) percent annual chance flood by a flood control system that was subsequently decertified. Zone AR indicates that the former flood control system is being restored to provide protection from the one (1%) percent annual chance or greater flood.

60.    "Zone A99" means area to be protected from one (1%) percent annual chance flood by a federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations determined.

61.    "Zone D" means areas in which flood hazards are undetermined, but possible.

62.    "Zone X (unshaded)" means areas determined to be outside the two-tenths (0.2%) percent annual chance floodplain.

63.    "Zone X (shaded)" means areas of two-tenths (0.2%) percent annual chance flood; areas of one (1%) percent annual chance flood with average depths of less than one (1) foot or with drainage areas less than one (1) square mile; and areas protected by levees from one (1%) percent annual chance flood. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.

A.R.S. § 48-3603. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the corporate limits of Pinetop-Lakeside. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Navajo County, AZ and Incorporated Areas" dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs dated September 26, 2008) and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the Floodplain Board by the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Board, within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate (or may, by rule, require developers of land to delineate) for areas where development is ongoing or imminent, and thereafter as development becomes imminent, floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Director of Arizona Department of Water Resources. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Community Development Department. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.080 Compliance.

All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain areas is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.100 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

B.    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body charged with floodplain regulation, based on scientific and engineering conclusions; and

C.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, any officer or employee thereof, the State of Arizona or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.120 Statutory exceptions.

A.    In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(H), unless expressly provided, this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter do not affect:

1.    Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of such legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a building or structure is discontinued for twelve (12) months, or destroyed to the extent of fifty (50%) percent of its market value as determined by a competent appraiser, any further use shall comply with this chapter and regulations of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside; 

2.    Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or on the date any regulations affecting such property takes effect, except that any alteration, addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would result in increasing its flood damage potential by fifty (50%) percent or more shall be either floodproofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation;

3.    Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613;

4.    Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of environmental compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2; and

5.    In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613(D), in addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided by law, this state, a political subdivision or a person who may be damaged or has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or obstruction of a watercourse has the right to commence, maintain and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate this section or regulations adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1. If a person is found to be in violation of this section, the court shall require the violator to either comply with this section if authorized by the Floodplain Board or remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original state. The court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured parties resulting from the violation including reasonable costs and attorney fees.

B.    Before the following types of construction authorized by A.R.S. § 48-3613(B) begin, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the Floodplain Board for review and comment pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-3613(C):

1.    The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets intersecting or crossing a watercourse (see "Watercourse" definition);

2.    The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of flood waters as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45, Chapter 6;

3.    Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This subsection does not exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring authorization from the Floodplain Board pursuant to regulations adopted by the Floodplain Board under this chapter;

4.    Other construction upon determination by the Floodplain Board that written authorization is unnecessary;

5.    Any flood control district, county, city, town or other political subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1;

6.    The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and 

7.    The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations, support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to power transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service corporation or a political subdivision. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.130 Unlawful acts.

A.    It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters without securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613. A person shall also not create a manmade watercourse that diverts, retards, or obstructs flow without securing written authorization of the Floodplain Board.

B.    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.140 Declaration of public nuisance.

All development located or maintained within any area of special flood hazard after August 8, 1973, in violation of this chapter, is a public nuisance per se and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this political subdivision. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.150 Abatement of violations.

Within thirty (30) days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit a report to the Floodplain Board which shall include all information available to the Floodplain Administrator which is pertinent to said violation. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of this report, the Floodplain Board shall either:

A.    Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation; or

B.    Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.12.280; or

C.    Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for their determination. Such information must be provided to the Floodplain Administrator within thirty (30) days of such order, and the Floodplain Administrator shall submit an amended report to the Floodplain Board within twenty (20) days. At the next regularly scheduled public meeting, the Floodplain Board shall either order the abatement of said violation or they shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.12.280; or

D.    Submit to the Federal Emergency Management Agency a declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 as amended. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.160 Severability.

This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.170 Nonconforming uses.

A.    In the event that a nonconforming use of land, building or structure is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, any further use thereof shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any alteration, addition or repair to nonconforming buildings or structures shall be adequately protected in conformity with the floodplain management ordinance.

B.    In the event that any such nonconforming use of land, building or structure is destroyed by fire, explosion, natural disaster or act of the public to the extent of fifty-one (51%) percent of its value, according to the appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, then and without further action by the Floodplain Board, the further use thereof shall from and after the date of such destruction be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.180 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.

The Community Development Director is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. The Town Engineer will provide technical guidance to support Floodplain Administrator duties. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.190 Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.

Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

A.    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

1.    The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

2.    All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

3.    The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

4.    In areas where a floodway has not been designated, the proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined.

For the purposes of this chapter, "adversely affect" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point.

B.    Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Assessments. Review all development permits for improvements and/or damages to existing structures to determine if the application of the substantial improvement rules apply, including establishing a definition of market value determination and verifying that the estimated improvement and/or repair costs are less than fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure.

C.    Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.12.070, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Section 15.12.210. Any such information shall be consistent with the requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources and shall be submitted to the Floodplain Board for adoption.

D.    Obtain and Maintain for Public Inspection. Obtain and maintain the following for public inspection and make available as needed:

1.    Certification required by Sections 15.12.210(A)(3) and 15.12.250 (lowest floor elevations, bottom of the structural frame, and utilities);

2.    Certification required by Section 15.12.210(A)(3) (lowest floor elevations or floodproofing of nonresidential structures and utilities);

3.    Certification required by Section 15.12.210(A)(6) (flood vents);

4.    Certification of elevation required by Section 15.12.240(A)(2) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);

5.    Certification required by Section 15.12.270(A) (floodway encroachments);

6.    Records of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.

7.    Obtain and maintain improvement and damage calculations required in subsection B of this section.

E.    Notification of Other Entities.

1.    Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:

a.    Notify adjacent communities and the Arizona Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency through appropriate notification means; and

b.    Assure that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

2.    Base Flood Elevation and Rate of Flow Due to Physical Alterations.

a.    Base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with Volume 44 Code of Federal Regulations Section 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.

b.    Within one hundred twenty (120) days after completion of construction of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the base flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources.

3.    Corporate Boundary Changes.

a.    Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction.

F.    Map Determinations. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.12.280.

G.    Remedial Actions. Take actions on violations of this chapter as required in Section 15.12.150. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.200 Establishment of development permit.

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any special flood hazard area established in Section 15.12.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. In Zone AO, elevation of existing highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures;

B.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;

C.    Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.12.210(A)(3);

D.    Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other development greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser; and

E.    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.210 Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 

A.    Standards of Construction. In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required:

1.    Anchoring.

a.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and

b.    All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.12.250(B).

2.    Construction Materials and Methods.

a.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

b.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

c.    Within Zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be constructed around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

3.    Elevation and Floodproofing.

a.    Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation.

i.    In a Zone AO, the base flood elevation is determined from the FIRM panel. If unspecified, the required elevation is at minimum two (2) feet above highest adjacent grade.

ii.    In a Zone A where the base flood elevation has not been determined, the base flood elevation is determined locally by the criteria set out in Section 15.12.190(C).

iii.    In Zones AE and AH, the base flood elevation is determined from the FIS and/or FIRM.

iv.    A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the regulatory flood elevation, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. See subsection (A)(6)(a) or (b) of this section.

Upon completion of the structure, certification by a registered professional engineer or surveyor that the elevation requirements of the lowest floor, including basement, of this section have been satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification.

b.    Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor either elevated to conform with subsection (A)(3)(a)(i), (ii), or (iii) of this section as appropriate, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

i.    Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection (A)(3)(a) (i), (ii), or (iii) of this section as appropriate so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and

ii.    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

Upon completion of the structure, certification by a registered professional engineer or surveyor that the elevation requirements of the lowest floor, including basement, of this section have been satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification; or certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing standards of this section are satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification. 

4.    Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in Section 15.12.250.

5.    Accessory Structures (Detached Garages and Storage Structures). Accessory structures used solely for parking of vehicles or storage may be constructed such that the floor is below the regulatory flood elevation, provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

a.    Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking of vehicles or storage;

b.    The portions of the accessory structure located below the regulatory flood elevation must be built using flood resistant materials;

c.    The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;

d.    Any machinery or equipment servicing the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation;

e.    The accessory structure must comply with floodway encroachment provisions in Section 15.12.270; and

f.    The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in accordance with subsection (A)(6)(a) or (b) of this section.

Detached garages, storage structures and other accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in subsection (A)(3)(a)(i), (ii), or (iii) of this section as appropriate.

Upon completion of the structure, certification by a registered professional engineer or surveyor that the requirements of this section have been satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification.

6.    Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following criteria:

For nonengineered openings:

a.    Have a minimum of two (2) openings, on different sides of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

b.    The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade;

c.    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or

Alternatively, a registered engineer or architect may design and certify engineered openings. 

7.    Machinery and Service Equipment. All new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.220 Standards for storage of materials and equipment.

A.    The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious to human, animal or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is prohibited in special flood hazard areas.

B.    Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.230 Standards for water supply and waste disposal systems.

A.    All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.

B.    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

C.    Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a regulatory floodway. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.240 Additional development standards, including subdivisions.

A.    All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:

1.    Identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood; and

2.    Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

B.    All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

C.    All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

D.    All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.250 Standards for manufactured homes.

All manufactured homes that are placed on site or substantially improved shall:

A.    Be elevated to conform with Section 15.12.210(A)(3)(a)(i), (ii), or (iii) as appropriate so that the bottom of the structural frame or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above the regulatory flood elevation; and

B.    Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

Upon completion of installation of the manufactured home, certification by a registered professional engineer or surveyor that the elevation requirements of this section have been satisfied shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator for verification. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.260 Standards for recreational vehicles.

All recreational vehicles placed on site shall:

A.    Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;

B.    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

C.    Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.12.200 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.12.250. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.270 Floodways.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.12.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B.    If this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.12.210. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


15.12.280 Variance procedure.

A.    Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.

It is the duty of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

B.    Floodplain Review Board.

1.    The Town Council may establish a board of review, which may be the Advisory Board or a committee of the Advisory Board to sit in review and make decisions.

2.    The Floodplain Review Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

3.    In considering such applications, the Floodplain Review Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

a.    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

b.    The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

c.    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

d.    The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

e.    The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

f.    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

g.    The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

h.    The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

i.    The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

j.    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

k.    The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

4.    Upon consideration of the factors of subsection C of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the Floodplain Review Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

5.    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

a.    The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the regulatory flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and

b.    Such construction below the regulatory flood elevation increases risks to life and property; and

c.    The land upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the flood relocation and land exchange program provided by A.R.S. § 37-610. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the Navajo County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

6.    The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.

7.    A person aggrieved in any manner by an action of the Floodplain Review Board may within thirty (30) days appeal to the Floodplain Review Board.

C.    Conditions for Variances.

1.    Variances shall only be issued:

a.    Upon a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances;

b.    For the repair, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structures’ continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure;

c.    Upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;

d.    Upon a showing of good and sufficient cause;

e.    Upon a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

f.    Upon a showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes only facilities defined in Section 15.12.050 in the definition of "Functionally dependent use."

2.    Variances shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

3.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the regulatory flood elevation, provided the procedures of Sections 15.12.200 and 15.12.210 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. (Ord. 14-384 § 1 (part))


Chapter 15.16 UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM

Sections:

15.16.010    Uniform numbering system.

15.16.020    Definitions.

15.16.030    Designations.

15.16.040    Base point and baselines for dividing the Town.

15.16.050    Basis for assigning numbers.

15.16.060    Number assignment, distribution and placement on buildings.

15.16.070    Plat book and grid map for the purpose of facilitating correct numbering.

15.16.080    Approval required for new street names.

15.16.090    Changing, renaming or naming existing streets.

15.16.100    Penalty.


15.16.010 Uniform numbering system.

There is established a uniform system for numbering buildings fronting on all streets and public ways in the Town and all houses and other buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All properties located within the incorporated boundaries of the Town shall be so numbered. Upon annexation of any property into the Town, the uniform numbering system shall be extended into the annexed area. (Ord. 98-154 § 16: Ord. 88-60 § 1)


15.16.020 Definitions.

1.    "Legal address" means designated, by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, as the physical building number assigned in accordance with this chapter.

2.    "Master street name list" means the official street name list for the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

3.    "Official street and numbering map" means the official street and numbering map of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside designating the street names and grid numbers.

4.    "Physical building number" means the legal address, as designated by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, assigned to a building in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

5.    "Street" means all property dedicated or otherwise reserved for public street use, or having thereon a public easement for such use. (Ord. 98-154 § 17: Ord. 88-60 § 2)


15.16.030 Designations.

A.    Streets and Public Ways. Streets and public ways shall be designated as drives, lanes and roads, as designated by Section 15.16.020.

B.    Street Names. All streets shall carry a PREFIX ... PRIMARY ... SUFFIX: To constitute a full or total name.

C.    Listing of Prefixes, Primaries and Suffixes.

1.    Prefixes.

a.    North.

b.    South.

c.    East.

d.    West.

2.    Primaries. As shown in the master street name list, and any amendments thereto.

3.    Suffixes.

a.    Drive.

b.    Lane.

c.    Road.

d.    Way.

e.    Circle.

f.    Street.

g.    Other designations as approved by the Administrator. (Ord. 98-154 § 18)


15.16.040 Base point and baselines for dividing the Town.

The common corner of Sections 25 and 36, Township 9 North-Range 22 East, and Sections 30 and 31, Township 9 North-Range 23 East, Gila and Salt River Meridian, shall be the base point of the grid system.

The line extending east and west from the base point shall be the base line dividing the Town into north and south parts. The line extending north and south from the base point shall be the base line dividing the Town into east and west parts.

Hereafter, streets and public ways north of the base point and running generally in a northerly-southerly direction shall be considered "north" streets;

Streets and public ways south of the base point and running generally in a northerly-southerly direction shall be considered "south" streets;

Streets and public ways west of the base point and running generally in an easterly-westerly direction shall be considered "west" streets;

Streets and public ways east of the base point and running generally in an easterly-westerly direction shall be considered "east" streets.

A.    Each building north of the east-west base line and facing a street running in a northerly direction shall carry a number indicating its location north of such base line.

B.    Each building south of the east-west base line and facing a street running in a southerly direction shall carry a number indicating its location south of such base line.

C.    Each building west of the north-south base line and facing a street running in a westerly direction shall carry a number indicating its location west of such base line.

D.    Each building east of the north-south base line and facing a street running in an easterly direction shall carry a number indicating its location east of such base line.

E.    All buildings on diagonal streets shall be numbered the same as buildings on northerly and southerly streets if the diagonal runs more from the north to south, and the same rule shall apply on easterly and westerly streets if the diagonal runs more from east to west. To simplify the system, Highway 260 (White Mountain Boulevard) is declared to be an east-west alignment.

All streets and public ways lying north and east of Highway 260 (White Mountain Boulevard) shall carry the suffix "Drive," except Porter Mountain Road.

All streets and public ways lying south and west of Highway 260 (White Mountain Boulevard) shall carry the suffix "Lane," except Woodland Road, Woodland Lake Road, Rim Road and Pine Lake Road. (Ord. 98-154 § 19)


15.16.050 Basis for assigning numbers.

The numbers shall be assigned using the grid system at one thousand six hundred (1,600) numbers to the mile. The numbering of buildings on all streets and public ways shall begin at the base point. A grid system shall be used with individual numbers being assigned according to the location of the lot or parcel within the grid. Each grid shall contain one hundred (100) numbers (one thousand six hundred (1,600) numbers to the mile).

A.    All buildings on the south side of east-west streets and on the east side of north-south streets shall bear odd numbers.

B.    All buildings on the north side of the east-west streets and on the west side of north-south streets shall bear even numbers. (Ord. 98-154 § 20)


15.16.060 Number assignment, distribution and placement on buildings.

A.    There shall be assigned, by the Town Planning and Zoning Department to each house and other residential or commercial buildings located on any street or public way in the Town, its respective number under the uniform system as provided for by this chapter. When each house or building has been assigned its respective number or numbers, the owner, occupant or agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or building controlled by him the number or numbering assigned under the uniform system as provided in this chapter.

B.    The physical building number shall be legible and a minimum of two inches by three and one-half inches per number to a maximum of one square foot in area for each set of numbers.

C.    Such numbers shall be placed on all appropriate existing buildings within thirty (30) days after the assignment and distribution of a physical number.

D.    The numbers shall be conspicuously placed so that the number can be seen plainly from the street line. Whenever any building is situated more than fifty (50) feet from the street line, the numbers shall appear near the walk, driveway or entrance to such buildings, so as to be easily seen from the street. (Ord. 98-154 § 21)


15.16.070 Plat book and grid map for the purpose of facilitating correct numbering.

A plat book of all streets and public ways within the Town showing the proper number of all houses or other buildings shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk. These plats shall be open to inspection by any person during office hours of the Town Offices. The grid map shall be transmitted to the United States Postal Service, Police Department, Fire Departments and all other emergency services operating within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. (Ord. 98-154 § 22)


15.16.080 Approval required for new street names.

Anyone submitting a subdivision plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission or to the Town Council for their approval shall show the proper names of any and all proposed streets. Street name suggestions may originate with the parties submitting the plat under the guidance of the Planning and Zoning Department or other Town Council designee. (Ord. 98-154 § 23)


15.16.090 Changing, renaming or naming existing streets.

The Mayor and Town Council by resolution may change, rename or name an existing or newly established street within the limits of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside at any time upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Planning and Zoning Administrator, the Town Manager or any other Town Council designee. (Ord. 98-154 § 24)


15.16.100 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of the uniform numbering system of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside adopted by this chapter shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. See Chapter 1.16. Each separate day or any part thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs, or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in this section. (Ord. 98-154 § 25)


Chapter 15.20 BUILDING ALARM SYSTEMS

Sections:

15.20.010    Building Alarm User Permits

15.20.020    Permit Fees; User Service Calls Fees.

15.20.030    Alarm System Receivers.

15.20.040    False Alarms.

15.20.050    Required Repairs; Revocation of Permit.

15.20.060    Notice of Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

15.20.070    Unlawful Use; Civil Penalty


15.20.010 Building Alarm User Permits

A.    Every building alarm system user (residential or commercial) shall obtain an alarm users permit from the Pinetop-Lakeside Police Department/Planning and Zoning Department for each building alarm system. Such permit shall be obtained within six (6) months from the effective date of this Chapter, and prior to the use of any building alarm system which is installed or repaired after the effective date of this Chapter.

B.    The building alarm users permit shall be physically displayed or readily available within the premises using the building alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the Police Department or the Planning and Zoning Department upon request.

C.    Permits may not be transferred from one user to another or from one address to another. (Ord. 99-171)


15.20.020 Permit Fees; User Service Calls Fees.

A.    The fee for building alarm permits shall be established by resolution adopted from time-to-time by the Town Council. The initial permit fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year for all permit applicants, and there shall be no fee for permits issued to residential property owners over 65 years of age, who actually reside at the residence where the alarm is located.

B.    The alarm user permit fee will include the first three (3) user service calls for police response to alarms or false holdup alarms or false fire alarms. Alarms users will be billed an alarm service user fee for each alarm responded to by police after the first three (3) responses to alarms. User fee charges shall be established by resolution adopted from time-to-time by the Town Council. Failure to pay user service fees within thirty (30) days of being billed for same shall subject a person to the civil penalty provided by Section 15.20.070, below. The initial alarm service call fees are as follows: (Ord. 99-171, § 1)

	1-3 Alarms Per Year	No Charge

	4-8 Alarms Per Year	$50 for Each Response

	9-13 Alarms Per Year	$100 for Each Response

	More than 14 Alarms Per Year	$200 for Each Response


15.20.030 Alarm System Receivers.

The building alarm system receivers which are currently installed within the Pinetop-Lakeside Police Department communications center shall be removed within one (1) year of the effective date of this Chapter. No building alarm system receivers may be placed or installed at the Town Police Department without the express written approval of the Chief of Police. This subsection does not apply to government building alarm systems. (Ord. 99-171)


15.20.040 False Alarms.

Any building alarm system which has more than three (3) false alarms which are responded to by law enforcement officers, within one permit year shall be subject to fees for police response services as established by resolution adopted from time-to-time by the Town Council an any building alarm system which has twenty (20) false alarms or more within one permit year may be subject to permit revocation and/or required repairs to the building alarm system as hereafter provided. (Ord. 99-171)


15.20.050 Required Repairs; Revocation of Permit.

If the Pinetop-Lakeside Police Department records police response to twenty (20) or more false alarms within one permit year for any building alarm system, the Police Department may notify the alarm user by certified mail or personal service of such fact and may direct that the alarm user submit a report or repair order to the Chief of Police describing the actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. If no report is submitted to the Chief of Police as requested, or if the Chief of Police determines that actions taken or to be taken by the alarm user will not prevent the recurrence of false alarms or noncompliance of the Alarm Ordinance, the Chief of Police may give notice by certified mail or personal service to the alarm user of a permit revocation hearing to be held by the Pinetop-Lakeside Town Manager or a Hearing Officer appointed by the Town Manager. The Hearing Officer will determine whether to suspend, revoke or reinstate the alarm user’s permit. The hearing should be held within thirty (30) days after a request for hearing and the Hearing Officer shall render a decision within ten (10) days of the hearing. (Ord. 99-171)


15.20.060 Notice of Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

An alarm user whose permit has been suspended or revoked shall be furnished written notification of such suspension or revocation and shall, within three (3) days after the furnishing of such written notification, discontinue the use of any building alarm system(s) for which a permit has been suspended or revoked. (Ord. 99-171)


15.20.070 Unlawful Use; Civil Penalty

A.    It shall be unlawful for any building alarm user to activate or otherwise put in use a building alarm system within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside without first obtaining an alarm user’s permit as required by Section 15.20.010, above.

B.    It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to fail to disconnect the building alarm system within three (3) days after written notification has been furnished advising the alarm user of the suspension or revocation of the alarm user permit.

C.    Violation of any section in this Chapter shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in accordance with Chapter 17.132 of the Town Code, as if set forth fully herein. (Ord. 99-171 § 1)


Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:

16.04    Title, Authority and Definitions

16.08    Administration

16.12    Types of Subdivision Developments

16.16    Platting Procedures and Requirements

16.20    Mountainside Development

16.24    Design Standards

16.28    Improvement Requirements

16.32    Minor Land Division

16.36    Fee Schedule

16.40    Enforcement and Penalties


Chapter 16.04 TITLE, AUTHORITY AND DEFINITIONS

Sections:

16.04.010    Short title.

16.04.020    Authority.

16.04.030    Purpose and intent.

16.04.040    Adoption of figures.

16.04.050    Adoption of appendices and maps.

16.04.060    Definitions.

16.04.070    Maps.


16.04.010 Short title.

These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Subdivision Ordinance" and will be referred to herein as "this code," or "this Ordinance." (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.04.020 Authority.

This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in the Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) § 9-463.01, et seq. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.04.030 Purpose and intent.

A.    The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside; to ensure adequate vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of reasonable utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage, flood protection, sanitary sewage, and other health and safety requirements; to ensure consideration for adequate sites for schools, unbuilt lot area, recreation areas, and other public facilities; to help ensure that emergency services such as fire, ambulance and police services can be provided to all developed land; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal description; and to provide practical procedures for the achievement of this purpose.

B.    In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, it is intended that a common ground of understanding and a sound and equitable working relationship exist between the public and private interests and to this end, the independent and mutual objectives of the public and private interests can be achieved in the subdivision of land. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.04.040 Adoption of figures.

All figures within this Ordinance are hereby adopted and shall be incorporated herein as a part of this Ordinance. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.04.050 Adoption of appendices and maps.

All appendices and maps within this Ordinance are hereby adopted and shall be incorporated herein as a part of this Ordinance. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.04.060 Definitions.

1.    "Abutting" is the condition of two (2) adjoining properties having a common property line or boundary, including cases where two (2) or more lots adjoin only at a corner(s).

2.    "Accessory use" is a use, building, structure, part of a building, or part of a structure which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building, structure or use on the same lot, including a private garage. If a building otherwise qualified as an accessory building is attached to the main building by a common wall or roof, such building shall be considered part of the main building.

3.    "Alley" means a public way, other than a street, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation.

4.    "Alter the mountain top ridge line" means any development on the primary ridgeline that disturbs or alters the natural mountain top profile (see Chapter 16.20, Mountainside Development, and Chapter 17.96, Forest Health and Fire Protection).

5.    "Average lot slope" means the average slope of the natural terrain within the boundaries of a particular lot. The slope will be calculated by taking the average of a minimum of three (3) slope lines per lot. These slope lines shall run the entire length of the lot and be as near to perpendicular as practical to the natural contour lines (see Chapter 16.20).

6.    "Basal area" is a measurement of tree density (see Chapter 16.20, Mountainside Development, and Chapter 17.96, Forest Health and Fire Protection).

7.    "Basin, detention" is a storm water storage facility that temporarily stores surface runoff and releases it at a controlled rate through a positive outlet. A detention basin and park may be joined to serve both recreational needs and as a water storage facility.

8.    "Basin, drainage" is a geographical area that contributes surface runoff to a particular concentration point. The terms "drainage basin," "tributary area" and "watershed" are used interchangeably.

9.    "Basin, retention" is a storm water storage facility that stores surface runoff. Stored water is infiltrated into the subsurface or released to the downstream drainage system or watercourse (via gravity outlet or pump), or evaporated after the storm event. A retention basin and park may be joined to serve both recreational needs and as a water storage facility.

10.    "Berm" means an earthen mound, either natural or man-made.

11.    "Bicycle lane" means a paved area located within a street right-of-way and between the curbs that is designated for bicycle or other nonmotorized traffic.

12.    "Bicycle trail" means a paved or improved surfaced trail, located outside of a street right-of-way, utilized for bicycle, pedestrian or other nonmotorized traffic. Public utility maintenance vehicles may be permitted use if joint access is allowed.

13.    "Bicycle path" means a paved area located within a street right-of-way but not between curbs that is designated for bicycle or other nonmotorized traffic.

14.    "Block" means a piece or parcel of land or group of lots entirely surrounded by public or private streets, streams, washes, parks, or a combination thereof of sufficient magnitude as to interrupt the continuity of development.

15.    "Board of Adjustment" means the Board of Adjustment for the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

16.    "Buffering" means an area of land, including landscaping, berms, walls and fences but not building setbacks, which is located between land uses of different character or density and is intended to mitigate negative impacts of the more intense use on residential or vacant parcels.

17.    "Buildable" means a lot or parcel that has the area, shape, slope, street frontage, or other attribute in order for a permitted use, based on the lot or parcel’s zoning district, to be developed, without the need for any variance from the Town Zoning Ordinance.

18.    "Building pad and slope" is the percent of slope measured at right angles to the natural contours along a line passing through the center of the proposed building and terminating at the end of the disturbed area limits of the building site (see Chapter 16.20).

19.    "Building setback line" means the required minimum distance, as prescribed by the Zoning Ordinance, between the property line and the closest point of any building or structure.

20.    "Bus stops (school)" means areas designated by the School District as needed for the convenience and safety of the students and public per R17-9-104.

21.    "Chord" means a straight line joining two (2) points on a curve.

22.    "Cluster development" means a development pattern that concentrates development in specific areas on a site through a density transfer rather than distributed evenly throughout a parcel as in conventional lot-by-lot development with the remaining portion of the site retained as natural unbuilt common area or parks.
[IMAGE]


23.    "Commission" means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

24.    "Committee" means the Development Review Committee of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

25.    "Conditional approval" means an affirmative action by the Commission or Council indicating that approval will be forthcoming with satisfaction of certain specified conditions or stipulations.

26.    "Condominium" (see also "time-share unit") means real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. The term "condos" may also be used in the Ordinance.

27.    "Conservation easement" means a permanent unbuilt lot area easement granted to the Town or to a public land trust to prohibit development of the property, including roads and utilities, and to protect archaeological sites, ecologically significant lands, scenic highways, hiking trails, biking trails, equestrian trails, and to preserve the land for the scenic enjoyment of the general public.

28.    "Conventional development" means a development other than a planned unit development or a cluster development.

29.    "Council" means the Town Council of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

30.    "County" means Navajo County, Arizona.

31.    "Cut" means the removal of soil, rock, or other materials from a location which shapes and lowers the grade at the location.

32.    "Defensible space" means the area around a building that is intentionally maintained to provide a separation of the building from non-fire-resistant vegetation to help prevent the spread of fire (see Chapter 16.20).

33.    "Department" means the Community Development Department of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

34.    "Developer" (see also "subdivider") means a person, firm, partnership, joint venture, trust, syndicate, association, corporation, limited liability company or other legal entity who desires to improve or otherwise engage in any development of property within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, including the owner of the property; except that an individual serving as agent for such legal entity is not a developer.

35.    "Development" means the utilization of land for public or private purposes.

36.    "Development Review Committee" means the selected group of technically qualified individuals, appointed by the Director, made up of Town Staff and other public or private agencies and utility company representatives responsible to ensure compliance with Town ordinances, codes and standards as they relate to the subdivision process.

37.    "Director" means the Community Development Director of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

38.    "Disturbed area" means that area of natural ground, including the footprint of the residence, that has been or is proposed to be altered through grading, cut and fill, removal of natural vegetation, placement of material, trenching, or by any means that causes a change in the undisturbed natural surface of the land or natural vegetation.

39.    "Easement" means a grant by the owner of the use of land by the public, a corporation, or person for the specific uses designated.

40.    "Engineer" means the Engineer of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside or his designated representative.

41.    "Engineering Department" means the Engineering Department of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

42.    "Exception" means any parcel of land that is not owned by the developer or not included in the recorded plat. All such exceptions must be noted on the final plat as "not a part of this subdivision."

43.    "Figure" means any graphic representation noted as "Figure" within this Ordinance, which is used to illustrate and exemplify certain standards and regulations contained within the language of this Ordinance. If a figure and text of the Ordinance conflict, the written text of the Ordinance shall control.

44.    "Fill" means soil, rock, or other material deposited at a location by man that raises the grade at that location.

45.    "Finished grade" means the final grade and elevation of the ground surface after grading is completed and in conformance with the approved grading plans.

46.    "Flood hazard zone" means any land area partially or wholly within a delineated floodplain susceptible to flood-related damage as designated on the flood management maps. Such flood hazard zones may include, but not be limited to, areas highly susceptible to erosion, stream meander sensitivity, moveable bed, scour, wave action, and subsidence.

47.    "Floodplain" means low lands adjoining the channel of a river, stream or watercourse, lake or other body of water, which have been or may be inundated by floodwater, and those other areas subject to flooding. A floodplain may be that area further defined by the drainage policy of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and as shown on Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) or an approved flood control study.

48.    "Flood prone area" means any area within a floodplain.

49.    "Floodway" means the channel of a wash or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the one hundred (100) year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.

50.    "Fuel modification" means changing the type or amount of plant fuels to reduce fire danger (see Chapter 16.20).

51.    "General plan" means the municipal statement of land development policies, which may include maps, charts, graphs and text which set forth objectives, principles and standards for local growth and redevelopment enacted under the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-461 et seq.

52.    "Health Department" means the Navajo County Health Department.

53.    "Improvements" means required installations, pursuant to this Subdivision Ordinance and any zoning stipulations, including but not limited to grading, sewer, water, utilities, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, trails, alleys, street lights, traffic control devices and landscaping, as a condition to the approval and signing of the final plat, before recordation.

54.    "Improvement plans" means a set of plans setting forth the profiles, cross-sections, details, specifications, instructions and procedures to be followed in the construction of public or private improvements in the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside that are prepared and bear the seal of an Arizona-registered land surveyor, engineer, architect or landscape architect in accordance with the approved preliminary plat, and zoning stipulations, and in compliance with standards of design and construction that are to be approved by the Town Engineer, other Town departments, the applicable county departments, and all applicable utilities.

55.    "Improvements standards" means a set of regulations and exhibits setting forth the details, specifications and instructions to be followed in the design and construction of required improvements.

56.    "Irrigation facilities" includes laterals, ditches, conduits, pipes, gates, pumps and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery and drainage of irrigation water and the construction, operation and maintenance of such.

57.    "Ladder fuels" means living or dead trees, bushes and grasses that allow a fire to travel from the ground to the forest or tree canopy (see Chapter 16.20).

58.    "Land/lot splits" means the division of improved or unimproved land, the area of which is two and one-half (2-1/2) acres or less, into two (2) or three (3) parcels of land for the purpose of sale, lease, or conveyance.

59.    "Lot" means a single piece of property having frontage on a publicly dedicated and accepted street or a private road approved and accepted by the Town and which has been established by a plat, recorded subdivision or otherwise established by some legal instrument of record which is described and denoted as such.

60.    "Lot area" means the area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines of a lot but not including any area in a public way.

61.    "Lot corner" means the intersection of two (2) or more lot lines, or angle point or change in direction of a lot line.

62.    "Lot, corner" means a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.

63.    "Lot coverage" means the percentage of the area of a lot that is occupied by all buildings or other covered structures using the roof outline for all outer dimensions.

64.    "Lot depth" means the horizontal length of a straight line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines; and for triangular shaped lots, the shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten (10) feet.

65.    "Lot, improvement" means any building, structure, place, work of art or other object or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property.

66.    "Lot, interior" means a lot other than a corner lot.

67.    "Lot, key" means a lot adjacent to a corner lot having its side lot line in common with the rear lot line of the corner lot and fronting on the street that forms the side boundary of the corner lot.

68.    "Lot line" means a line dividing one (1) lot from another or from a street or any public place.

69.    "Lot line, front" means, in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot, the narrower of the two (2) lot lines adjoining a street right-of-way.

70.    "Lot line, rear" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line; except that in the absence of a rear lot line as is the case of the triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line may be considered as a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten (10) feet.

71.    "Lot line, side" means the boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

72.    "Lot, through" means a lot having a part of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) streets, and which is not a corner lot (also known as a "double frontage lot"). On such lot, both lot lines are front, except that where a nonaccess easement has been established on such a lot, the front lot line shall be considered as that lot line most distant from the lot line containing the nonaccess easement.

73.    Lot Width.

a.    For rectangular lots, lots having side lot lines not parallel, and lots on the outside of the curve of a street, the distance between side lot lines measured at the required minimum front yard setback line on a line parallel to the street or street chord;

b.    For lots on the inside of the curve of a street, the distance between side lot lines measured thirty (30) feet behind the required minimum front yard setback line on a line parallel to the street or street chord.
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]


74.    "Mountain top" means the highest point on a mountain with a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet relief from its base to its highest peak (see Chapter 16.20).

75.    "Mountainside development area" means those lands where the natural terrain has a slope of fifteen (15%) percent or greater. This does not include a fifteen (15%) percent or greater slope, created by a natural wash, on land that otherwise would not be classified as mountainside land (see Chapter 16.20).

76.    "Mountainside wash" means any creek, stream, wash, channel, or other body of water having historical banks and with a flow rate equal to or greater than two (2) cubic feet per second based on a one hundred (100) year storm event (see Chapter 16.20).

77.    "Natural features, significant" includes washes, significant vegetation, and significant rock outcroppings, provided these features are in their undisturbed natural state (see Chapter 16.20).

78.    "Natural grade" means the undisturbed natural surface of the land, including washes.

79.    "Net acres" means the total acreage of a tract or parcel of land exclusive of the area existing or required for arterial or collector street right-of-way dedications and school/public site reservations. When calculating residential net acres within a neighborhood PUD, any commercially zoned land must be excluded in addition to those uses listed above.

80.    "Non-fire-resistant vegetation" includes trees and other plant material, dead or alive, which increase the fire danger to unreasonably high levels (see Chapter 16.20).

81.    "Off site" means not located within the area of the property to be developed.

82.    "Unbuilt common area, active" means any parcel or area of land or water designated as an amenity or for recreational purposes and may consist of improved landscaped areas, parks, playgrounds, seating areas, or areas otherwise designed to be consistent with recreational uses. Active unbuilt common area is designated and reserved for the use and enjoyment of all the residents of the development.

83.    "Unbuilt common area, passive" means unbuilt common area within a development primarily used for drainage, detention basins, and tracts of land which are not explicitly designated for recreational purposes. Passive unbuilt common area is designated and may be owned in common by all property owners in that development.

84.    "Unbuilt common area, preserved" means unbuilt common areas required for the preservation and conservation of plant and animal life, including habitat for fish and wildlife species; areas required for ecological and/or cultural purposes; and areas required to preserve natural drainage or floodplain. The developer is encouraged to preserve environmentally sensitive areas to the greatest extent possible. Preserved unbuilt common area is designated for long-term benefit.

85.    "Owner" means the person or persons holding title by deed to land, or holding title as vendor under a land contract, or holding any other title of record.

86.    "Parks" means a public tract of land that contains a mix of active and passive recreation facilities including tot lots, defined and improved play fields and/or sport court areas, and picnic/seating/shade areas that are landscaped/hardscaped in a pleasing manner.

87.    "Pathway" means a path, course, route, track, footway and equestrian trail.

88.    "Pedestrian way" means a public walk dedicated entirely through a block from street to street and/or providing access to a school, park, recreation area, trail system, or shopping area.

89.    "Planned unit development (PUD)" means a development in which flexibility can be permitted in the zoning standards, in order to encourage more creativity and sustainable design, thereby providing usable unbuilt common area within and about the development and enhancing the residential character of the Town.

90.    "Plat" means a map that provides for changes in land use or ownership.

a.    "Preliminary plat" means a tentative map, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision design, prepared by a registered civil engineer, or a registered land surveyor, in accordance with this Ordinance and the Arizona Revised Statutes. A preliminary site plan for a condominium development shall be considered a preliminary plat.

b.    "Final plat" means a final map of all of a subdivision, including supporting data, in substantial conformance to an approved preliminary plat and all stipulations or conditions placed upon it by the Commission or Council, prepared by a registered land surveyor, in accordance with this Ordinance and the Arizona Revised Statutes.

c.    "Recorded plat" means a final plat bearing all certificates of approval required by this Ordinance and the Arizona Revised Statutes and duly recorded in the Navajo County Recorder’s Office.

d.    Reversionary Plat.

i.    A plat for the purpose of reverting previously subdivided acreage to unsubdivided acreage; or

ii.    A plat for the purpose of vacating rights-of-way previously dedicated to the public and abandoned under procedures prescribed by the Town Code; or

iii.    A plat for the purpose of vacating or redescribing lot or parcel boundaries previously recorded.

91.    "Pre-application meeting" means an initial meeting between developer and municipal representatives that affords developers the opportunity to present their proposals informally and discuss the project and address any items of controversy or requirements before the preliminary plat is submitted.

92.    "Preliminary approval" means affirmative action on a preliminary plat, noted upon prints of the plat, indicating that approval of a final plat will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of specified stipulations; and which constitutes authorization to submit final engineering plans and the final plat.

93.    "Primary ridge line" means the line running from the highest peak on a mountain top to the next highest peak along a natural ridge (see Chapter 16.20).

94.    "Private access way" means a private way of access dedicated as a tract to one (1) or more lots or air spaces, which is owned and maintained by an individual or group of individuals and has been improved in accordance with Town standards and plans approved by the Town Engineer. A private access way is intended to apply where its use is logically consistent with a desire for neighborhood identification and control of access, and where special design concepts may be involved, such as within planned unit developments and condominiums.

95.    "Protected development rights plan" means a final subdivision plat that meets all the requirements of this Ordinance and A.R.S. § 9-463.01, and which has been recorded with the County Recorder.

96.    "Recorder" means the Recorder of Navajo County.

97.    "Right-of-way" means any public or private access way required for ingress or egress, including any area required for public use pursuant to any official plan; rights-of-way may consist of fee title dedications or easements.

98.    "Roadway easement" means a recorded conveyance to the public over a described area for roadway related uses.

99.    "Rock outcroppings, significant" means any surface rock or group formation of rocks covering an area of two hundred (200) square feet or larger or any surface rock formation with a height greater than ten (10) feet from the surrounding grade (see Chapter 16.20).

100.    "Service easement" means an area provided for in the subdivision design at the rear of retail, commercial or multi-family dwelling use of sufficient size and accessibility to facilitate the provision of necessary services.

101.    "Sidewalk" means a five (5) foot wide pedestrian way constructed of portland cement concrete.

102.    "Sketch plan" means a preliminary presentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for discussion purposes and identification of any items of controversy or issues of concern.

103.    "Staging area" means a trailhead specifically designed to accommodate equestrians. It includes areas for horse trailer parking, and facilities for hitching, mounting, and watering horses.

104.    "Street, arterial" means arterial streets to provide a high level of mobility for Town-wide through traffic movement and are typically spaced at one (1) mile or greater intervals, have limited access, and no on-street parking. The locations of arterial streets are designated in the Pinetop-Lakeside general plan.

105.    "Street, collector" means the collector streets provide mobility and access and link the arterial and local roadways as well as allowing access to adjacent properties.

106.    "Street, cul-de-sac" means a local street having one (1) end permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround, or an equally convenient form of turning, with backing areas as may be recommended by the Town Engineer.

107.    "Street, frontage" means a local street parallel to an arterial or collector road which intercepts the residential traffic and controls access to the arterial and collector roads.

108.    "Street, local" provides for direct access to residential or other abutting land and serves local traffic movement with connections to roadways of higher classification.

109.    "Street, private" means any road or street that is not publicly owned and maintained providing access to lots or units over a common parcel, primarily by the owners or occupants of the common parcel, and necessary service and emergency vehicles, but from which the public may be excluded.

110.    "Subdivider" (see also "developer") means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, syndicate, trust, or other legal entity that files the application and initiates proceedings for a subdivision in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and statutes of the State of Arizona, except that an individual serving as agent for such legal entity is not a developer; and said developer need not be the owner of the property as defined by this Ordinance. The Town Council may itself prepare or have prepared a plat for the subdivision of land under municipal ownership.

111.    Subdivision.

a.    Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing, sale, lease, or conveyance, whether immediate or future, into four (4) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land; or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land; or, any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into two (2) or more parts. "Subdivision" also includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse, patio home, or similar project containing four (4) or more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon.

b.    "Subdivision" does not include the following:

i.    The sale or exchange of parcels of land between adjoining property owners if such sale or exchange does not create additional lots.

ii.    The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership.

iii.    The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within a building or trailer park, nor to mineral, oil, or gas leases.

112.    "Technical review" means the detailed review of proposed preliminary plats, by the Development Review Committee, for compliance with Town codes, ordinances, standards, or conditions of approval by the Commission or Council. Other utilities and public agencies are invited to review the plat as it relates to their conditions of service or need.

113.    "Time-share unit" (see also "condominium") means a right of occupancy in a time-share project, condominium or multiple residence unit, which is owned, occupied, or possessed, under either interval ownership or fractional fee interests as may be determined by the Town Council.

114.    "Town" means the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona.

115.    "Townhouse" means a building on its own separate lot containing one (1) dwelling unit that occupies space from the ground to the roof, and is attached to one (1) or more other townhouse dwelling units by at least one (1) common wall. Shall also mean patio home.

116.    "Trail, multi-use" means a hard surfaced trail designed for all types of nonmotorized use. These trails should be constructed of either concrete or an all-weather surface such as rubberized asphalt, or similar material.

117.    "Trail, unpaved" means a designated trail designed to accommodate primarily equestrians, off-road bicycles, and pedestrian users.

118.    "Trailhead" means a trailhead that serves as the beginning point of a trail and must include parking and trail information and may also include trash receptacles, water, sanitary facilities and shade structures/ramadas (refer to the "Urban Element of the White Mountain Trailsystem").

119.    "Urban-wildlife interface" means the area where buildings, structures and people come together and mix with the forest or non-fire-resistant vegetation (see Chapter 16.20).

120.    "Usable lot area" means that portion of a lot usable for, or adaptable to, the normal uses made of property, excluding any areas which may be covered by water, are excessively steep, or are included in certain types of easements. Areas covered by water shall include areas within the defined flood plain, flood prone areas, or are within the perimeter of a given pond of water that will remain after the development is completed.

121.    "U.S.C. and G.S." means the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey.

122.    "U.S.A.C.O.E." means the United States Army Corp of Engineers.

123.    "Utility services" means the service to the public of water, sewer, gas, electricity, telephone and cable television. The foregoing shall be deemed to include facilities and appurtenances to the above uses but shall not include public utility treatment and generating plants or offices.

124.    "Vegetation, significant" is considered to be a stand of trees having a height greater than fifteen (15) feet or three (3) or more trees, located within a radius of fifteen (15) feet, each having a height greater than fifteen (15) feet.

125.    "View fencing (view fence)" shall mean fencing that is constructed in such a manner as to achieve eighty (80%) percent overall openness.

126.    "Watercourse" means any lake, river, stream, creek, wash, arroyo, or other body of water or channel having banks and bed through which waters flow at least periodically.

127.    "Water supply, adequate" means a written statement from the water company, providing water to the subdivision, that states the water supply and flows are adequate and in accordance with Town and the Fire District’s requirements.

128.    "Zone" means a district classification established by the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside that limits or permits various and specific uses.

129.    "Zoning clearance" means the approval by the Director of a plan that is in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

130.    "Zoning district" means a zone area in which the same zoning regulations apply throughout the district.

131.    "Zoning Ordinance" means the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-331 § 2 (Exh. A)(part); Ord. 05-250)


16.04.070 Maps.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


(Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


Chapter 16.08 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

16.08.010    Responsibility.

16.08.020    Application.

16.08.030    Filing fees.

16.08.040    Prohibition of circumvention.

16.08.050    Modifications.


16.08.010 Responsibility.

A.    The Pinetop-Lakeside Planning and Zoning Commission is charged with the duty of reviewing the design and improvements of proposed subdivisions and is hereby authorized to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove preliminary subdivision plats and to designate the kinds, nature and extent of the improvements to be installed in the subdivisions.

B.    The Town Council for the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside is hereby authorized to receive, process and otherwise act upon applications for final subdivision plats and planned unit developments (PUD) in accordance with this Ordinance.

C.    The Town Council shall have final jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to the implementation of this Ordinance.

D.    All applications for action under this Ordinance shall be filed initially with the Director or his/her designee for processing in accordance with this Ordinance.

E.    All applications shall be reviewed, from a technical aspect, by the Development Review Committee (DRC) which shall act in an advisory capacity to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The DRC shall, at a minimum, consist of the following Town Staff and agency members: Director, Town Engineer, Parks and Recreation Director, and representatives from the Fire Districts, U.S. Forest Service, Community Forester, Irrigation District(s), Water Companies, Sanitary District, School District, and utility companies. Additional members may be consulted on an as needed basis for their expertise. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.08.020 Application.

A.    Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon land, land improvement, or development, and land use, than is imposed by existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, this Ordinance shall control.

B.    This Ordinance shall apply to all subdivisions, land splits, and minor land divisions as defined in Chapter 16.04. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.08.030 Filing fees.

The Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside may from time to time establish and set by resolution administrative fees considered necessary to process subdivision applications, and to review improvement plans and construction documents. The developer shall, at the time of filing, pay to the Town those established fees. These fees shall be nonrefundable. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.08.040 Prohibition of circumvention.

No person, firm, corporation or legal entity shall sell, offer to sell, or divide any lot, piece, or parcel of land which constitutes a subdivision, as defined herein, or part thereof without first having recorded a plat thereof in accordance with this Ordinance. The Town shall not issue any permits for work on any parcel in violation of this Ordinance. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.08.050 Modifications.

A.    Where, in the opinion of the Council, and after review by the Community Development Department or the Planning and Zoning Commission, there exist extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership or adjacent development, or other circumstances not provided for in this Ordinance, the Council may modify these provisions in such a manner and to such extent as it may deem appropriate to the public interest.

B.    In the case of a plan and program for a planned unit development (PUD), the Council may modify this Ordinance in such manner as appears necessary and desirable to provide adequate space and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the development when fully developed and populated and may require stipulations to assure conformance with the achievement of the approved plan.

C.    In modifying the standards or requirements of this title as outlined above, the Town Council may make such additional conditions, restrictions or requirements as appear necessary in the Council’s judgment to help ensure that the purposes and objectives of this title and Title 17 are met. These additional conditions, restrictions or requirements may include time restrictions for construction and development, density restrictions, agreements between the owner/developer and the Town, or other lawful conditions, restrictions or requirements imposed by the Town Council. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-297 § 1)


Chapter 16.12 TYPES OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:

16.12.010    Rural residential (R-Low, 1 acre and larger).

16.12.020    Suburban residential (R1-2, R1-4 and MH-4).

16.12.030    Urban residential (R1-6 and MH-6).

16.12.040    Multiple-family development (R-2 and R-3).

16.12.050    Mountainside development.

16.12.060    Planned unit development (PUD).

16.12.070    Commercial development.


16.12.010 Rural residential (R-Low, 1 acre and larger).

A single-family residential development of large lots that are rural in character with much of the unbuilt area predominantly provided on the individual lots. A rural subdivision may have modified public improvement requirements (i.e. street width and sidewalks); with the following standards:

A.    Lot widths of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.

B.    Lot areas not less than forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) net square feet (one (1) acre).

C.    Unbuilt common area requirements, based on net acres, shall be provided as follows:

1.    Zero (0%) percent for subdivisions of one (1) to fifteen (15) lots.

2.    Five (5%) percent for subdivisions of sixteen (16) or more lots.

D.    Compliance with all regulations of the Zoning Ordinance shall be required.

E.    Opportunities may exist for some modifications in the off-site improvement requirements if approved by Town Council. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.12.020 Suburban residential (R1-2, R1-4 and MH-4).

A single-family residential development of medium sized lots for detached conventional built dwellings within all of the above Zoning Districts and including manufactured homes within the MH-4 Zoning District. A suburban subdivision will have additional public improvements (i.e. street pavements widths and sidewalks) and more public unbuilt common area requirements; with the following standards:

A.    Lot widths of not less than one hundred (100) feet.

B.    Lot area minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) net square feet for lots zoned R1-2. Lot area minimum of ten thousand (10,000) net square feet for lots zoned R1-4 and MH-4.

C.    Unbuilt common area requirements, based on net acres, shall be provided as follows:

1.    Five (5%) percent for subdivisions with one (1) to forty (40) lots and zoned R1-2.

2.    Ten (10%) percent for subdivisions with forty-one (41) to eighty (80) lots and zoned R1-2.

3.    Fifteen (15%) percent for subdivisions with more than eighty (80) lots and zoned R1-2.

4.    Ten (10%) percent for subdivisions with one (1) to forty (40) lots and zoned R1-4 and MH-4.

5.    Fifteen (15%) percent for subdivisions with forty-one (41) to eighty (80) lots and zoned R1-4 and MH-4.

6.    Twenty (20%) percent for subdivisions with more than eighty (80) lots and zoned R1-4 and MH-4.

D.    Compliance with all regulations of the Zoning Ordinance shall be required. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.12.030 Urban residential (R1-6 and MH-6).

A typical single-family residential development of small lots for detached conventional built dwellings within the R1-6 Zoning District and manufactured homes within the MH-6 Zoning District. The urban density and traffic volumes will require increased public improvements and greater public unbuilt common area; with the following standards:

A.    Lot widths of sixty (60) feet for lots zoned MH-6. Lot widths of fifty-five (55) feet for lots zoned R1-6.

B.    Lot areas not less than six thousand six hundred (6,600) net square feet.

C.    Unbuilt common area requirements, based on net acres, shall be provided as follows:

1.    Fifteen (15%) percent for subdivisions with one (1) to fifty-nine (59) lots.

2.    Twenty (20%) percent for subdivisions with sixty (60) or more lots.

D.    Compliance with all regulations of the Zoning Ordinance shall be required. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.12.040 Multiple-family development (R-2 and R-3)

Detached single-family residential development, attached and multi-family residential development, or cluster development as part of an approved PUD in locations that are suitable and appropriate, taking into consideration existing conditions, topography, future land use needs and availability of utilities; with the following standards:

A.    Lot widths of seventy (70) feet for lots/parcels zoned R-2. Lot widths of sixty (60) feet for lots/parcels zoned R-3.

B.    Lot area minimum of seven thousand (7,000) net square feet for lots/parcels zoned R-2. Lot area minimum of six thousand (6,000) net square feet for lots/parcels zoned R-3.

C.    Unbuilt common area equivalent to twenty-five (25%) percent of the net acres shall be provided; of which twenty (20%) percent shall be developed for amenities or recreational purposes.

D.    Compliance with all regulations of the Zoning Ordinance shall be required. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.12.050 Mountainside development.

Detached single-family residential development, attached and multi-family residential development, or a cluster development as part of an approved PUD on land where the natural terrain has a slope of fifteen (15%) percent or greater; with the following standards:

A.    Grading and drainage limitations shall apply.

B.    Land disturbance for a subdivision shall be limited.

C.    Density shall be limited based on the slope of the land.

D.    Unbuilt common area equivalent to the sum of all land required to be left undisturbed per slope categories on a lot-by-lot basis.

E.    Compliance with all regulations of the Zoning Ordinance shall be required.

F.    Compliance with the additional provisions for mountainside developments as outlined in Chapter 16.20.

G.    Opportunities may exist for some modifications in the off-site improvement requirements if approved by Town Council. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.12.060 Planned unit development (PUD).

A.    Residential Planned Unit Development. Designed to contain a mixture of residential land uses ranging in density from single-family dwellings to multiple-family dwellings including condominiums, patio homes and cluster developments.

1.    The overall project density, individual area and the specific building and yard regulations shall be determined through the PUD rezoning process.

2.    Unbuilt common area equivalent to thirty (30%) percent of the net acres shall be provided.

3.    Compliance with the additional provisions for PUD developments as outlined in Chapter 17.72.

B.    Neighborhood Planned Unit Development. May contain a mixture of residential land uses along with commercial land uses that provide for the daily needs of the neighborhood.

1.    The overall project density, individual area and the specific building and yard regulations shall be determined through the PUD rezoning process.

2.    Unbuilt common area equivalent to thirty (30%) percent of the net acres shall be provided. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.12.070 Commercial development.

Commercial development as a conventional subdivision or as part of an approved PUD in locations that are suitable and appropriate, taking into consideration adjacent land uses, size and scale of development, traffic and availability of utilities.

A.    Lot widths of not less than sixty (60) feet.

B.    Lot areas of not less than six thousand (6,000) net square feet.

C.    Compliance with all regulations of the Zoning Ordinance shall be required. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


Chapter 16.16 PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

16.16.010    Outline of procedures and requirements.

16.16.020    Stage 1 – Pre-application meeting.

16.16.030    Stage 2 – Preliminary plat application.

16.16.040    Stage 3 – Development Review Committee.

16.16.050    Stage 4 – Preliminary plat approval.

16.16.060    Stage 5 – Final plat and improvement plan approval.

16.16.070    Stage 6 – Recordation of plat.

16.16.080    Replats.

16.16.090    Abandonment of recorded subdivision.

16.16.100    Condominium developments.

16.16.110    Minor land divisions – Lot splits.


16.16.010 Outline of procedures and requirements.

A.    The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all subdivision plats located inside the jurisdictional boundaries of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall proceed through the following progressive stages.

1.    Stage 1: Pre-application meeting.

2.    Stage 2: Preliminary plat application.

3.    Stage 3: Development Review Committee.

4.    Stage 4: Preliminary plat approval.

5.    Stage 5: Final plat and improvement plan approval.

6.    Stage 6: Recordation of plat.

B.    If a submittal is determined to be incomplete or inaccurate at or during any of the different stages of the process the developer shall be required to correct the inaccuracy and/or produce the omitted information.

C.    The following flow chart depicts the different stages of the process and the necessary actions to be taken with each stage.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.020 Stage 1 – Pre-application meeting.

This stage affords the developer the opportunity to meet with the appropriate Town departments, prior to the expense of a preliminary plat preparation, to obtain advice, assistance, and a cursory review of the proposed subdivision. It also affords the Town the opportunity to give informal guidance at a time when potential points of conflict can be most easily resolved, subsequent relations improved, official action simplified, and undue expense and delay saved by the developer.

A.    Actions by the Developer.

1.    The developer shall schedule a mandatory pre-application meeting with the Community Development and Engineering Department staff. When scheduling the mandatory pre-application meeting, the developer shall submit seven (7) copies of a sketch plan for staff to review in preparation for the pre-application meeting.

2.    The sketch plan shall be printed on twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch, blue line or black line. The sketch plan shall include at a minimum the following information:

a.    Location map.

b.    Scale drawing and north arrow.

c.    Location of all public arterial and collector streets.

d.    Acreage and land uses of all parcels.

e.    Conceptual lot configuration.

f.    Conceptual roadway layout and street design.

g.    Table of land use data including: gross and net acres, percent of total acreage in each land use category, existing zoning, proposed zoning, and tentative lot sizes.

h.    Preliminary topography with two (2) foot contour intervals along with the FEMA information overlaid.

i.    Surrounding and adjacent land uses.

3.    Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, and surface drainage.

B.    Actions by the Town.

1.    Depending on the scope of the proposed development, the Town may distribute the seven (7) sketch plans to the following departments and/or agencies:

a.    Pinetop-Lakeside Community Development Department.

b.    Pinetop-Lakeside Engineering Department.

c.    Pinetop-Lakeside Recreation Department.

d.    Pinetop Fire District or Lakeside Fire District.

e.    U.S. Forest Service staff.

2.    The Town shall discuss the proposal with the developer in general terms and provide advice on procedural steps, design and improvement standards, and general platting requirements.

3.    Check the existing zoning of the proposed development and advise the developer if a zoning change or a general plan amendment is necessary or desirable. Review the proposal and its relationship to adjacent land uses and the general plan’s goals and objectives. Determine the amount and type of parks, unbuilt common area or other public facility needs for the area as determined by the general plan and Recreation Department plans and/or policies; to then determine what space needs shall be reserved or set aside with any special requirements for such site. Review for compliance with these Subdivision Ordinance regulations and any other applicable regulations.

4.    Determine if the size, complexity, or the land use mix of the proposed development would warrant the preparation of a planned unit development (PUD). If a PUD is required such shall be processed prior to subsequent consideration of a preliminary plat.

5.    If a general plan amendment is required that amendment must be obtained prior to additional processing of the application.

6.    Inspect the site and review the relationship of the property to major streets, utility systems and adjacent land uses and determine any unusual problems such as utilities, drainage or flooding. Determine street width and right-of-way requirements, intersection relationships and other traffic control related characteristics. Identify possible off-site public improvements and dedications. Review the wastewater disposal system.

7.    Help the developer determine the providers of water, sewer, electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable.

8.    Provide the applicant with the necessary Town application forms, review the submittal requirements, and discuss tentative timetables for the project. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.030 Stage 2 – Preliminary plat application.

The preliminary plat stage of land and airspace subdivision includes detailed planning, submittal, review, and approval of the preliminary plat. This stage is intended to resolve most all of the major issues pertinent to the land development according to the Town’s policies, standards, codes, and requirements. To avoid delay in processing the application, the developer shall provide the Town with all information essential, as determined by the Town, regarding the character and general acceptability of the proposed development.

A.    Submittal Requirements.

The following information is required as part of the preliminary plat submittal and shall be shown graphically, by note on plans, or by letter, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements of required data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn at the same standard engineering scale which shall not be less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, adjusted to produce an overall drawing measuring twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches and in conformance with requirements contained in this Ordinance and by the Town Engineer and other reviewing departments and agencies.

1.    Fifteen (15) copies/sets of the proposed preliminary plat and other required supporting data prepared in accordance with requirements set forth in this Chapter shall be filed with the Administrator. Submission shall include fees as required in Chapter 16.08. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be reproduced in the form of blue line or black line prints on a white background. Scheduling of the case for the Development Review Committee (DRC) meeting shall be dependent upon adequacy of data presented and completion of processing.

2.    If the proposed preliminary plat is within an approved PUD, fifteen (15) copies of the approved PUD site plan shall also be submitted as supporting documentation and project phasing shall be indicated.

3.    All subdivision submittals shall provide identification and descriptive data, existing conditions data, proposed conditions data, proposed utility methods, and environmental assessment report information by graphic representation or note as further outlined in the following subsections. The submittal shall be checked by the Town for completeness and assigned a case number; if incomplete as to those requirements set forth in this section, the submittal shall be rejected and the developer notified within fifteen (15) days of the date the application was received.

4.    If the developer is planning to plat the proposed development in phases it must be so indicated on their preliminary plat when submitted for development review. If the developer later decides to phase the development, it will be necessary to re-submit for a second review.

5.    Submit three (3) copies of the preliminary drainage report in a separate bound folder. See Section 16.28.030(E)(1) for more specific details.

6.    Submit three (3) copies of the preliminary traffic impact analysis in a separate bound folder. See Section 16.28.030(E)(4) for more specific details.

7.    Submit three (3) copies of the preliminary geotechnical report in a separate bound folder. See Section 16.28.030(E)(3) for more specific details.

8.    Submit a lot statistical table.

9.    Submit fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary landscape plan for all off-site, unbuilt common area, trails, and retention area landscaping. See Section 16.28.030(C)(1) for more specific details.

10.    Submit fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary fuel modification plan in compliance with Chapter 17.96, Forest Health and Fire Protection. See Section 16.28.030(D) for more specific details.

11.    Submit subdivision fencing detail, if applicable, depicting the type of fencing being proposed; including elevations and general locations.

12.    Submit a conceptual "Residential Design Guidelines" which both narratively and graphically describes the character, site planning, architecture (if a tract homebuilder is building the subdivision) and landscaping that can be expected from the development.

13.    Submit documentation that a site records check, for potential cultural resources, has been conducted in conjunction with the State Historic Preservation Office.

14.    Submit fifteen (15) copies of a slope analysis as required by Section 16.20.050 if the subdivision is a Mountainside Development. Include slope analysis of existing topography, slope analysis of the proposed development areas and building pad sites, and delineation of unbuilt common areas.

B.    Identification and Descriptive Data.

1.    The proposed name of the subdivision shall be clearly indicated and include the location by section, township and range with reference by dimension and bearing to two (2) section or quarter (1/4) section corners. Basis of bearings must be stated on the plat.

2.    Name, address, phone number, and seal of the registered land surveyor preparing the preliminary plat and the registered civil engineer preparing the improvements.

3.    Name, address, e-mail, and phone number of developer.

4.    Scale, north point (pointing up or to the right), and date of preparation including any subsequent revision dates.

5.    Location map which shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to arterial and collector streets.

6.    A surveyed boundary, including distances, lengths and bearings and the total area of the proposed subdivision.

C.    Existing Conditions Data.

1.    Topography by contours and spot elevations on Town datum and related to USGS survey datum shown on the same map as the proposed subdivision layout. Contour intervals shall be at two (2) feet and shall be shown extending a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the external boundaries of the proposed development so to adequately reflect the character and drainage of the land.

2.    Location of fences, existing structures, wells, canals, irrigation materials, private ditches (open or covered), washes, stock ponds or other water features and characteristics that could have a bearing on the review.

3.    Location, direction of flow, and extent of areas subject to flooding or storm runoff must be defined (FEMA data and any federal Clean Water Act, Section 404 designation), whether such inundation is frequent, periodic, or occasional.

4.    Location, widths and type of any and all easements (public and private) of public record of all private and public streets that may exist around the perimeter of the site, through or across it. Show any permanent structures that are to remain, including water wells and public or private utility lines within, adjacent to, or extending from, the proposed development.

5.    Show all driveways, streets and median openings within three hundred twenty-five (325) feet of any proposed driveway or street intersection on the opposite side of the perimeter streets.

6.    Name, book, and page numbers of any recorded subdivision adjacent to or having common boundaries with the proposed development.

7.    The existing base zone of the subject and adjacent parcel(s), the zoning case number, if any, and the case number of the approved PUD of which the proposed development is a part of, if applicable.

8.    The gross acreage of the subject parcel(s). Do not include previously dedicated rights-of-way in this figure.

9.    Boundaries and dimensions of the parcel(s) to be subdivided shall be fully dimensioned.

10.    Engineers’ calculations for each tributary area of the runoff for ten (10) year, fifty (50) year and one hundred (100) year frequency storms. The values to be indicated along the boundary of the parcel for all points of drainage entering and exiting the property.

D.    Proposed Conditions Data.

1.    Street layout, including design cross section, preliminary curve data, curve lengths, proposed street names based on existing projected alignments wherever possible, and pedestrian connections to adjoining developments.

2.    Typical lot dimensions (scaled), dimensions of all corner lots, lots on curvilinear sections of streets, and all lots where the number of sides exceeds four (4). Each lot shall be numbered individually and the total number of lots or dwelling units provided. Where plats will consist of a number of units/phases, utilizing the same subdivision name, the lot numbering shall be consecutive through the total number of lots or units.

3.    Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for unbuilt common area, parks, schools, well sites, or other public or private use with use indicated.

4.    If multiple uses are planned (multiple residential, commercial, industrial, or office) such areas shall be clearly designated together with existing zoning classification and status of zoning change, if any.

5.    Show minimum setback lines. Where there are lots with more than four (4) sides or whose shape may be considered atypical, show all setbacks.

6.    Proposed storm water disposal system, preliminary calculations, and layout of proposed drainage system. The direction of proposed street drainage to be indicated by arrows on the plat, the one hundred (100) year flood plain delineation and a proposal to provide for the detention of storm water generated on the property. Detention of storm water to comply with the drainage policy of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and the design standards of this Ordinance.

7.    Compliance with rules as may be established by the State Department of Environmental Quality and/or State Department of Water Resources relating to the provision of domestic water supply and sanitary sewage disposal.

E.    Proposed Utility Methods.

1.    Sewage Disposal. A statement as to the method for sanitary sewage disposal for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat. The plat shall also show the preliminary sewer layout indicating line sizes, manholes, direction of flow, and cleanout locations. If the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District will not provide sanitary sewer services for the development, a letter from the Sanitary District approving the use of an alternate system is required.

2.    Water Supply. A statement as to the water supply and the water provider for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat. The preliminary layout of the water system shall be shown, indicating fire hydrants, valves, meter vaults, water line sizes and locations.

3.    Electric Supply. A statement as to the electric supply for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements shall be shown on the preliminary plat.

4.    Gas Supply. A statement as to the gas supply for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements shall be shown on the preliminary plat.

5.    Telephone Service. A statement as to the telephone service for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements shall be shown on the preliminary plat.

6.    Garbage Service. A statement as to the garbage service for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat.

7.    Cable Television. If applicable, a statement as to the cable television service for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat.

F.    Environmental Assessment Data. The purpose of the environmental site assessment is to provide a written and graphic analysis of the environmental characteristics of the site so that the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside can evaluate the future use of the site. The Phase 1 environmental report will identify any hazardous waste site within the proposed subdivision. Environmental site assessments are required for all preliminary plat applications. This study shall include written reports and maps that provide the information outlined below:

1.    The Phase 1 environmental report shall:

a.    Describe the site and identify uses or activities which might indicate the presence of disposed hazardous substances; and

b.    Be prepared through the review of readily available information, including but not limited to engineering, regulatory, and historical records of the site, and through the interviewing of current and past owners of the site, tenants and neighbors; and

c.    Be prepared to thoroughly review the regional geology and hydrology of the site and the surrounding area, available records of groundwater contamination up and down gradient from the site, obtainable reports of compliance violations and/or containment discharges in the site’s vicinity, and the proximity of the site to known environmental conditions or problems within approximately one (1) mile of the site; and

d.    Reference the data, records and source of information.

2.    The applicant’s consultant shall:

a.    Personally observe the site surface closely for evidence of potential contamination such as soil stabilizing, discarded chemical containers, vegetative distress; and

b.    Interview the tenants on/or adjacent to the site with respect to their use of hazardous substances on the site; and

c.    Investigate the registration status of any existing underground storage tanks or drywells on or adjacent to the site; and

d.    Identify any adverse environmental impacts. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.040 Stage 3 – Development Review Committee.

In order for a preliminary plat to be scheduled for a particular Development Review Committee (DRC) meeting, a complete preliminary plat application must be received and accepted by the Town.

A.    Upon receipt of a preliminary plat application the Town shall determine if the application is a complete submittal. If complete, the Town shall forward copies of the preliminary plat to the following agencies and entities along with those previously listed in Section 16.16.020. These reviewing agencies shall transmit their written comments and recommendations to the Town.

1.    U.S. Postmaster.

2.    Water company serving the proposed development.

3.    Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District.

4.    Lakeside Irrigation District.

5.    Blue Ridge Unified School District.

6.    Navopache Electric Cooperative, Inc.

7.    Cable One, Inc.

8.    Frontier-Citizens Communications.

9.    UniSource Energy Services.

B.    The Town shall host a Development Review Committee (DRC) meeting where the applicant is provided an opportunity to meet with the representatives from all applicable utilities and other interested governmental agencies to receive comments regarding the preliminary plat application. At this meeting the applicant may also receive written comments from the Town, detailing the extent to which the plans are required to be revised in order for the Town to schedule the preliminary plat for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Extensive revisions caused by the comments received at the DRC meeting or by voluntary action of the applicant, may require additional DRC meetings. Additionally, circumstances may exist where the project may experience delay due to the applicant’s timeline in addressing agency comments. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.050 Stage 4 – Preliminary plat approval.

The preliminary plat approval stage involves the re-submission of the preliminary plat to address the DRC comments. Included in this stage is the review of the resubmitted plans, reports, and required studies and acceptance of the preliminary plat. The developer shall provide the Town with all information essential to determine the character and general acceptability of the proposed development.

A.    Preliminary Plat Resubmittal.

1.    The applicant shall resubmit fifteen (15) full-sized copies/sets of the preliminary plat and one (1) eight and one-half (8-1/2) by eleven (11) inch photo mechanical transfer (PMT) of each sheet/exhibit and all other required or requested supporting data to the Town. Preliminary plats that correctly contain all of the information requested or required by the DRC, as determined by the Town, shall be scheduled for a Planning and Zoning Commission hearing. Incomplete or incorrect re-submittals could cause delays in a preliminary plat being presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Scheduling of the case for a Commission hearing shall be determined by the Director and shall be dependent upon adequacy of data presented, completion of processing, and other legalities that may be required if the subdivision involves rezoning, PUD, or other land use exceptions.

2.    Prior to the Commission hearing for a preliminary plat or PUD, the applicant is strongly encouraged to conduct a neighborhood meeting. The purpose of the meeting would be to provide information to the adjacent property owners and citizens. The applicant should notify all landowners adjoining or adjacent to the boundaries of the proposed development and the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside by first class mail no less than thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled Commission meeting. The applicant should submit documentation of the attendees and minutes of the meeting(s) to the Director. All meeting(s) must be held within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside corporate limits.

3.    An applicant has ninety (90) days from the date of the DRC meeting, or ninety (90) days from the date of receipt of later redlines, in which to resubmit said plans. Failure to resubmit plans which address all of the DRC comments, or subsequent redline comments, within ninety (90) days of the DRC meeting or ninety (90) days from the receipt of later redlines shall cause the application to be null and void and fees will not be refunded.

4.    An applicant shall be required to submit a new preliminary plat application, including fees and another review of the subdivision by the DRC if the resubmittal is not in substantial conformance to the original application. Substantial nonconformance is considered to be, but not limited to, the following:

a.    An increase in the number of lots or units.

b.    A change in the size or configuration of the development parcel.

B.    Preliminary Plat Review.

1.    Zoning. The subdivision shall be designed to meet the specific requirements for the zoning district within which it is located. However, in the event that rezoning is necessary for the preliminary plat to conform with the Zoning District regulations, or if a PUD approval is sought, said action shall be initiated concurrently with the preliminary plat by the property owner or his authorized agent. In any event, any such zoning amendment required in relation to the preliminary plat shall have been adopted prior to a preliminary plat approval.

2.    Planning. The subdivision shall be designed to comply with the design principles of this Ordinance and the goals and objectives of the Pinetop-Lakeside general plan. In the event that an amendment to the general plan is necessary for the preliminary plat to conform with the specific land use, circulation, or unbuilt common area elements, said amendment(s) required in relation to the preliminary plat shall have been adopted prior to a preliminary plat approval.

3.    Utilities and Services. As a prerequisite of preliminary plat approval by the Town, the developer shall have reviewed tentative concepts with the County Health Department, the State Department of Environmental Quality, the State Department of Water Resources, the Town Engineer, Community Development, the Parks and Recreation Department, the U.S. Forest Service, the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District and the Fire District servicing the development. The developer shall have an "intent to serve letter" from the private water company servicing the development, the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District, and the electric, gas, telephone and cable television companies servicing the development and general approval of the preliminary design to be used.

C.    Preliminary Plat Approval.

1.    When all requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied the case will be scheduled for a Commission preview meeting in which no action is taken by the Commission but rather the public is simply informed about the project and allowed to ask questions and voice concerns.

2.    After the Commission preview meeting the preliminary plat will be scheduled for a Commission hearing. The Community Development Department report shall be submitted for Commission review and action.

3.    The Commission shall consider the preliminary plat, DRC comments, and the Community Development Department report and recommendations. If satisfied that all objectives and requirements of this Ordinance have been met, the Commission may approve the preliminary plat and make a notation of the Commission’s approval on the copy of the preliminary plat retained in the office of the Director.

4.    If the plat is generally acceptable, but requires minor revisions, the Commission may conditionally approve the preliminary plat and the required revisions noted in the minutes of the meeting. At the direction of the Commission, the Director may approve the preliminary plat when it has been satisfactorily revised in accordance with the stated conditions.

5.    If the Commission finds that all of the objectives and requirements of this Ordinance have not been met, the Commission may continue the preliminary plat pending revisions, or deny the preliminary plat. Resubmittals due to revisions, for the same parcel or any part thereof, shall follow the aforementioned procedure.

D.    Significance of Preliminary Approval.

Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for the developer to proceed with preparation of the final plat and the improvement plans and specifications for public improvements. Preliminary plat approval does not authorize the developer to cut roads or other easements, begin site preparation and grading, or any similar such work unless authorized in writing by the Town. Preliminary approval is based on the following terms:

1.    Subject to the basic approval. The basic conditions under which preliminary approval of the preliminary plat is granted will not be substantially changed prior to the expiration date.

2.    One (1) year approval. Approval of the preliminary plat is valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of Commission approval. An extension of the preliminary plat approval may be granted for an additional six (6) months upon reapplication and review by the Commission.

3.    No authority to record. Preliminary approval, in itself, does not assure final acceptance of streets for dedication nor continuation of existing zoning requirements for the development or its environs nor constitute authorization to record the plat. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.060 Stage 5 – Final plat and improvement plan approval.

This stage includes the final design of the subdivision, engineering of public improvements, and submittal by the developer of the final plat, final reports, and plans for all of the required subdivision improvements, to the Town, the state and county departments, and the utility companies for approval; including the submittal of the final plat for review and action by the Town Council.

A.    Submittal Requirements.

1.    Final Plat Preparation.

a.    Presentation. The final plat shall be presented in accordance with requirements set forth in this section, and shall substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat and applicable zoning stipulations.

b.    Zoning. The final plat shall meet all requirements of the zoning district in which it is located; and necessary zoning amendments shall have been adopted by the Town Council prior to filing the final plat with the Administrator.

c.    Pre-Final Review. The developer shall file fifteen (15) full size (twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch) blue or black line copies of the final plat with the Town who in turn will distribute copies to the various reviewing agencies. The reviewing agencies shall make known their recommendations in writing. The Town shall review the plat for substantial conformity to the approved preliminary plat.

d.    Final Plat Submission. The developer shall file with the Town three (3) full size mylars, three (3) full size blue or black line copies, one (1) eight and one-half (8-1/2) by eleven (11) inch PMT and ten (10) copies thereof, of the final plat. The final plat shall be drawn in black ink on polyester mylar, measuring exactly twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches with a left hand margin of two (2) inches, and be drawn to an accurate engineering scale from an accurate survey. The applicant shall also submit an electronic copy of the final plat in a file format required by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

2.    Improvement Plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted in accordance with the procedures and standards established in Chapter 16.28. Ten (10) complete sets of improvement plans shall be submitted to the Town. If the submittal is complete, the Town shall distribute sets of the plans to the appropriate reviewing departments, agencies and utility companies who shall make known their recommendations in writing.

3.    Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (Deed Restrictions). The subdivision deed restrictions shall be submitted to the Town for review as part of the final plat and improvement plan submittal package.

4.    Title Report. The developer shall, at the time of filing the application(s) for the final plat and improvement plans, submit an American Land Title Association (ALTA) title report, not more than thirty (30) days old, certifying that the applicant has title, acceptable to the Town Attorney, for all of the land being subdivided.

5.    Filing Fees. The developer shall, at the time of filing the application(s) for the final plat and improvement plans, pay the Town the final plat application fee, improvement plan review fees, and the recordation fee, in accordance with Chapter 16.08, which are established by the Town Council.

B.    Identification Data. The following identification data shall be required as a part of the final plat submittal.

1.    A title, which includes the name of the subdivision and its location by number of section, township, range, and county.

2.    Name, address and seal of the Arizona-registered land surveyor preparing the final plat.

3.    Scale, north arrow, and date of plat preparation.

4.    The name, address and telephone number of the property owner.

C.    Survey Data. The following survey data shall be required as a part of the final plat submittal.

1.    The corners of the plat shall be located on the monument lines of abutting streets; boundaries of the parcel(s) to be subdivided fully balanced and closed, showing all bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey in the field. The surveyor of record shall also provide a copy of the computer closure, properly stamped and signed showing registration number. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.

2.    Any excepted parcel(s) within or surrounded by the plat boundaries shall be noted as "Not a Part of This Subdivision" and show all bearings and distances of the excepted parcel as determined by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.

3.    Location and description of cardinal points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referenced. Each of two (2) separate corners of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by course and distance to separate section corners or quarter-section corners. The certifying land surveyor shall submit subdivision boundary and lot closure and area calculations to the Town.

4.    Location of all physical encroachments upon the boundaries of the tract.

5.    Total subdivision gross acres.

6.    Total number of lots and parcels, and the size, in square feet, of each lot or parcel. The size of lots or parcels greater than ten (10) acres in size may be expressed in acres.

D.    Descriptive Data. The following descriptive data shall be required as part of the final plat submittal.

1.    Names, centerlines, right-of-way lines, courses, length and width of all public streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and utility easements; radii, point of tangency, curve lengths, and central angles of all curvilinear streets, and alleys; radii of all rounded street line intersections.

2.    All drainage easements shall be shown on the plat. No structure will be allowed in the easements that will obstruct drainage. The rights-of-way of all major drainage ways shall be dedicated drainage easements or right-of-way as determined by the Town Engineer.

3.    All lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers throughout the plat. All "tracts" and "parcels" shall be designated, lettered, or named and clearly dimensioned; parcels which are not part of the subdivision shall be so designated. Ownership and maintenance responsibility for open space and unbuilt common areas shall be indicated on the plat.

4.    Location, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs, and central angles of all sites to be dedicated to the public with the use clearly indicated.

5.    Location of all adjoining subdivisions with name, date, book, and page number of recordation noted, or if unrecorded, so noted.

6.    Any proposed private deed restrictions to be imposed upon the plat or any part or parts thereof pertaining to the intended use of the land, and to be recognized by the Town, shall be noted on the plat (see subsection F of this section for details).

7.    All existing private easements within, on, or over the plat shall be indicated, dimensioned, and noted as to their use. The location and widths of all easements for right-of-way provided for public services, utilities, or drainage, and any limitations of the easements.

a.    The following notation shall be placed on all final plats which provide drainage easements: "No structure of any kind shall be constructed or any inappropriate vegetation be planted nor be allowed to grow within, on or over the drainage easement, which would obstruct or divert the flow of storm water. The Town may, if it so desires, construct and/or maintain drainage facilities on or under the land of the easement".

E.    Dedication and Acknowledgement.

1.    Dedication. There shall be required as part of the final plat submittal a statement of dedication of all streets, alleys, drainage detention basins and drainage ways, pedestrian/bicycle ways, equestrian trails and easements, and other easements for public use, including sanitation, utility, fire and other emergency related vehicles, executed by the person or persons holding title of record, by persons holding titles as vendees under land contract, by the spouse(s) of said parties, lien holders and all other parties having an interest in the property. If lands dedicated are liened, the lien holder shall also sign the plat. Dedication shall include a written location by section, township and range of the tract. If the plat contains private streets, a public easement shall be reserved which shall include the right to install and maintain utilities in any approved private street, including refuse collection, fire and other emergency services.

2.    Acknowledgment of Dedication. Execution of dedication shall be acknowledged and certified by a Notary Public.

F.    Required Certification, Signatures, and Notes. Multiple notations are required to appear on a final plat. The notations that are standard on every final plat include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.    Assurance statement, as follows:

Assurance Statement:

Assurance in the form of a ______________, issued from ___________________ in the amount of $______ has been deposited with the Town Engineer to guarantee construction of the required subdivision improvements.

2.    Conveyance and dedication statements, as follows:

Conveyance and Dedication:

Know all men by these presents that (owner’s name), as owner, have subdivided (or re-subdivided) under the name of (name of subdivision), (add Section, Township and Range) of the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian, Navajo County, Arizona as shown platted hereon, and hereby publishes this plat as and for the plat of said (subdivision name), and hereby declares that said plat sets forth the location and gives the dimensions of all lots, easements, tracts and streets constituting the same, and that each lot, tract and street shall be known by the number, letter and name given each respectively, and that (owner’s name), as owner, hereby dedicates to the public for use as such the streets and hereby grants to the public the drainage and public utility easements as shown on said plat. In witness (owner’s name), as owner, has hereunto caused its name to be signed and the same to be attested by the signature of (owner or designated signatory and title).

By: _________________________________________________________ Date: ________________

Owner’s Name and Title

3.    Notary acknowledgment statement, as follows:

Notary Acknowledgment:     State of Arizona )     County of Navajo )

On this, the ____________ day of _______________, (year), before me the undersigned (title) personally appeared _______(Name)_________ who acknowledges that he/she executed the foregoing instrument for the purposes contained therein.

In witness whereof I hereunto set my hand and official seal.

_______________________________    My Commission Expires Notary Public    ______________________

4.    Provision for water service, as follows:

Water Provider:

The _______________________ Water Company has agreed to serve this subdivision.

By: ______________________________________________________     (Title)

5.    Provision for sanitary sewer service, as follows:

Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District:

The Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District has/has not agreed to serve this subdivision, and has/has not agreed to allow the subdivision to use an alternate sewage disposal method.

By: ________________________________________     District Manager

6.    Town approval signature blocks, as follows:

Town Council Approval:

Approved by the Town Council of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, this ___________ day of ____________, _________ (year).

By: ____________________________________________________    Attest: _____________ Mayor        Town Clerk

Town Department Approvals:

This plat was approved by the Town Engineer and the Director.

By: ____________________________________________________    Date: ______________________ Town Engineer

By: ____________________________________________________    Date: ______________________ Director

7.    Surveyors certification, as follows:

Surveyors Certification:

This is to certify the survey and subdivision premises described and platted hereon were made under my direction, that the plat is correct and accurate, that the monuments shown hereon have been located or established as described and lot corners have been permanently set.

__________________________________ (Surveyor’s name and registration number)    (Stamp) (Surveyor’s address)

8.    Covenants, conditions and restrictions (deed restriction) information, as follows:

Covenants, Codes and Restrictions for (name of subdivision) Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona are recorded in (document recording number), Navajo County Records.

9.    Typical notes, as follows:

Notes: •    benchmark information. •    basis of bearing information.

G.    Final Plat Approval.

1.    Upon approval of the improvement plans and final reports; letters from all involved utility companies approving the utility installation plans and confirming the availability of services; all required certifications from state and county agencies; and receipt of a request for Town Council action from the Town Engineer; the Town Clerk shall place the plat on the agenda of a Council meeting, whereupon the Town Council shall approve or deny the plat.

2.    If the Town Council approves the plat, the Mayor shall sign the plat and the Town Clerk shall attest the Mayor’s signature.

3.    When the certificate of approval by the Town Council has been transcribed on the plat, the Director shall retain the recording copies until the Town Engineer certifies that the subdivision has been staked; the improvement plans and final reports have been approved; a computer closure of the plat has been received; recording fees submitted; that the subdivision improvement construction assurances are in the form and amount to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and the Town Attorney, along with the Engineer’s estimated cost of said improvements has been received; and that any drainage or other restrictive covenants have been signed, notarized and received from the developer.

4.    Approval of the final plat is valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of Town Council approval. If the developer fails to provide the required material or perform the necessary work, as indicated in this section, within this twelve (12) month period, the final plat approval by council shall become null and void. Any further action on said plat, after the expiration of the approval, shall require a complete re-submittal of the plat. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.070 Stage 6 – Recordation of plat.

Upon receipt of the required material, documents, and fees, and performance of the necessary work as listed in Section 16.16.060, the Town shall then cause the final plat to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Navajo County. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.080 Replats.

A.    Any division of a lot in a recorded subdivision, or any change in lot lines in a recorded subdivision, shall be processed in accordance with Section 16.16.060, after a pre-application conference with Town staff as provided in Section 16.16.020.

B.    Any replat involving the dedication of land for a public street or any off-site public improvements shall comply with all procedures set forth in this chapter.

C.    If the abandonment of a street, alley or public utility easement or other recorded easement in a previously recorded subdivision is necessary, either a replat or a certificate of correction, as determined by the Director, shall be processed concurrently with the abandonment and recorded immediately subsequent to the recordation of the abandonment. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.090 Abandonment of recorded subdivision.

A.    Pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 28-7201 et seq., the abandonment of all or part of a recorded subdivision may be initiated by written petition to the Town Council. The petition shall be signed by all owners of real property in said subdivision requesting abandonment of all streets, alleys and easements within said subdivision and giving the legal description and recording information thereof.

B.    Applications for the abandonment of a recorded subdivision are filed with the Director and referred for recommendation to the appropriate Town staff and utility companies. After Town Council approval of the abandonment of any streets, alleys and easements within the subdivision, and after Town Council approval of the abandonment resolution for the recorded subdivision, and after the abandonment resolutions are recorded with the County Recorder’s Office, the subdivision is removed from the official maps. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.100 Condominium developments.

A.    The application requirements, processing and approval regulations contained within this Ordinance shall apply to all condominium developments.

B.    All condominium subdivisions shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, and the location of building shown on the plat and the manner in which the airspace is to be divided in conveying the condominium shall be clearly defined and shall not violate any provision of this Ordinance.

C.    In order for the condominium subdivision application to be considered complete, the applicant shall provide to the Town any plans, specifications, and/or analysis needed to show that the proposed condominium subdivision is in compliance with this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, including but not limited to grading plans, site plans, floor plans, elevations, and landscape plans. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.16.110 Minor land divisions – Lot splits.

A.    The provisions in this section shall apply to any minor land division of improved or unimproved property, including a lot, parcel, tract, or combination thereof, for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, if one of the following conditions exists:

1.    The division of land whose area is two and one-half (2-1/2) acres or less and is being divided into two (2) or three (3) tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of sale or lease.

2.    The area of the property to be divided is greater than two and one-half (2-1/2) acres and requires the creation of a public or private street or easement to provide legal access to one (1) or more additional lots.

3.    Any original lot, as defined by this ordinance, in a residential zone, not a part of a recorded subdivision plat, to be divided into two (2) or three (3) lots.

4.    The division of land into more than two (2) parts, and when the boundaries of such property have been fixed by a recorded plat.

B.    A minor land division does not include the adjustment of a property line, where land taken from one (1) lot is added to an adjacent lot, provided the proposed adjustment does not create a substandard lot. A certificate of correction shall be required if the property line adjustment is for lots within a recorded subdivision plat.

C.    An application for a minor land division shall be submitted to the Director prior to any deeds related to a minor land division with the Navajo County Recorder’s office. The Town may approve minor land divisions administratively.

D.    Except where expressly modified or permitted by staff all minor land divisions shall be in general conformity with the design standards and principles outlined for subdivisions in Chapter 16.24. All lots created by a minor land division shall be designed to conform to existing zoning and the general plan.

E.    If dedicated and/or public improvements are required for minor land divisions, the applicant shall be responsible for the preparation of a complete set of improvement plans, prepared by an Arizona-registered civil engineer, satisfactory to the Town Engineer for the construction of the required improvements. The plans shall be prepared in conjunction with the minor land division map and the requirements outlined in Chapter 16.28.

F.    The minor land division map shall not be recorded, nor shall any improvement work commence, until the Town Engineer has approved the improvement plans.

G.    No minor land division, which creates a substandard or nonconforming lot or structure, shall be approved except by Council action.

H.    If any improvements are required for the minor land division pursuant to regulations contained herein, no building permit for any lot created will be issued until such improvements are completed and the work accepted by the Town Engineer unless the developer provides construction assurance in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney as outlined in Chapter 16.28. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


Chapter 16.20 MOUNTAINSIDE DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

16.20.010    Purpose and intent.

16.20.020    General provisions.

16.20.030    Land disturbance.

16.20.040    Density.

16.20.050    Submittal requirements.


16.20.010 Purpose and intent.

A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish provisions to: (1) regulate the intensity of development; (2) preserve and protect the mountainside environment; (3) provide for the safety and welfare of the Town and its residents.

B.    The intent of this chapter is to enhance the design quality so that the resulting development maintains the essential natural characteristics and context of the mountainside consistent with the goals and policies of the Town’s general plan by regulating the following:

1.    Require building massing to adapt to the natural mountainside topography thereby reducing the scarring effects of roads, drives, building pads, and cut and fill slopes.

2.    Encourage all improvements to be designed and constructed in a manner that minimizes the impact of development from viewpoints throughout the Town and adjacent slopes.

3.    Prevent unnecessary grading or stripping of vegetation, preserve drainage patterns, protect the public from natural hazards of storm water runoff and erosion, and require re-vegetation in order to maintain the natural landscape environment.

4.    Preserve visual unbuilt common area, unique natural features, and wildlife habitats, and retain the integrity and natural states of dominant peaks and ridges.

5.    Provide development and construction practices and methods to ensure greater forest protection in mountainside development areas. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


16.20.020 General provisions.

A.    All lots where the natural terrain causes the average lot slope to be fifteen (15%) percent or greater shall be considered mountainside property and shall be required to adhere to the mountainside regulations of the Zoning Ordinance in addition to the regulations of this chapter. However, a fifteen (15%) percent or greater slope created by a natural wash, on land that would otherwise not be classified as mountainside land, shall be exempt from the mountainside regulations.

B.    No development shall occur which will alter the mountain top ridge lines.

C.    A mountainside wash shall not be diverted, relocated, or moved from its present position to another location; however, a mountainside wash may be bridged by a structure so long as such structure does not impede the flow of the wash. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


16.20.030 Land disturbance.

A.    The total amount of land disturbance for a mountainside subdivision shall be limited to the cumulative sum of the amount of disturbance permitted per each slope category as delineated in Table 1.

B.    Grading within the street right-of-way or tracts of land for private roads is exempt from the disturbance calculations. Any roadway grading beyond the limits of the dedicated rights-of-way or private road tract shall be placed in slope easements and included within the calculations for land disturbance limitations.

C.    Grading for utility lines, including water and sewer lines and lateral lines, electric, gas, telephone and cable services, shall be included within the calculations for land disturbance limitations unless the trenches are placed under a driveway, under paving or in other areas already counted as disturbed, or trenches and related disturbed areas are restored to appear as original ground, color treated and planted to blend with surrounding natural growth.

D.    A legally pre-existing disturbed area may be excluded from disturbed area calculations when the developer has committed to comply with the restoration conditions outlined in Chapter 17.04.

E.    Any street cut greater than eight (8) feet shall not have a length greater than one hundred (100) feet. The maximum height, measured vertically, of any cut used to establish a street shall not exceed thirty (30) feet.

F.    The maximum depth of fill shall not exceed eight (8) feet. All exposed disturbed area fill shall be contained behind retaining walls or covered with a natural rock veneer and treated with an aging agent and landscaped with indigenous plant material. Raw spill slopes are prohibited.

Table 1 – Land/Lot Disturbance Limitation  

	Average Lot Slope	% Allowed Land Disturbance

	Under 15%	100%

	15%	45%

	20%	40%

	25%	35%

	30%	30%

	35%	25%

	40%	20%

	45%	18%

	50%	16%

	55%	15%

	60%	14%

	65%	13%

	70%	12%

	75% or greater	10%

(Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


16.20.040 Density.

A.    The maximum number of lots into which mountainside development area land may be subdivided shall be the sum of the number of lots allowed in each slope category of land as shown by the following Table 2 – Density/Slope Category.

B.    Slope shall be calculated using a minimum of three (3) slope lines per acre. The slope lines shall be perpendicular to the slope and at equal distances across the lot.

C.    Each of the resulting lots shall meet the minimum lot size requirements based upon the average lot slope shown on Table 2.

D.    Building envelopes shall be conceptually indicated on preliminary plats and accurately shown on final plats.

E.    The developer shall demonstrate by sketches, engineering drawings, charts or other means that roads, public or private, and driveway access and placement of residential structure will conform, for each lot, to current mountainside development regulations and without the need for a variance.

F.    All subdivision development and minor land division applications shall comply with the mountainside development requirements in the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Zoning Ordinance and this Subdivision Ordinance.

Table 2 – Density/Slope Category 

	Average Lot Slope	Minimum Lot Size (Sq Ft.)	Minimum Lot Size (Acres)

	15%	12,500	.29

	20%	15,000	.34

	25%	17,500	.40

	30%	20,000	.46

	35%	21,780	.50

	40%	32,670	.75

	45%	43,560	1.0

	50%	57,935	1.33

	55%	73,745	1.67

	60%	87,120	2.0

	65%	108,900	2.5

	70%	130,680	3.0

	75% or greater	174,240	4.0

(Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


16.20.050 Submittal requirements.

A.    In addition to the submittal requirements for the pre-application meeting, outlined in Section 16.16.020, the developer shall submit preliminary calculations on land disturbance and cut/fill methods.

B.    In addition to the submittal requirements outlined in Section 16.16.030, the developer shall submit a preliminary slope analysis and land disturbance calculations. The slope analysis shall be overlaid onto a topographic map and delineate the individual slope bands throughout the proposed subdivision site and extend fifty (50) feet beyond the site boundaries. The area of each slope band shall then be denoted as total acres/slope category. The slope analysis plan shall show original drainage pattern (natural course) and proposed changes.

C.    A forest health and fire protection fuel modification plan will be required per Section 17.96.080. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 16.24 DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

16.24.010    Purpose.

16.24.020    General provisions.

16.24.030    General site design standards.

16.24.040    Unbuilt area requirements.

16.24.050    Landscape requirements.

16.24.060    Access requirements.

16.24.070    Street location and arrangement.

16.24.080    Street design.

16.24.090    Lot planning.

16.24.100    Easement planning.

16.24.110    Street naming.

16.24.120    Drainage.

16.24.130    Sanitary sewage disposal.

16.24.140    Water system.

16.24.150    Street lights.

16.24.160    Public utilities.


16.24.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide the development community with a consistent set of standards to guide the physical development and the visual quality of the community. The design standards in this chapter apply to all development in the Town. The intent is to create functional, attractive developments, to help preserve the natural beauty of the Town by preserving trees and unbuilt area, minimize adverse impacts on the community, and to ensure that future subdivisions will conform to the community’s expectations while at the same time encouraging new development that is dynamic, creative and imaginative. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.020 General provisions.

A.    Every subdivision shall conform to the Pinetop-Lakeside Zoning Ordinance, other ordinances and regulations of the Town, and the Arizona Revised Statutes, as well as implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the Pinetop-Lakeside general plan. In the event two or more requirements conflict, the most restrictive requirement shall apply.

B.    All public improvements shown on the preliminary plat, and any additional improvements that may be required by the Town Council as a condition for approval of the final plat, shall be the responsibility of the developer.

C.    All improvements must be acceptable to the Director prior to the issuance of building permits for lots within the subdivision. Building permits for model homes, sales office and construction site trailers may be allowed, prior to the acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the Town, with a temporary use permit issued by the Town, along with the written approvals of water, electric, sewer and other affected utility providers.

D.    Where the area proposed for development contains all or part of a park, a trail and/or a trailhead, a school, flood control facility, or other public site, as shown on the general plan or as recommended by the Town Council, such site shall either be dedicated to the public or reserved for acquisition by the public or appropriate agency or land trust within a specified period of time as prescribed in A.R.S. § 9-463.01 (D) and (E).

E.    Land which is subject to periodic flooding, land which cannot be properly drained, land which has unstable slopes, or land which is otherwise unsuitable for residential or commercial uses shall not be subdivided; except that the Town Council may approve the subdivision of such land upon receipt of evidence, including subdivision construction assurances, satisfactory to the Town Engineer and Town Attorney, that the construction of specific improvements will render the land suitable. The construction of subdivision improvements shall not commence until after final plat approval and financial assurances have been secured to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, Director, and Town Attorney. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.030 General site design standards.

A.    Regardless of the density of the individual developments, single-family residential subdivisions, and condominium or multi-family subdivisions may be required to provide unbuilt area, provide buffering to adjacent developments, provide landscaping, and provide physical connections to adjacent neighborhoods and to the unbuilt common area network, the Town’s green belt and urban trail system.

B.    Commercial subdivisions shall be subject to all the requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and shall be designed according to the same principles governing the design of residential developments; namely, buildings shall be located according to topography; factors such as drainage, noise, odor, and surrounding land uses considered in sighting buildings; sufficient access shall be provided; adverse impacts buffered; and landscaping provided. In addition, the following standards shall apply to commercial subdivisions:

1.    Commercial lots/developments that back up to an existing or designated residential land use shall provide a landscaped unbuilt area buffer strip adjacent to the common property line to mitigate any adverse effects to the residential neighborhood from a permitted commercial use.

2.    The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Council may impose special requirements with respect to the design, construction and installation of the public utilities, street, curb, gutter and sidewalk.

C.    Those portions of the unbuilt common area network and/or the Pinetop-Lakeside urban trail system adjacent to, or within, the area proposed for development, whether residential or commercial, shall be incorporated by that development. These unbuilt areas or trails shall be the responsibility of the developer and shall be part of the subdivision design. These trails shall be part of a tract unless the unbuilt area has been accepted, by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, into the Town park system for maintenance responsibilities. Dedication of a trail and/or trailhead to a local land trust, established for the purpose of trail development and maintenance, may also be acceptable.

D.    Tracts or parcels of land proposed for subdivision development that are adjacent to U.S. forest land shall provide a buffer area adjacent to the forest land. Trail and/or trailhead locations must be considered and shall be in accordance with the U.S. Forest Service standards and regulations. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.040 Unbuilt area requirements.

A.    General Unbuilt Area Requirements. The purpose of these unbuilt area regulations is to provide for, among other things, recreational opportunities and trails within each subdivision and connectivity to the greater community.

1.    The development, through the planned unit development (PUD) process as described in the Zoning Ordinance, upon the requisite findings, may vary the minimum lot area and minimum lot width from the standards specified in the zoning district(s), in effect over the area considered for subdivision; provided, that such variations are approved by the Town Council prior to or in conjunction with the preliminary plat approval for the subdivision. Every PUD shall provide a minimum of thirty (30%) percent of the net acreage as unbuilt common area.

2.    Unbuilt common area intended to fulfill these unbuilt common area requirements shall be calculated upon the net acres of the subdivision. Required unbuilt common area for all types of subdivisions shall be as prescribed in the following Table 3:

Table 3 – Unbuilt Common Area Requirements 

	TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT	LOTS	ACTIVE AND/OR PRESERVED UCA	REQUIRED PERCENTAGE OF UCA

	Rural Residential (R-Low 1 acre and larger)	1 – 15 lots	0%	0%

	16 or more lots	3.3%	5% 

	Suburban Residential (R1-2)	1 – 40 lots	3.3%	5%

	41 – 80 lots	6.6%	10%

	over 80 lots	10%	15%

	Suburban Residential (R1-4 and MH-4)	1 – 40 lots	6.6%	10%

	41 – 80 lots	10%	15%

	over 80 lots	13.3%	20%

	Urban Residential (R1-6 and MH-4)	1 – 59 lots	10%	15%

	60 or more lots	13.3%	20%

	Multiple-Family Development (R-2 and R-3)	N/A	16.6%	25%

	PUD Development	N/A	20%	30%

	Mountainside Development	Sum of required undisturbed per slope categories for all lots.

B.    Unbuilt Common Area Design Standards.

1.    For the purposes of calculating preserved unbuilt common area the following uses are acceptable:

a.    Existing watercourses or drainage ways shall qualify as preserved unbuilt common area if they are incorporated into the design of the subdivision in their historic (unaltered) location, given a "natural" character (not ditch-like in design), constructed with/of natural materials, and incorporated into the larger unbuilt common area design.

b.    Tracts designated as "nondevelopable," which can include floodplains, lakes, forests, meadows, or undisturbed areas.

2.    For the purposes of calculating active unbuilt common area the following uses are acceptable:

a.    Recreational facilities/amenities: baseball fields, basketball courts, playgrounds, parks, miniparks, etc.

b.    Neighborhood parks and/or those portions of an individual development’s unbuilt common area system should be developed adjacent to the Pinetop-Lakeside urban trail system and the U.S. Forest Service trails whenever possible to provide links to the greater community. Construction of the development’s neighborhood park and/or the active unbuilt common areas shall be the responsibility of the developer and shall be part of the subdivision improvements. The active unbuilt common areas within an individual development shall be part of a tract and shall be maintained by a homeowners’/property owners’ association unless otherwise approved by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

c.    The active unbuilt common areas shall be designed in such a manner as to be easily accessible to all lots. "Accessible" means there is no more than one-sixth (1/6) of a mile or eight hundred eighty (880) feet of pedestrian travel between any one lot and an entrance area allowing wildlife corridors, people, bikes or equestrians to enter into the active unbuilt common area or view the active unbuilt common area.

d.    Retention or detention basins, which are required in accordance with the subdivision drainage report, shall qualify as active unbuilt common area only if they are landscaped, multi-tiered and designed to be used as an active multi-use area. All recreational facilities, play equipment, and amenities within the basin shall be located at least one (1) foot above the fifty (50) year storm level. Terracing, berming and contouring may be required to naturalize and enhance the aesthetics of the basin. Basin slopes shall not exceed a three to one (3:1) slope.

e.    Not more than fifty (50%) percent of the required active unbuilt common area shall be attributed to golf course use or ancillary golf uses, unless open to the public.

f.    If the developer chooses to provide a minimum of ten (10) feet curb separated sidewalk, the "boulevard strip" area, inclusive of that portion of the public right-of-way starting from the back of curb and including any easement specifically granted for landscaping or pedestrian purposes, may be calculated as part of the required active unbuilt common area.

3.    For the purposes of calculating passive unbuilt common area the following uses are acceptable:

a.    All drainage tracts.

b.    Any tract greater than twenty (20) feet wide.

c.    For multi-family uses, tracts between buildings that provide a minimum of twenty (20) feet building separation can be considered passive unbuilt common area.

4.    The following uses shall not be considered as any form of unbuilt common area (i.e., preserved, active, or passive):

a.    For multi-family uses, tracts between buildings that provide less than twenty (20) feet building separation.

b.    All parking islands or tracts completely surrounded by parking. (Note: parking islands are encouraged but do not count as unbuilt common area.)

c.    Any tract less than twenty (20) feet wide not used for drainage or trails. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-331 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


16.24.050 Landscape requirements.

A.    General Landscape Requirements. When different land uses are adjacent to each other, landscaping is one method of minimizing the impact and establishing a transition between them. Plant materials can filter air, curtail erosion, provide shade and maintain privacy.

1.    Healthy significant existing trees located outside of the proposed roadway pavement, within retention/detention basins, adjacent to pre-existing watercourse, or within the proposed subdivision unbuilt common areas shall be preserved to the extent reasonably feasible and in accordance with the approved forest health plan.

2.    Landscape plant materials, in addition to those healthy trees retained on site, should consist of those tree and shrub species listed in the landscape regulations of Tables 2 and 4 in Chapter 17.92.

3.    Replacement of dead street trees and required landscaping shall be by the homeowners’/property owners’ association or the individual property owner and shall be completed within six (6) months from the date that the association or the property owner is notified by the Town.

4.    Plant Specifications.

a.    Trees. Where required by this Ordinance shall be a minimum of two (2) inch caliper in size upon installation.

b.    Shrubs. Where required by this Ordinance shall be a minimum of five (5) gallon in size upon installation.

c.    Organic Groundcovers. Where required by this Ordinance shall be a minimum of one (1) gallon size upon installation. A drip irrigation system shall be installed by approved standards.

d.    Inorganic Groundcovers. Where required by this Ordinance shall be used and consist of cinder or stone (maximum size three-quarter (3/4) inch minus) or turf, river rock, or pea gravel in selected areas may also be considered.

5.    To ensure plant materials are installed and properly maintained, a preliminary landscape plan will be required of all developments as part of the preliminary plat submittal package and a final landscape plan as part of the improvement plan submittal package (see Chapter 16.28 for details). This plan shall show all required plant materials location, include a plant list/palette, and indicate species, size, and spacing specifications. Irrigation plans shall be included with the landscape plans.

B.    Streetscape Requirements. Streets are the true public realm which are experienced by everyone and provide the most visual sense of the overall look and feel of a community. Landscaping is a major element of the streetscape.

1.    Arterial and Collector Streets.

a.    A minimum of one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs and/or organic groundcover per tree shall be planted, in a formal pattern creating a tree lined street, every thirty (30) feet or fraction thereof; exclusive of that portion of the public right-of-way occupied by a driveway area. Street trees should, however, be spaced according to each species’ needs (see Table 3 in Chapter 17.92).

b.    Undisturbed healthy existing trees with a six (6) inch caliper shall count as one (1) planted tree.

2.    Local and Neighborhood Streets.

a.    A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted, every twenty-five (25) feet, or fraction thereof, depending on the recommended spacing according to each species’ needs (see Table 3 in Chapter 17.92). The trees shall be planted in either a landscape easement or within the right-of-way. The location of the tree shall be between the back of curb and the sidewalk or pathway, where a sidewalk or pathway is required, in a formal pattern creating a tree lined street.

b.    Undisturbed healthy existing trees with a four (4) inch caliper shall count as one (1) planted tree.

c.    A homeowners’ or property owners’ association shall maintain all landscape materials and landscaped areas in accordance with the approved landscape plan except in rural residential developments where a homeowners’ association may not be required and the maintenance responsibility for street trees and landscaping shall be with the individual homeowners.

C.    Neighborhood (Subdivision) Entry Monuments.

1.    Landscaping at entryways should be designed to visually enhance all arrival points. Clustering of trees, shrubs, and ground covers should accent focal points and provide variety to streetscape. Street trees shall be consistent with those outlined in Chapter 17.92.

2.    Signage shall be attractively designed and submitted along with the required landscape plans for approval. Signs shall be integrated to complement the streetscape and landscaping frontages using a decorative monument base. Monument signs shall not exceed those outlined in Chapter 17.108.

3.    Textured entryway drives (such as decorative stone, stamped concrete or brick) may be incorporated into access points from any collector or arterial frontages. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.060 Access requirements.

A.    Rural residential developments should front onto and take access from streets classified as collector streets as set forth in the circulation element of the general plan.

B.    Suburban and urban type developments should be designed to provide lots that back or side onto streets classified as collector or arterial streets as set forth in the circulation element of the general plan.

C.    Every subdivision shall provide two (2) separate and distinct access points, both of which shall provide fully-improved and accepted access from public, or approved private streets, developed to Town of Pinetop-Lakeside street standards. Additionally, every subdivision shall provide a multi-use trail/pathway from an access point other than those used to address the vehicular access requirements; where possible.

D.    Every lot shall have frontage onto a fully improved, publicly dedicated and accepted right-of-way that meets all Town of Pinetop-Lakeside street standards. Private streets that meet all Town of Pinetop-Lakeside street standards may provide frontage to lots if the development is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town Council for private streets. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.070 Street location and arrangement.

A.    The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and orderly movement of traffic and pedestrians; meet the needs of present and future population served; have a simple and logical pattern; respect natural features and topography; and present an attractive streetscape.

B.    In residential subdivisions, the road system shall be designed to serve the needs of the greater neighborhood. Through vehicular traffic should be discouraged with traffic calming methods, as defined by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE).

C.    Street layout shall provide for the continuation of such streets as the general plan or Director may designate.

D.    Certain proposed streets, as designated by the Town, shall be extended to the subdivision boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unsubdivided lands.

E.    Local streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic and the pedestrian needs shall be met.

F.    Where a proposed subdivision of suburban and urban density abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector right-of-way, a nonbuildable landscaped tract equaling at least the depth of the minimum street side-yard setback of the base zoning district, or fifteen (15) feet, whichever is greater, should be platted with nonvehicular access easements along the arterial or collector right-of-way. The exception to this would be for rural residential developments where frontage onto collector roadways may be desirable and/or encouraged.

G.    Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to produce desirable lots of maximum utility, streets of reasonable gradient, and the facilitation of adequate drainage.

H.    Where private streets are approved, such streets shall be constructed to Town public street specifications and shall be placed into specific street tracts of land. Statements shall be contained on the plat and in both the deed restrictions and the homeowners’ association by-laws that those streets are declared private subject to an easement authorizing use by emergency and public service vehicles and utilities, and remain the permanent responsibility of the homeowners’ association. If at any time the streets are dedicated to, and accepted by, the Town, the streets must first be developed to the current standards specified by the Town at the time of dedication.

I.    Alleys may be required in commercial subdivisions as approved by the Town Council. Where needed, they shall have a twenty (24) four foot minimum width. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.080 Street design.

A.    Design of Streets. The design of streets shall conform to standards established by this Ordinance. See Table 4, Table 5, and Table 6 for specifics.

B.    Private Street. Private streets shall conform to above stated design standards unless otherwise approved by the Town Council. Private streets shall be placed within their own parcel or tract of land. Where site conditions necessitate unique design solutions, modifications may be approved by the Town Council.

C.    Cul-De-Sac Streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall be constructed with a minimum unobstructed turn-around area of fifty (50) feet which shall be free from parked vehicles. The Town Engineer may recommend an equally convenient form of turning and backing areas where extreme conditions justify. The maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be six hundred (600) feet or twenty (20) homes, as measured from the intersection of right-of-way lines to the extreme depth of the turning circle along the street centerline. An exception may be made where topography justifies but shall not be made merely because the tract has restrictive boundary dimensions, wherein provision should be made for extension of street pattern to the adjoining unplatted parcel and a temporary turnaround installed.

D.    Dead-End Streets. Dead-end streets will not be approved except in locations recommended by the Director as necessary to future development of adjacent lands, with an unobstructed temporary fifty (50) foot turn-around.

E.    Private Access and Driveways. Access from private property to any dedicated street shall be constructed in accordance with permits issued by the Town. Width of driveway at the property line shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and a maximum of forty (40) feet. The width will depend on the access to be served, i.e., residential or commercial. All residential access treatment within the right-of-way will be constructed with five (5) inches of concrete or two (2) inches of asphalt over five (5) inches of aggregate base.

F.    Street Intersections.

1.    Streets intersecting a major street shall do so at a ninety (90) degree angle; intersection of local streets shall not vary from ninety (90) degrees by more than fifteen (15) degrees. Exceptions to these requirements will be considered by the Town Engineer based on terrain and other conditions.

2.    Street jogs with centerline offsets less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited except when approved by the Town Engineer. Under special circumstances where local streets intersect collector or arterial streets, the Town Engineer may require minimum centerline offsets of four hundred (400) feet.

3.    Local streets intersecting a collector street or arterial street shall have a tangent section of centerline at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the major street, except that no such tangent is required when local street curve has a centerline radius greater than four hundred (400) feet with the center located on the major street right-of-way line. Where topographic conditions make necessary other treatment to secure the best overall design, these standards may be varied by the Town Council upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer.

4.    Street intersections with more than four legs and y-type intersections where legs meet at acute angles shall be prohibited.

5.    At local intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by circular arc, having a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet. A twenty-five (25) foot by twenty-five (25) foot triangle shall be provided at each corner of the intersection of two (2) major streets. Under special conditions the Town Engineer may recommend other dimensions for the above.

G.    Street Grades. The minimum street grade shall not be less than two-tenths (2/10) of one (1%) percent. The maximum street grade shall not exceed a six (6%) percent grade. Street grades between six (6%) percent and ten (10%) percent may be approved only for such distances as topographical conditions make lesser grades impractical. A grade exceeding ten (10%) percent may be approved only when conclusive evidence shows a lesser grade is impractical.

H.    Surface Treatment. The traveled way of all streets shall be surfaced with asphalt concrete. The placing of asphalt concrete shall be accomplished under generally accepted construction techniques provided in Section 321 of the MAG Standard.

I.    Structural Section. The thickness of base and surface treatment for all streets shall be based on soil analysis and pavement thickness design provided by the developer. In no case will base be less than eight (8) inches and the surface treatment be less than three (3) inches (compacted thickness).

J.    Aggregate Base Course. All developments will be required to submit a soils report and pavement recommendation prepared by an Arizona-registered geotechnical engineer. The pavement report will recommend at least two alternative structural sections for each street classification. Additional asphalt may be substituted for untreated base at the ratio of one to three (1:3). The top four (4) inches must be ABC, the balance may be ABC or select material.

Table 4 – Minimum Street Structural Section 

	Street Classifications	Untreated Base (Minimum)	Asphalt Base Course	Asphalt Surface Course

	Arterial Roadway (Hwy 260)	10"	3" – A 1 1/2 	2" – C 3/4

	Collector Roadway	7"	3" – A 1 1/2	2" – C 3/4

	Local Street

Rural Residential	8"	2" – C 3/4	2" – D 1/2

	Local Street Suburban/Urban	8"	2" – C 3/4	2" – D 1/2

	Local Street Commercial	10"	2" – C 3/4	2" – D 1/2

  

Table 5 – Minimum Road Design Standards  

	Street Type/Category	Arterial	Collector	Local Rural	Local Suburban/Urban	Local Commercial

	Design Speed	55	35	30	30	30

	Min. Radius of Horizontal Curves w/o Superelevations (ft)	1,800	500	200	200	200

	Min. Length of Tangent between Reverse Curves (ft)	300	100	100	100	100

	Min. Length of Tangent between Curves – Same Direction (ft)	550	100	100	100	100

	Min. Vertical Curve (ft)	500	100	100	100	100

	Passing Sight Distance (ft) (per ASHTO)	1,950	 	 	 	 

	Right Angle Intersection Sight Distance (ft) (per ASHTO)	860	 	 	 	 

	Min. Tangent Length Approaching Intersections (ft)	300	200	150	150	150

  

Table 6 Street Cross Section Design 

	Roadway Classification	Zoning District	R/W Width	Pavement Width1	Curb Type	# Drive Lanes2	Sidewalk or Pathway and Location	On-Street Parking	Landscape Strip	Esmt Required

	Arterial Street (Hwy 260)	----	15-250	64	Vertical	2 + Turn	S/W @ b.o.c. each side	No	20	None

	Collector Street	----	60-80	40	Vertical	1 + Turn	S/W @ 10' b.o.c. each side	No	10	8' PUE and S/W esmt.

	Local Street Rural Res.	R1/Low	50	24	Ribbon	1	Path @7' b.o.c. 1-side	No	13	None

	Local Street Suburban Res.	R1-2	50	28	Ribbon	1	Path @ 5' b.o.c. 1-side	1-side	11	None

	Local Street Suburban Res.	R1-4, MH-4	50	24	Roll	1	S/W @b.o.c.7 1-side	No	13 and 8	8' PUE both sides

	Local Street Suburban Res.	R1-4, MH-4	50	28	Roll	1	S/W @b.o.c.7 1-side	1-side	11 and 6	8' PUE both sides

	Local Street Suburban Res.	R1-4, MH-4	60	36	Roll	1	S/W @b.o.c.7 1-side	2-sides	12 and 7	8' PUE both sides

	Local Street Urban Res.	R1-6, MH-6	60	36	Vertical	1	S/W @b.o.c.7 2-side	2-sides	7 and 7	8' PUE both sides

	Local Street Commercial	----	60	40	Vertical	1 + turn	S/W @b.o.c.7 2-side	2-sides	5 and 5	8' PUE both sides

1.    Pavement width shall be measured from back of curb to back of curb (b.o.c).

2.    Number of drive lanes is for each direction. All drive lanes shall be twelve (12) feet in width.

3.    Sewer utilities shall be located under the pavement or within a sewer easement.

4.    Dry utilities shall be located within the PUE.

5.    Sidewalks (S/W) shall be five (5) feet in width, constructed of portland cement concrete.

6.    Pathways shall be six (6) feet in width.

7.    The Town strongly encourages minimum ten (10) feet curb separated sidewalks (see Section 16.24.040(B)(2)(f)) for unbuilt common area incentive.

8.    As lot widths are reduced to less than fifty (50) feet and the overall project density increases to more than three point five (3.5) dwelling units per acre and the total number of lots or dwelling units exceeds forty (40) then the rights-of-way shall be increased to thirty-six (36) feet. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.090 Lot planning.

A.    Single-family residential lots shall not have a width-to-depth ratio greater than one to three (1:3).

B.    All proposed lots must be developable without the need of a variance, waiver or further discretionary approvals from the Town. Prior to final plat approval the Town may require additional documentation, including but not limited to engineered concept plans, for lots with questionable developability.

C.    Corner lots shall generally be designed larger to accommodate the increased setback requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.

D.    Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines, except where other treatment may be justified in the opinion of the Director.

E.    Residential lots extending through the block and having frontage on two parallel streets which are both local streets or one of which is a local street and the other is a collector street shall not be permitted; except when there are Commercial Zoning Districts on the opposite side of the street and except where justified in the opinion of the Director. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.100 Easement planning.

A.    Easements will be required for all public and/or private utilities outside of the street right-of-way and shall be placed along lot lines as required by the utility companies. For information on the requirements contact the specific utility companies serving the development.

B.    Where a stream, wash or important surface drainage course abuts or crosses a development, dedication of a drainage easement of a width sufficient to permit widening, deepening, relocating, or protecting and maintaining said water course shall be required. Drainage easement width shall be approved by the Town Engineer based upon the hydrological analysis of a one hundred (100) year frequency storm.

C.    All retention areas shall be in tracts with drainage easements. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.110 Street naming.

A.    Street names shall comply with the overall Town of Pinetop-Lakeside street naming system.

B.    Street names should be consistent with the natural alignment and extension of existing named streets.

C.    The developer shall propose the street names at the preliminary plat submittal stage and the names shall be recommended by the Commission and approved by Council.

D.    Reflectorized street name signs using current "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) letter size and numbers shall be placed at all street intersections and be in place by the time the street pavement is ready for use. Specifications for design, construction, location, and installation shall conform to MUTCD standards. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.120 Drainage.

A.    Proper and adequate provision shall be made for disposal of storm water; this shall apply equally to grading of private properties and to public streets. Existing major water courses shall be maintained as drainage ways. Drainage shall meet the requirements of the drainage policy of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. Streets shall not be used for drainage purposes.

B.    Post-development flows cannot exceed pre-development flows in peak runoff, volume, or velocity and may not concentrate sheet flows without downstream off-site control.

C.    Drywells are discouraged. If drywells are necessary they shall be spaced as far apart as possible and only fifty (50%) percent of the percolation capacity can be used in calculating the required number of drywells to be utilized. In addition a maintenance plan shall be prepared that provides for routine inspection and maintenance to the approval of the Town Engineer. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.130 Sanitary sewage disposal.

A.    All subdivisions within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside shall install sewer collection lines, and all dwelling units shall be required to connect to the sanitary sewer collection system. If there is no sewer main available then the developer must apply to the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District for sewer extension information. If sewer service is not available and the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District issues a written waiver approving the use of an alternative sewage disposal system, an alternative sewage disposal system may be approved by the Town.

B.    All subdivisions not in the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District service area shall submit a sewer service plan acceptable to the Navajo County Health Department, Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ), and the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District for possible annexation into the district’s service area.

C.    Septic tanks shall be approved by the Navajo County Health Department.

D.    Sewer lines shall be reviewed by the Town Engineer and approved by the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District, ADEQ, and by the Navajo County Health Department.

E.    Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed to the right-of-way line or the public utility easement whichever is greater.

F.    Sanitary sewer lines shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.

G.    If a separate sanitary sewer easement is needed it shall be fifteen (15) feet in width.

H.    The developer will need to refer to the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District "Design Criteria and Specifications" for more specific design regulations. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.140 Water system.

A.    Each lot or building unit shall be supplied with potable water in sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection purposes. Design and construction of any and all facilities relating to the supply, storage, transmission, treatment and distribution of potable water within or outside of any subdivision must meet with the written approval of the water provider and Pinetop Fire District or Lakeside Fire District.

B.    All design and construction must meet all applicable Town and ADEQ specifications and requirements in force at the time of plan renewal and approval. If it is necessary for the Town to apply specifications or requirements not in force at the time of plan review, but necessary to achieve the orderly and proper development of any portion of the water system, the Town reserves the right to enforce such specifications and requirements to insure and protect the public welfare.

C.    The developer of a subdivision may be required by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside and/or the water provider to supply to the water system an amount of new water supply and/or storage facilities to offset the demand on the existing or planned water system imposed by owners of property or building units within the subdivision.

D.    The Town assumes no liability for providing water to any proposed or actual subdivision. All water supplies within the Town are provided by water companies or districts.

E.    Water specifications and requirements relating to fire protection are established by the currently adopted Fire Code of the State of Arizona. At a minimum fire protection must be provided in accordance with the 2000 Uniform Fire Code, or updated versions of said code, as adopted by the State of Arizona.

F.    Line Sizing. Minimum size lines for water lines shall be six (6) inches. Minimum eight (8) inch lines shall be required on dead-end hydrant lines longer than three hundred (300) feet.

G.    Valves. There shall be a minimum of three (3) valves at crosses, two (2) valves at tees and one (1) valve at each fire hydrant tee. Shutdown valving shall be arranged such that no more then four (4) valves are required to make a shutdown in any section of waterline. No more than thirty (30) homes or two (2) fire hydrants shall be out of service during a water line shutdown.

H.    Services.

1.    Minimum service tap, service pipe and meter shall be three-quarter (3/4) inches and shall serve only one property. A minimum one (1) inch service tap, pipe and meter, servicing only one (1) property, shall be required on all long cul-de-sac runs, fire sprinkled residences and for all rural and suburban development (R-Low and R1-2 Zoning Districts respectively) and for commercial developments.

2.    Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed to the right-of-way line or the public utility easement, whichever is greater.

I.    Fire Hydrants. Maximum spacing between fire hydrants shall be five hundred (500) feet in single-family residential areas and two hundred (200) feet in all other areas.

J.    Water distribution lines shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.

K.    The above regulations shall be the minimum standards regardless of the individual water provider’s standards. The developer will need to refer to the specific design criteria and specifications established by the individual water provider; the more restrictive regulation shall apply. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.150 Street lights.

A.    Where required the fixture type shall be fully shielded and shall meet the requirements of Section 17.104.100, Outdoor light control.

B.    Where required the installation height shall be limited to American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards or the specific criteria established by the Town; whichever is more restrictive.

C.    Street lights shall be installed only at the entrances to a subdivision or neighborhood and at those street light locations required for safety.

D.    Street lights in other than the entrance locations (within and throughout a subdivision) are strongly discouraged. If the developer, property owners, or homeowners’ association desire additional street lights the cost for installation, maintenance, and monthly operational/utility bills for the additional street lights shall be the sole responsibility of the developer, property owners and/or homeowners’/property owners’ association. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.24.160 Public utilities.

A.    All existing and new utility and telephone lines, electric utility distribution feeders, cable television lines, and all other communication and utility lines adjacent to or within new residential or commercial subdivisions or other areas to be developed within the Town shall be installed underground at the time of development of the property as part of the required off-site and on-site improvements. The developer of the property shall be responsible for the costs of the underground construction in accordance with the underground policy of the serving utility.

B.    When as a result of the subdivision development, it is necessary to relocate, renew or expand existing facilities within or adjacent to the platted area, the developer shall make the necessary arrangements with the serving utility for these installations to be placed underground. The developer shall arrange with the serving utility, and be responsible for, the cost of underground service lines to approved street light locations.

C.    Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed to the right-of-way line or the public utility easement, whichever is greater.

D.    Underground utilities shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.

E.    The above regulations shall be the minimum standards regardless of the utility company’s standards. The developer will need to refer to the specific design criteria and specifications established by the utility companies; the more restrictive regulation shall apply. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


Chapter 16.28 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

16.28.010    Purpose.

16.28.020    General.

16.28.030    Submittal requirements.

16.28.040    Improvement plan review process.

16.28.050    Assurances by developer.

16.28.060    Construction and inspection.

16.28.070    Subdivision improvement acceptance.


16.28.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to further describe Stage 5 final plat and improvement plan approval of the subdivision process, the specific responsibilities of the developer in the design, construction and financing of improvements and to establish procedures for review and approval of these improvements. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.28.020 General.

A.    Responsibility. The developer shall be responsible for paying all improvement plan and report review fees at the time of plan/report submittal. The developer shall be responsible for paying all costs for the installation of the improvements as a stipulation of zoning and/or preliminary plat which shall include, at least but not limited to, the following improvements:

1.    Sanitary sewer systems.

2.    Water supply systems.

3.    Grading/drainage/storm drains.

4.    Streets (public and private) and access ways.

5.    Alleys (where applicable and approved).

6.    Utilities (electric, telephone, cable television, gas).

7.    Traffic signals, street lights (where applicable and approved).

8.    Monuments and signage.

9.    Landscaping and streetscape.

10.    Sidewalks, multi-use pathways and trails.

B.    Streets and Public Easements. All streets and public easements within the boundary lines of the subdivision shall be improved to the minimum cross-sections, grades, and standards outlined in this Ordinance. If there are extenuating circumstances the Town may approve modifications. Where there are existing Town streets adjacent to the subdivision, subdivision streets shall be improved to the intercepting paving line of such existing streets, or to a matching line determined by the Town Engineer; transition paving, including turn lanes, shall be installed as required by the Town Engineer. When a subdivision includes a portion of a major street or a collector street, the remainder of which outside of the subdivision is not paved, an asphalt two (2) lane street at least twenty-four (24) feet wide may be constructed in the interim as approved by the Town Engineer. Financial assurances, in the amount necessary for completion of the ultimate improvements of the major street or a collector street, shall be filed with and retained by the Town. In the case where there is an unimproved street or roadway easement between the subdivision and the improved Town street system, an interim paved two (2) lane street at least twenty-four (24) feet wide shall be constructed to a standard approved by the Town Engineer to connect the subdivision to the improved street system. Any interim roadway shall have sufficient culverts and drainage facilities to allow a fifty (50) year frequency storm to pass under the road section and a one hundred (100) year frequency storm to pass over the road section at a depth not to exceed six (6) inches of water. Dead-end streets extending two hundred (200) feet or more and dead-end interim roads shall be graded and have an asphalt surface with a temporary unobstructed minimum fifty (50) foot radius turning circle.

C.    Utilities. The developer shall be responsible to make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utility companies involved for the installation of the underground facilities, including payment of all deposits, fees and miscellaneous expenses. Letters from each of the serving utility companies indicating that said arrangements have been made shall be submitted to the Community Development Department at the time the improvement plans and final plat are submitted. All utility improvement plans shall be submitted to/through the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside as part of the improvement plan submittal. The Town will log in the submitted plans and forward them to the appropriate utility companies for review.

D.    Monuments. Permanent survey monuments shall be installed along the easement and right-of-way lines, including drainage easements, and in accordance with current Town standards at all corners, angle points, and points of curve and in the center at all street intersections. After all improvements have been installed, an Arizona-registered land surveyor shall check the locations of the monuments and certify their accuracy.

1.    Iron pins shall be set at all lot corners, angle points and points of curve for each lot within the subdivision within one (1) year of final plat approval and before the issuance of the first building permit. Permanent brass cap in concrete monuments shall be set for all subdivision points that are located in the public rights-of-way. These are to be placed in accordance with the applicable MAG standard. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.28.030 Submittal requirements.

A.    General.

1.    It shall be the responsibility of the developer to have an Arizona-registered professional engineer, in the correct discipline, prepare a complete set of engineering plans and reports for construction of all required improvements and an Arizona-registered landscape architect prepare a complete set of landscape plans. All plans and reports submitted to the Town shall be stamped/sealed by the professional who prepared them. Such plans shall be based on the approved preliminary plat and be prepared in conjunction with the final plat and in accordance with all applicable Town, county, or state standards.

2.    All improvement plans for the subdivision, including the private/public utility plans, shall be submitted to/through the Town. All improvement plans submitted to the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside for approval must be submitted on twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch sheets of blue or black line paper prints. The scales chosen for plans shall be such that existing features, proposed construction and any other information to be provided will be depicted in a clear, uncluttered, understandable manner. Water system, sewer system and street paving improvements should be drawn at a horizontal scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet and a vertical scale of one (1) inch equals four (4) feet, unless the Town Engineer, in conjunction with the water provider and Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District, approves the use of another scale. Plans for other purposes may require the use of a larger or smaller scale.

3.    Water and sewer improvement plans may be submitted on the same set of plans, but shall also show on the paving plans. A signature block for Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) shall be on the front page of the water and sewer improvement plans as well as the storm water pollution prevention plans (SWPPP).

4.    Separate grading and drainage plans shall be submitted.

B.    Improvement Plan Submittal Requirements.

1.    Initial Submittal with Final Plat. The following sets of plans and reports along with the required fees shall be submitted to the Community Development Department:

•    Improvement plan review fees (paid to Town and utility companies).

•    Final plat review fee (paid to Town).

•    Ten (10) copies of the final plat.

•    Ten (10) sets of water and sewer improvement plans.

•    Ten (10) sets of paving, grading, and drainage improvement plans.

•    Four (4) sets of landscape improvement plans.

•    Ten (10) sets of all dry utility improvement plans.

•    Three (3) copies of the final drainage report.

•    Three (3) copies of the final geotechnical report.

•    Three (3) copies of the final traffic report.

•    Three (3) copies of the boundary closure.

•    Three (3) copies of the subdivision deed restrictions or covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), if any.

2.    The final plat should be in final form showing all information including dedication statement, signature blocks, and other notations as necessary.

3.    Subsequent submittals of improvement plans and reports will require that the redline check prints be submitted in addition to the same number of sets as in the initial submittal requirements.

4.    An approval signature block shall be included on the front page of all improvement plans.

5.    Final Submittal. The following information, documents and material shall be submitted to the Community Development Department:

•    Two (2) copies of engineers cost estimate.

•    Improvement plan mylar cover sheet.

•    Three (3) copies of the final plat (paper prints).

•    Eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch photo mechanical transfer (PMT) of the final plat.

•    Eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch PMT of the final landscape plan.

•    ALTA title report (current to the date of final plat recordation).

•    Assurance of construction (refer to Section 16.28.050 for specifics).

•    Utility companies approval and clearance letter.

6.    Town Recordation Submittal. The following fees, documents and plans shall be submitted to the Community Development Department after the Town Engineer has approved the improvements plans and the Town Council has approved the final plat:

•    Recording fees (for final plat and CC&Rs).

•    One (1) original, signed, covenants, conditions and restrictions.

•    One (1) photo mylar, (not ammonia process) for county records.

•    One (1) mylar sepia, not less than three (3) mil, for Town records.

•    One (1) mylar sepia, not less than three (3) mil, for Project Engineers’ Records.

•    Three (3) copies approved improvement plans (paper prints).

C.    Landscape Plan Submittal Requirements:

1.    Preliminary Landscape Plan. A preliminary landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the Stage 2 preliminary plat application and shall at a minimum contain the following:

a.    Identify the location of all existing and proposed species and inorganic ground covers, sidewalks, paths, curbing, fencing, walls, benches, ramadas, fountains, and waterways. For fencing and walls, provide a preliminary graphic representation as to what is intended relative to the fencing and wall themes.

b.    Show right-of-way landscaping. Right-of-way landscaping is required. The entire area of the right-of-way, between street property line and back of curb (b.o.c.) and/or pavement except for approved driveways, sidewalks and pathways, shall be landscaped.

c.    Include a plant palette, in list form, on the landscape plans that call out all proposed plant species and inorganic ground covers.

d.    Identify existing and proposed lots, streets, fences, walls, wells, or other features as may be applicable.

e.    Identify the line of sight requirements of the Town, county and state.

f.    Identify the name of the developer, project engineer, and landscape architect on the plan.

2.    Final Landscape Plan. A final landscape plan shall be prepared and shall be submitted as part of the final plat and improvement plan submittal and shall at a minimum contain the following:

a.    Final irrigation plan.

b.    Identify the location of all retained and proposed species and inorganic ground covers, sidewalks, paths, curbing, fencing, walls, benches, ramadas, fountains, and waterways. For fencing and walls, provide a final graphic representation as to what is intended relative to the fencing and wall themes.

c.    Show right-of-way landscaping. Right-of-way landscaping is required. The entire area of the right-of-way, between street property line and back of curb (b.o.c.) and/or pavement except for approved driveways, sidewalk and pathways, shall be landscaped.

d.    Include the approved preliminary landscape plan plant palette, in list form, on the landscape plans that call out all proposed plant species and inorganic ground covers.

e.    Identify the specific sizes of all proposed plant and inorganic ground covers. This information shall be included within the plant palette list on the landscape plan.

f.    Identify the exact quantities for each species of tree, shrub and ground cover per each size and species. This information shall be included within the plant palette list on the landscape plan.

g.    Identify the material type, width and depth of the surfacing of all proposed paths, trails and walks.

h.    Identify the type and location of proposed perimeter subdivision walls/fencing and entry monumentation. Indicate exact material types for all fencing and walls and entry monumentation proposed. A separate twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch wall/fence sheet may be required to be submitted as part of the improvement plan submittal.

i.    Identify existing lots, streets, fences, walls, wells, or other features as may be applicable.

j.    Identify the line of sight requirements of the Town, County and State.

k.    Identify the name of the developer, project engineer, and landscape architect on the plan.

D.    Stewardship Plan.

1.    Fuel Modification Plan. A preliminary fuel modification plan, prepared or certified by a professional forester, a certified arborist, or another qualified individual or organization, shall be submitted as part of the Stage 2 preliminary plat application and shall at a minimum contain the following information.

a.    Identification of subdivision boundaries and location of adjacent Wildland-urban interface or U.S. Forest Service lands, if applicable, on an aerial photo at a scale such that existing vegetative and natural features and any other information to be provided (lot and roadway layout) will be depicted in a clear, uncluttered, understandable manner.

b.    Provide a site specific analysis and identify the areas of high, medium and low risk and the recommended methods and timetables for controlling, changing, or modifying fuels within the subdivision boundaries in order to meet the minimum defensible space requirements necessary to promote forest health and to help prevent the spread of fire to adjacent property.

c.    The plan shall identify those trees that need to be removed or thinned, plants and other non-fire-resistant, insect infested, or disease ridden vegetation, debris on the land, slash, snags, vegetation that may grow into overhead electrical lines, ladder fuels and dead trees.

d.    Identify the type of fuel reduction treatment to be applied.

e.    Provide information on the number of trees per acre pre-development and post-development.

f.    Provide information on the plan for the ongoing and continuous maintenance of the proposed fuel-reduction and disease and insect infestation control measures.

2.    The fuel modification plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Forester.

E.    Report Submittal Requirements.

1.    Preliminary Drainage Report. A preliminary drainage report shall be submitted as part of the Stage 2 preliminary plat application and shall at a minimum contain the following information:

a.    Delineation of the boundaries of on-site and off-site drainage areas. Information about adjacent property, such as significant differences in elevation, walls, drainage structures, buildings with their floor elevations, etc., shall be provided.

b.    Identify the drainage pattern for all existing and proposed streets and building sites. Label by number the different critical points and where inlets/outlets are to be located.

c.    Justify the runoff factor (C-factor) used in the computations.

d.    If storm runoff flows onto the property to be developed from the adjacent properties, this must be described in detail. Drainage area, calculated peak flows, velocity and other pertinent runoff data must be presented. If the flow is in a defined channel, the channel must be improved. Special consideration for joint use of open channels as a recreational amenity is to be given on each individual project. The runoff from areas outside the development may be realigned through the new development.

e.    Indicate the detention volume required and provided. Indicate the method for draining basins in thirty-six (36) hours, and who is responsible for maintenance.

f.    Provide location of all drainage easements.

2.    Final Drainage Report. Three (3) copies of a final drainage report shall be submitted as a part of the improvement plan submittal for all developments. The report shall be a complete report and not an addendum to the preliminary drainage report. The format shall be as previously described and include the following additional information.

a.    Place inlets wherever the flow exceeds the street capacity. The inlets are to be analyzed separately and catch basin computations shall be submitted.

b.    Size the storm drains and culverts and submit design computations.

c.    Final detention basins calculations including 36-hour percolation, or evaporation rates.

d.    Final channel flow calculations taking into account the impacts of landscaping and other joint use impacts on the cross-section and Mannings coefficients.

e.    Adjusted calculations for pre- and post-development conditions.

3.    Geotechnical Report. Three (3) copies of a geotechnical report shall be submitted as part of the Stage 2 preliminary plat application and shall at a minimum contain the following information:

a.    Identifies any special geotechnical hazards, and develops recommendations regarding the hazards, grading, foundations and pavement.

b.    The geotechnical hazards portion shall consider at a minimum expansive soils, soil creep, landsliding, and groundwater.

c.    The grading and foundations portion of the report shall include data regarding the distribution and engineering characteristics of the various soil materials; data about groundwater levels; an opinion regarding the geotechnical feasibility of the development as planned; recommendations about any needed mitigation measures for geotechnical hazards, grading criteria and foundation design criteria and any other pertinent information.

d.    The pavement design portion shall include data regarding the distribution of various subgrade materials and, for each, design tests such as R-value. The design procedure and all assumptions used to determine the pavement section shall be presented. The selected design procedure per the traffic and geotechnical report shall not result in a lesser pavement section than the minimum allowed in Chapter 16.24.

4.    Preliminary Traffic Impact Analysis. All traffic analysis information shall be prepared by a registered professional traffic engineer or civil engineer with adequate experience in transportation engineering. A preliminary traffic analysis shall be submitted as part of the Stage 2 preliminary plat application and shall at a minimum contain the following information:

a.    A project trip generation report that provides an analysis of the number of trips generated by the development during a weekday in a one (1) hour a.m. and p.m. peak hour and daily traffic. Trip generation shall be developed utilizing the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual.

b.    An analysis of the nonvehicular modes of transportation (e.g. sidewalks, multi-use pathways and trails) proposed for the development and their impact on the trips generated by the development.

5.    Final Traffic Report. If the number of peak hour trips generated by the development is greater than one hundred (100) trips, three (3) copies of a final traffic impact analysis shall be provided. The Town Engineer may require a final traffic analysis to be provided for projects with a peak hour trip generation of less than one hundred (100) trips because of safe access concerns. The final traffic impact analysis shall include the following information:

a.    Introduction which outlines the land use, site and study boundaries, and existing and proposed site uses.

b.    Project trip generation estimates (a.m., p.m., and ADT).

c.    Project access and internal circulation evaluation.

d.    Trip distribution.

e.    Trip assignment.

f.    Existing and projected traffic volumes.

g.    Capacity analysis of all impacted public/private street intersections and access points.

h.    Level of service with a minimum service of Level C.

i.    Evaluation of existing and existing-plus project conditions, as well as cumulative and cumulative-plus project conditions.

j.    Project impacts and mitigation measures (recommendations to include the proposed recommended improvements, volume/capacity analysis at critical points, traffic volume proportions for funding of improvements).

k.    Other special requirements, as determined by the Town Engineer.

6.    Water Supply Report. Three (3) copies of a water supply report shall be submitted along with the improvement plan submittal. This report shall include the following information:

a.    Additional water improvements needed for new source, storage, transmission and distribution.

b.    Location and size of the closest existing water line. Static residual pressure and location taken.

c.    The location of all existing fire hydrants within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed subdivision and the number and location of all proposed fire hydrants.

d.    Line size and flow calculations for each use classification.

7.    All of these reports shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer or consultant experts designated by the Town Engineer. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.28.040 Improvement plan review process.

A.    Copies of all plans shall be submitted to the Town and shall be distributed by the Town to the appropriate agencies and private/public utility companies. All fees for review of the plan(s), reports, and other submittals shall be paid by the developer. Design and/or review fees shall be paid to the respective utility companies per utility company policies.

B.    The Town staff will review the submittal for accuracy, completeness, compliance with stipulations made by the Commission or Council, requirements of the Development Review Committee, and conformance with all Town Codes.

C.    Navopache Electric Cooperative (NEC) will commence the subdivision design work once the Town transmits one (1) set of the improvement plans to them and the developer has paid the design fee.

D.    Marked up prints (redlines), including NEC’s preliminary design plan, will be returned to the developer’s engineer and landscape architect of record in an expeditious manner for corrections, additions, revisions and in the case of the NEC plan for conflict checks.

E.    Subsequent submittals of the improvement plans and reports shall also include the latest redline set of plans/comments. It shall be the developer’s responsibility to resubmit, through the Town, the NEC preliminary design plan after it has been checked by the developer’s engineer for potential conflicts.

F.    Within ninety (90) days from the date of Town Council approval, and prior to the recording of the final plat and subdivision deed restrictions or CC&Rs, if any, the following items must be submitted:

1.    A project approval letter, signed by the Town Engineer, stating that all of the subdivision improvement plans and reports have all been approved by the Town.

2.    A project approval letter, signed by the Director, stating that any and all required agreements between the Town and developer have been executed.

3.    A letter of agreement from the serving utilities stating the availability of utilities and the approval of improvement plans for the subdivision.

4.    The required financial assurance for construction.

G.    If the engineering plans have not been approved within ninety (90) days, solely due to reasons on the part of the developer, the Council may require the final plat be resubmitted. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.28.050 Assurances by developer.

A.    Agreement by Developer.

1.    The subdivision improvements in an approved development may be constructed in practical increments in accordance with a Council approved phasing plan subject to provisions for satisfactory drainage, traffic, circulation, utilities, landscaping and other elements of the total development plan.

2.    The improvements shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Town Engineer, state agencies and utility companies and shall be completed within an agreed upon specific time period.

3.    The developer shall give adequate financial assurance for construction for each phase in accordance with this Ordinance and to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Town Attorney.

4.    Once a construction permit has been issued for improvements under the financial assurance of construction, work shall proceed without interruption until the Town Engineer accepts the improvements.

5.    Any work shown on approved plans that has been abandoned for a period of thirty (30) days, or not completed by the developer in accordance with an agreed upon time period, may be completed by the Town which may recover the construction costs from the developer.

6.    When in the opinion of the Town and the developer it is in the best interest of both parties to delay installation of development required improvements to coincide with adjacent work, the Town Council may elect to accept payment of the estimated cost of said improvements in-lieu of construction by the developer. The timing of this payment will be specified in a Council approved phasing plan.

B.    Financial Assurances of Construction.

1.    The Town Council shall require that the applicant provide cash, a performance bond from a corporate surety licensed to do business as a surety in Arizona, an irrevocable letter of credit, or funds in escrow at the time of application for final subdivision approval in the amount sufficient to secure to the Town the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the required improvements. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be no less than one hundred twenty (120%) percent and no more than one hundred fifty (150%) percent of the cost of the installation and materials necessary to complete the subdivision, depending on conditions.

2.    Such financial guarantee shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution, as set forth in this Ordinance. The periods within which required improvements must be completed shall be incorporated in the financial guarantee and shall not, in any event, exceed two (2) years from the date of final approval. The Town shall require that ten (10%) percent of the gross total cost of public improvements be retained by the Town for the duration of the warranty period which begins from the date of acceptance of said improvements by the Town Council.

3.    Whenever it is deemed appropriate or necessary by the Town Engineer and the Town Council to defer, for an additional two (2) year period, the construction of any required public improvements, because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for other suitable reasons, the developer shall provide renewed assurances based on updated costs as determined by the Town Engineer to secure completion of the required public improvements. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.28.060 Construction and inspection.

A.    All improvements whether public or private shall be constructed to the latest Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction as written and promulgated by the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG), the latest standards and specifications adopted by the Town, or standard specifications of the utility provider; whichever is greater.

B.    All improvements shall be constructed with the inspection and approval of the Town Engineer. All construction shall require a Town construction permit. Construction shall not begin until a permit has been issued for the construction.

C.    A preconstruction meeting must be scheduled, by the developer, to include all dry utilities before any trenching or conduit installation is permitted/accepted.

D.    Public utilities must be installed either in public dedicated rights-of-way or public utility easements or easements dedicated specifically by the landowner for such usage and maintenance.

E.    All utility companies, public and private, must inspect all trenches, pipes, lines and conduit installation prior to backfill.

F.    Shading material shall be per the individual utility company standards and all backfill shall be compacted to ninety-five (95%) percent or better.

G.    All underground utilities to be installed in streets and private access ways shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such street or private access way.

H.    The developer shall provide for an Arizona-registered engineer to be present on the site for sufficient time to assess compliance with the plans and specifications for each element of construction.

I.    The Town Engineer shall be notified in writing forty-eight (48) hours prior to any construction on the project site.

J.    The Town Engineer shall be notified upon completion of all underground utilities within the street rights-of-way and prior to any street preparation work. Interim as-built plans of the utilities and all passing tests results shall be submitted for review. Upon review and approval of the supplied information, the developer may proceed with the installation of street improvements.

K.    The developer’s engineer shall request the Town Engineer to perform inspections of the subgrade base prior to placement of the overlaying materials. In addition the Town Engineer will perform periodic inspections throughout the course of the construction. These inspections or approvals do not signify that the Town has accepted any of the improvements for maintenance.

L.    The developer’s engineer shall submit monthly progress reports to the Town Engineer throughout the construction as requested by the Town Engineer. The monthly progress reports shall include the results of all tests taken during the month.

M.    Testing during the construction phase of the project shall be performed as required by the Town Engineer and the involved utility companies’ policies. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part))


16.28.070 Subdivision improvement acceptance.

A.    General. Upon completion of all subdivision improvements and installation of monumentation the Town Engineer will perform a final inspection and review the final reports and as-built drawings for approval.

B.    Final Inspection. At completion of the project a final inspection shall be requested with the Town Engineer. At the time of request for the final inspection one (1) set of mylars and two (2) sets of blueline as-built drawings shall be submitted along with a final engineers’ report and warranty statement to the Town Engineer. The as-built drawings shall be certified and contain the following statement:

I certify that the construction of the public improvements and the "as-built" plan preparation were performed by me or under my direct control and supervision. The construction details as shown on the "as-builts" are accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief.

_________________________________    ______________________________ Arizona Registered Engineer    Date & Registration Number

C.    Final Report. A final report shall be submitted upon completion of the project. The final report shall be compiled by the developer’s engineer and shall include the following:

1.    A brief statement of the testing on the project and a statement as to whether the observations and tests indicate that the various materials in place comply with the plans and specifications.

2.    A summary of all field density tests and compaction tests on trench backfill, on street subgrade and base material and on any fill material.

3.    Asphalt and pavement mix design and all results of Marshall, gradation, asphalt content and compaction tests.

4.    All concrete mix designs and all test results on air content, slump, unit weight, compressive strength at seven (7) and twenty-eight (28) days.

5.    All line pressure, bacteria and manhole test information.

6.    Any other tests or information that may be required as a part of the specifications or that may add to the integrity of the report.

D.    Procedure. The following procedure will be followed for final acceptance of the improvements:

1.    The Town Engineer shall make a final inspection of all public improvements in the project. The developer will be notified of any items that are not in conformance with the Town specifications, and shall bring the items into conformance.

2.    The as-built plans and final report will be reviewed by the Town Engineer. Any additional information needed will be noted and the plans will be returned to the developer for revision and resubmittal as mylars.

3.    When the public improvements have passed the final inspection, the as-built plans and final report have been stamped and approved and the warranty statement provided, the Town Engineer shall make a written recommendation to the Town Council to accept the public improvements for maintenance.

4.    All utilities shall have ADEQ approval of construction signature blocks and/or letters.

E.    Warranty Period on Public Improvements. The warranty period begins on the day that the Town Council accepts the public improvements. At a minimum a warranty period of one (1) year for all utilities and five (5) years for roadway pavement and structure shall apply to all subdivision improvements; however, the warranty period may extend beyond that time period as determined by the Town Engineer. During the warranty period the developer is responsible for repair work to any of the public improvements. The Town Engineer will periodically inspect the public improvements and will notify the developer of the necessary repair work. The developer is responsible for having the repair work completed prior to the end of the warranty period. Upon completion of the warranty period and acceptable repair of any necessary warranty items the remainder of the financial assurances retained by the Town will be released. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-265)


Chapter 16.32 MINOR LAND DIVISIONS

Sections:

16.32.010    Authority and purpose.

16.32.020    Definitions.

16.32.030    Applicability.

16.32.040    Exceptions.

16.32.050    Minor land division application procedures.

16.32.060    Review, approval and appeal procedures.

16.32.070    Minor land division design standards.

16.32.080    Minor land division street improvement standards.

16.32.090    Assurance for improvements.


16.32.010 Authority and purpose.

A.    Authority. The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside is authorized by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.2, to adopt regulations for the review of "land splits" and "streets" as defined herein. For the purposes of this chapter, any land split or creation of a new street shall constitute a minor land division within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

B.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for minimum standards for regulating the minor land division of lots, tracts or parcels of land into two (2) or three (3) parts through a process that is more expeditious than the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside subdivision process and to promote consistency and implementation of the Town general plan and the following:

1.    Assurance that adequate ingress and egress for current and future property owners and emergency services exist pursuant to Section 16.32.070 of this chapter;

2.    Accurate recordation of surveys created to divide existing lots, tracts or parcels of land; and

3.    The proposed minor land division is in conformance with Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.2, and all land development regulations established by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


16.32.020 Definitions.

1.    "Access" means rights-of-way provided by means of recorded easements for the right of egress and ingress and utilities in perpetuity, where access is required over the property of others.

2.    "Land development regulations" means all zoning, building, and subdivision codes, and any other applicable ordinances, regulations or standards adopted by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

3.    "Land splits" means the division of improved or unimproved land whose area is two and one-half (2-1/2) acres or less into two (2) or three (3) tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of sale or lease.

4.    "Legal access" means a public or private right of vehicular ingress and egress to and from any additional lots or parcels created and the exterior boundary of the original lot in which the minor land division is proposed. The minimum legal access may be provided by either public or private streets or easements and shall be twenty-five (25) feet or greater (see exhibit below).

Exhibit: Minor Land Division with Legal Access
[IMAGE]


5.    "Lot" means any lot, parcel, tract of land, or combination thereof, shown on a plat of record or recorded by metes and bounds that is occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in the zoning regulations of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, including one (1) principal building together with its accessory buildings, the unbuilt lot area and required parking spaces, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.

6.    "Minor land division" means a division of land into two (2) or three (3) lots not resulting in a "subdivision" or "subdivided lands" as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes, Chapter 4, Article 6.2, or the creation of a street. For the purposes of these regulations a minor land division shall include a land split.

7.    "Original lot" means any existing lot, parcel, tract of land, or combination thereof, identified in the official records of the Planning and Zoning Department as of the adoption of these minor land division regulations.

8.    "Street" means any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard, street, lane, parkway, place, bridge, viaduct or easement for public vehicular access or a street shown in a plat duly filed and recorded in the County Recorder’s office. A street includes all land within the street right-of-way whether improved or unimproved, and includes such improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking space, bridges and viaducts.

9.    "Subdivision" means improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into four (4) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or any such property the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into more than two (2) parts. Subdivision also includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing four (4) or more parcels in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which buildings or airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be divided.

10.    "Town of Pinetop-Lakeside general plan" means a municipal statement of land development policies, which may include maps, charts, graphs and text which set forth objectives, principles and standards for local growth and redevelopment enacted under the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.0, and as amended by the Town Council. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


16.32.030 Applicability.

The provisions in this chapter shall apply to a minor land division of improved or unimproved property, defined as a lot, parcel, tract or combination thereof, for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, if one (1) of the following conditions exists:

A.    The property to be divided is two and one-half (2-1/2) acres or less, and one (1) or more additional lots are created.

B.    The property to be divided is greater than two and one-half (2-1/2) acres and requires the creation of a public or private street or easement to provide legal access to one (1) or more additional lots. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


16.32.040 Exceptions.

The minor land division regulations herein shall not apply to the following activities:

A.    Exchange of land between previously platted lots so long as no additional lots are created and the resulting lots comply with all Town land development regulations or other local, state or federal laws.

B.    Division of an existing lot meeting the definition of an original lot, whose area is greater than two and one-half (2-1/2) acres provided an existing street is not affected or a new street created.

C.    Any division or resubdivision of land covered by the Town subdivision regulations or the creation of two (2) or three (3) lots within any area granted plat approval prior to the adoption of these minor land division regulations, provided all other requirements of the land development regulations are met.

D.    Creation of two (2) or more lots in any commercially zoned area limited to commercial use development pursuant to site plan review procedures in accordance with Chapter 17.84, Arizona Department of Transportation minimum access standards, and other applicable regulations governing commercial development. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


16.32.050 Minor land division application procedures.

The division of land into two (2) or three (3) parcels and under those special conditions described in Section 16.32.030 requires the approval of a minor land division application and permit.

A.    An application for a minor land division shall be submitted to the Community Development Department and approved prior to filing any deeds related to a minor land division with the Navajo County Recorder.

B.    An application fee as established by special resolution shall be paid at the time of filing an application. The fee is nonrefundable and is to cover the costs of processing the application.

C.    Application Requirements. Each application shall include a scaled map of the original lot as legally recorded by the Navajo County Recorder and the lots proposed to be created. The map does not have to be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor, but must contain sufficient data to determine the approximate boundaries and areas of all proposed lots. At a minimum the map shall include the following:

1.    Boundaries of the original lot or parcel and assessor’s number(s) as identified from the Town parcel map.

2.    Any other lots created from the original lot.

3.    Approximate locations of all known dedications and easements.

4.    Approximate location of all existing structures on the original lot.

5.    Approximate setbacks of all existing structures from proposed lot lines.

6.    Right-of-way dedications and easements.

7.    Area in square feet and in acreage of each proposed lot.

8.    Township, range, section number and north arrow for the original lot.

9.    Documentation such as a recorded survey, preliminary title report, or other suitable information to verify that access exists from all created lots to an approved public right-of-way.

D.    The applicant shall execute and record with Navajo County all proposed or required public or private dedications shown on an approved plan as a condition of approval by submission of a recorded survey sealed by a registered Arizona land surveyor. Easements shall be recorded in a form subject to approval by the Administrator.

E.    Application review and comment by all applicable public or private service providers as deemed necessary by the Administrator, including but not limited to fire districts, electric, sanitary district, water, etc. Failure to obtain approval of serviceability from any provider shall not restrict the Planning and Zoning Department from issuing a minor land division permit.

F.    Any minor land division utilizing a private street or easement for vehicular ingress and egress shall submit and record an approved maintenance agreement.

G.    Documentation indicating access to a dedicated Town street, either through a preliminary title report from a licensed title company or other suitable information sufficient for the Administrator to verify that access exists. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


16.32.060 Review, approval and appeal procedures.

The Administrator shall review the application, map, and other pertinent information for completeness and accuracy in accordance with the following guidelines:

A.    An application shall be filed prior to approval of a minor land division request. The applicant may request a meeting with a staff person to review the requirements and standards for a lot division prior to submission of the application. The Administrator shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within ten (10) working days from acceptance of a complete application. If denied, the Administrator shall state the specific reasons for denial and the procedure for correcting the deficiency.

B.    The application may be resubmitted with corrections within ten (10) days with no further fee.

C.    If an applicant believes an application for a minor land division has been improperly denied by the Administrator, the decision may be appealed. Any appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days of the Administrator’s decision. The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be final unless the applicant files a request for review with the Superior Court. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


16.32.070 Minor land division design standards.

A.    Minimum legal access between additional lots, parcels or fractional interests shall be subject to the following schedule:

Minimum Legal Access Standards 

	Original Lot	Minimum Legal Access

	0-5 acres	25' minimum

	5-10 acres	40' minimum

	10+ acres	50' minimum

B.    The legal access serving any minor land division shall include a minimum fifty (50) foot turning radius for emergency access, established by public or approved private street or easement, to serve all newly created lots. However, the minimum fifty (50) foot radius requirement may be decreased subject to the review of the applicable fire district and approval of the Administrator, provided site characteristics restrict compliance with this standard. The turning radius shall either be improved or reserved for future improvement, in accordance with the application procedures in Section 16.32.050.

C.    The minor land division proposed shall be in compliance with the Town general plan and Town zoning map in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 5.0.

D.    The minor land division proposed shall be in compliance with the land development regulations, including lot size and dimensions.

E.    Dedication of street or access easements for the future improvement of transportation facilities, utilities, drainage, and other improvements, if identified in an adopted capital improvement program (CIP) by the Town Council or other official plans as allowed by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.0, as amended. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


16.32.080 Minor land division street improvement standards.

In reviewing a minor land division application where street improvements for dedication to the Town are proposed, the following criteria apply:

A.    The applicant shall be responsible for the preparation of a complete set of engineering plans prepared by an Arizona-registered civil engineer, satisfactory to the Administrator and Town Engineer for the construction of the required improvements. The plans shall be prepared in conjunction with the minor land division map. The minor land division map shall not be recorded until all engineering plans for the required improvements have been approved by the Administrator and Town Engineer.

B.    Except where expressly modified or permitted by the Administrator, proposed streets shall be in conformity with the minimum street design standards as specified in the subdivision regulations. The construction of streets shall not commence until improvement plans and profiles have been approved by the Administrator and Town Engineer. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


16.32.090 Assurance for improvements.

Pursuant to Section 16.32.080, no improvement plans shall be approved by the Administrator or his/her designee unless the applicant has posted a performance bond, surety or guaranty instrument, letter of credit, or such other security as may be appropriate and necessary to guarantee the installation of the required improvements in the manner specified within the land development regulations. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-156 § 1 (part))


Chapter 16.36 FEE SCHEDULE

Sections:

16.36.010    Fee schedule.


16.36.010 Fee schedule.

The following fee schedule shall be used to calculate fees for map/plat checking and other engineering fees related to the subdivision of land. This fee schedule may be revised by the Council from time-to-time by resolution or ordinance.

FEE SCHEDULE 

	Tentative map check fee	$200 plus $4 per lot*

	Final map/plat checking fee	$200 plus $4 per lot*

	Reversion to acreage fee	$100*

	Other engineering work	As billed to the Town**

*Due upon filing the tentative map/map/final map/plat/plan. **Due within thirty (30) days of when services are rendered.

(Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 98-154 § 35: Ord. 85-7 (part))


Chapter 16.40 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Sections:

16.40.010    Enforcement – Administrative action.

16.40.020    Criminal penalties.


16.40.010 Enforcement – Administrative action.

A.    Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Director, the Code Enforcement Officer(s), the Police Department of the Town, the Town Attorney, and all officers of said Town otherwise charged with the enforcement of the law to enforce the provisions of this title. The Director or his/her designee shall inspect premises for which applications, plats, or other documents have been received, and for which plats have been approved, or for which permits have been issued. The inspections will help ensure compliance with the provisions of this title. The Director also shall make inspections and investigations in connection with matters which are the subject of this title and shall prepare reports when requested by the Town Council. For the purpose of enforcing compliance with these zoning regulations, the Director in conjunction with other enforcement officers of the Town shall issue notices, orders, or criminal citations as may be necessary. Any subdivision, land split, or other use of property in violation of this title shall be prevented, restrained, or penalized through appropriate action instituted by the Director or the Town. See also A.R.S. §§ 9-240(B)(28) and (29) and 9-463.01.

B.    Administrative Action.

1.    The Director may also take administrative action against violators which may include posting or recording public notices of violations of this Code, and issuing orders to halt work on the subdivision, minor land division, or other development until violations are either cured or Court proceedings concerning alleged violations are final. In addition, the Director may refuse to accept or process applications for preliminary or final plats, building permits or other applications concerning the property while violations are occurring or during the pendency of court proceedings on alleged violations.

2.    Upon receipt of information that the recording of a deed for a lot which was not created in accordance with this title, a notice of violation shall be sent by certified mail to the legal property owner by the Director and to the Arizona Department of Real Estate, Subdivision Investigations.

3.    Upon determination by the Director that any land split or land division has been made which does not comply with Arizona Revised Statutes or this title, the Director shall record a notice in the land records of Navajo County which identifies by legal description the property(ies) affected, a general description of the violation or deficiency identified in accordance with this title. The notice also shall include the following statement:

Notice is hereby given by the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside that the lot(s) created by the land division, or the development or improvement of this property, does not conform to the requirements of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code land use regulations in force at the time of the recordation. In consequence, any and all Building Permits for development will be denied and no certificate of occupancy will be issued by the Town until such time as deficiencies related to this property are corrected.

4.    A copy of the notice shall be sent to the property owner of record at his/her last address as listed with the Navajo County Assessor.

5.    No building permit nor certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any lot created, developed, or improved in violation of this title until any violations or deficiencies are corrected to the satisfaction of the Director. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-308 § 2 (part))


16.40.020 Criminal penalties.

A.    Criminal citations, hearings and penalties as prescribed by Chapter 1.20 shall be used for violations of this title.

B.    No incarceration or jail time shall be prescribed for a criminal violation.

C.    The Court or Hearing Officer may order a person adjudged guilty to perform community service, and the Court may also order abatement of any violation or nuisance, cessation of all building or development of the subject property, forfeiture of personal property in accordance with Arizona law after a forfeiture hearing, and such other remedies allowed by law and fashioned by the Court to fit the violation, crime, or infraction. (Ord. 15-392 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-308 § 2 (part))


Title 17 ZONING

Chapters:

17.04    Mountainside Development Regulations

17.08    General Provisions

17.12    Definitions

17.16    Zoning Districts

17.20    (R-Low 1 Acre) Rural Zoning District – One (1) Acre Per Dwelling Unit

17.24    (R1-2) Single-Family Residential Zoning District – Twenty Thousand (20,000) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit

17.28    (R1-4) Single-Family Residential Zoning District – Ten Thousand (10,000) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit

17.32    (R1-6) Single-Family Residential Zoning District – Six Thousand Six Hundred (6,600) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit

17.36    (R-2) Multiple-Family Residential Zoning District – Twelve (12) Dwelling Units Per Acre

17.40    (R-3) Multiple-Family Residential Zoning District

17.44    (MH-4) Manufactured Home Neighborhood Zoning District – Ten Thousand (10,000) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit

17.48    (MH-6) Manufactured Home Neighborhood Zoning District – Six Thousand Six Hundred (6,600) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit

17.52    (MHP) Manufactured Home Park Zoning District

17.56    (RVP) Recreational Vehicle Park Zoning District

17.60    (C-R) Commercial Recreational Zoning District

17.64    (C-1) Light Commercial Zoning District

17.68    (C-2) Heavy Commercial Zoning District

17.72    (PUD) Planned Unit Development Zoning District

17.76    (OS) Open Space/Park Zoning District

17.80    Conditional Use Permits

17.84    Site Plan and Plot Plan Review and Approval

17.88    Design Review

17.92    Landscaping Regulations

17.96    Forest Health and Fire Protection

17.100    Property Maintenance

17.102    Medical Marijuana

17.104    Supplemental Provisions

17.106    Wireless Communication Facilities

17.108    Sign Regulations

17.110    Aircraft Regulations

17.112    Nonconforming Uses

17.116    Planning and Zoning Commission Organization and Procedure

17.120    The Board of Adjustment, the Appeals Procedure, Variances

17.124    Permit Limitations and Fees

17.128    Zoning Map and Zoning Text Amendment Procedures

17.132    Administration, Enforcement and Penalties


Chapter 17.04 MOUNTAINSIDE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.04.010    Introduction.

17.04.020    Purpose.

17.04.030    Implementation.

17.04.040    Mountainside definitions.

17.04.050    Review and development process.

17.04.060    Documentary requirements and certification.

17.04.070    Development standards.

17.04.080    Density and subdivision/lot split standards.


17.04.010 Introduction.

As valuable scenic resources, the mountains and hillsides of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside provide a permanent visual presence that exemplifies what is unique about this community. They define the location and character of the Town, shape our sense of place, and contribute to the Town’s identity. These land forms, their foothills, and other areas where there exists a fifteen (15%) percent or greater slope, offer a desirable setting visible to the entire area and an intrinsic aesthetic value to the Town; therefore they require unique standards resulting from the characteristics of mountainside terrain. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.04.020 Purpose.

This chapter exists to establish provisions to: (a) regulate the intensity of development; (b) preserve and protect the mountainside environment; (c) provide for the safety and welfare of the Town and its residents; and (d) establish rules and procedures for review by the Development Review Committee of mountainside development, building, and construction plans through the implementation of the following:

A.    Require buildings and other improvements to adapt to the natural mountainside topography thereby reducing the scarring effects of roads, drives, building pads and cut and fill slopes.

B.    Encourage all improvements to be designed and constructed in a manner that minimizes the impact of development from viewpoints throughout the Town and adjacent slopes.

C.    Prevent unnecessary grading or stripping of vegetation, preserve drainage patterns, protect the public from natural hazards of storm water runoff and erosion, and require revegetation in order to maintain the natural landscape environment.

D.    Preserve visual sight lines to unique natural features and wildlife habitats. Retain the integrity and natural states of dominant peaks and ridges.

E.    Provide development and construction practices and methods to ensure greater forest protection in mountainside development areas.

This chapter endeavors to enhance design quality so that the resulting development maintains the essential natural characteristics and context of the mountainside consistent with the goals and policies of the Town’s General Plan. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.04.030 Implementation.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lots where the natural terrain causes the average lot slope to be fifteen (15%) percent or greater (see example below). However, a fifteen (15%) percent or greater slope created by a natural wash on land that would otherwise not be classified as mountainside land shall be exempt from the mountainside regulations. Mountainside lands are also subject to special provisions relating to minor land division and subdivision development as set forth in Title 16, the Subdivision Code. However, if there is a conflict between these mountainside development regulations and other Town regulations or the Town Code, these provisions shall prevail when mountainside development regulations are more restrictive.

Figure 1 – Fifteen (15%) Percent Slope
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.04.040 Mountainside definitions.

Where definitions are not included in this section, the definitions in Section 16.04.060 shall control. For purposes of this section, the terms contained in this section shall have the following meanings:

A.    "Acre" means forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet as measured on the horizontal plane.

B.    "Alter the mountaintop ridgeline" means any development on the primary ridgeline shown on Figures 2a and 2b that disturbs or alters the natural mountaintop profile.

C.    "Applicant" means the person or entity desiring to improve or otherwise engage in any development of property in the mountainside development area, including the owner of the property and any agents acting on behalf of the owner.

D.    "Average lot slope" means the average slope of the natural terrain within the boundaries of a particular lot. The slope will be calculated by taking the average of a minimum of two (2) slope lines per lot. These slope lines shall run the entire length of the lot and be as near to perpendicular as practical to the natural contour lines.

E.    "Building pad" means the total area under roof of all structures proposed for the property.

F.    "Building pad and slope" means the percent of slope measured at right angles to the natural contours along a line passing through the center of the proposed building and termination at the end of the disturbed area limits of the building site.

G.    "Code" means the Town Code of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, in effect as of the date of these regulations and as may be amended.

H.    "Commission" means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

I.    "Committee" means the Development Review Committee of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

J.    "Conservation" means the retention or acquisition of land for the purpose of preservation in a natural state.

K.    "Conservation easement" means a permanent unbuilt lot area easement granted to the Town or to a public land trust to prohibit development of property including roads and utilities and to retain and preserve the land for the scenic enjoyment of the general public.

L.    "Council" means the Town Council of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

M.    "Cut" means the land surface which is shaped through the removal of soil, rock, or other materials.

N.    "Development" means any grading, excavation or other construction, or the preparation for construction including the removal of natural vegetation, earth moving or other preconstruction work which alters the natural features or natural grade of the lot.

O.    "Disturbed area" means that area of natural ground, including the footprint of the residence, that has been or is proposed to be altered through grading, cut and fill, removal of natural vegetation, placement of material, trenching, or by any means that causes a change in the undisturbed natural surface of the land or natural vegetation.

P.    "Fill" means the deposit of soil, rock, or other material placed by man.

Q.    "Finished grade" means the final grade and elevation of the ground surface after grading is completed.

R.    "Footprint" means that area of the residence measured from the outside walls (excluding any overhanging portions) which includes indoor uses such as attached garage, carports, utility room, laundry, etc., and including outdoor uses such as patios and breezeways.

S.    "Grading" means any excavating, or filling or combination thereof, including the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.

T.    "Lot" means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one (1) main building, together with any accessory buildings and having adequate frontage on a public or private street.

U.    "Mass" means the size and shape of a new facility or land form, prepared to scale.

V.    "Massing study" means the visual representation of a new facility, whether it is a road, building or other physical feature. It must show the new facility and/or the changes to the existing land, such that the viewer can understand the size and shape of the finished project, and how it fits into the existing landscape. It can be a drawing, a computer model or a rendering.

W.    "Mountaintop" means the highest point on a mountain with a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet relief from its base to its highest peak.

X.    "Mountainside development area" means those lands where the natural terrain has a slope of fifteen (15%) percent or greater. However, a fifteen (15%) percent or greater slope, created by a natural wash on land that otherwise would not be classified as mountainside land, shall be exempt from the mountainside regulations.

Y.    "Mountainside wash" means any creek, stream, wash, channel, or other body of water having historical banks and with a flow rate equal to or greater than two (2) cubic feet per second based on a one hundred (100) year storm event.

Z.    "Natural features, significant" includes washes, significant vegetation, and significant rock outcroppings provided these features are in their undisturbed natural state.

AA.    "Natural grade" means the undisturbed natural surface of the land, including washes.

BB.    "Primary ridgeline" means the line running from the highest peak on a mountaintop to the next highest peak along a natural ridge.

CC.    "Retaining wall" means a wall or terraced combination of walls, including negative edge pools, used solely to retain more than eighteen (18) inches of material or water but not to support or to provide a foundation or wall for a building.

DD.    "Raw spill slope" means an area created by causing or allowing earth or other material to fall, flow, or run down the slope, thereby creating a change in the natural appearance and topography.

EE.    "Rock outcroppings, significant" means any surface rock or group formation of rocks covering an area of two hundred (200) square feet or larger or any surface rock formation with a height greater than ten (10) feet from the surrounding grade.

FF.    "Sheet flow" means a shallow and wide overland flow of water.

GG.    "Subterranean" means that space which lies totally underground, and which cannot be accessed from outside the exterior perimeter of the structure on the same horizontal plane which originates at that point where the building intersects the ground.

HH.    "Town" means the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

II.    "Vegetation, significant" means a stand of trees having a height greater than fifteen (15) feet or three (3) or more trees, located within a radius of fifteen (15) feet, each having a height greater than fifteen (15) feet.

JJ.    "View fencing" (view fence) means fencing that is constructed in such a manner as to achieve eighty (80%) percent overall openness. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.04.050 Review and development process.

The Development Review Committee shall review development plans, as outlined in Section 17.04.060(B), prior to any other development permit. The review and development process consists of up to five (5) stages, depending upon the nature and scope of the proposed development:

A.    Presubmittal Meeting. If the proposed building pad covers natural terrain having a slope of less than fifteen (15%) percent, the applicant may request a presubmittal meeting with Town staff to determine whether or not the applicant’s plans may be submitted without being stamped and sealed by a licensed professional. In this presubmittal meeting, Town staff shall consider lots where no grading has occurred. If grading has occurred on the lot, Town staff will only consider the lot if it has been restored following the guidelines in Section 17.04.070(C)(8).

B.    Concept Plan Review Meeting. The applicant, together with their architect and/or engineer, shall submit a completed application and the required fees to the Community Development Director at the time they request a concept plan review meeting (presubmittal meeting) with the Development Review Committee. The applicant’s architect and/or engineer do not need to be present at the concept plan review meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss, review, and give suggestions and guidance to the applicant regarding the proposed development including: the entire subdivision layout, if a subdivision; the location of the building pad and accessory uses; how these relate to significant natural features; the preservation of existing vegetation; grading concepts and their adaptation to the natural mountainside topography; and how the requirements pursuant to these mountainside regulations and purpose statement will guide the proposed development.

C.    Formal Development Review Committee Meeting. At this stage, in addition to those materials previously submitted, the applicant shall submit all materials outlined in Section 17.04.060 to the Town Engineer. The Development Review Committee shall then review the submittal for compliance with the goals, purposes, and specific criteria of this title and either approve, approve with conditions or changes, or deny the submittal.

D.    Building Permit Review. The final construction plans for a mountainside subdivision, or a mountainside building, submitted to the Community Development Department for review and approval shall comply with the final approval of the Development Review Committee. Any variation from Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code must be accompanied by a soils engineering report from a testing laboratory or registered geological engineer. No site preparation, development or construction shall commence until the Town has issued a grading or building permit.


[IMAGE]


1.    The plans for any development in a mountainside development area must be approved by the Town and all appropriate legal permit(s) issued before any clearing and grubbing, grading, bulldozing, blasting, or movement of earth is commenced. If development does not commence within twelve (12) months after securing such approval, no construction shall occur until such plans have been resubmitted and reapproved or if such is appropriate based upon circumstances outside the control of the applicant, a one (1) time six (6) month extension may be granted by the Community Development Director.

2.    When a grading permit is required, the applicant shall first provide the Town with a form of financial assurance, acceptable to the Town Attorney, which places the Town in an assured position to do or to contract to be done the necessary work to cover, restore and landscape exposed fills and cuts to blend with the surrounding natural terrain. The minimum acceptable assurance shall be in a dollar amount equal to the number of total cubic yards of cut and fill multiplied by twenty-five (25), or in such greater amount as deemed appropriate by the Town. In the event that construction has not commenced within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the grading or building permit, the plan approval and permit shall expire. Twelve (12) months after the date of the last inspection, such assurance shall be forfeited to the Town in such amount necessary for the purpose of restoration of the construction site to its original condition and all authorized permits shall be revoked and become void.

E.    Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any building constructed pursuant to these regulations, the applicant shall obtain from the Town Engineer and the Town Building Inspector certification of compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.04.060 Documentary requirements and certification.

A.    Concept Plan Review Meeting. The applicant shall submit the following:

1.    Seven (7) copies of a preliminary site plan that includes, but is not limited to, the subdivision roads and utilities, building footprint, driveway, and accessory use locations along with topographic information for the subdivision and/or the lot.

2.    A three (3) dimensional representation of the general massing of all proposed structures (e.g., a mass model, a 3-D rendering or a computer generated model in relation to topography – not a detailed model).

3.    Preliminary calculations on land disturbance and cut/fill methods.

B.    Formal Development Review Committee Meeting. All plans submitted to the Town for review shall be approved, stamped and sealed by the appropriate registered or licensed professional (e.g., civil engineer, land surveyor, geologist, or architect). However, when the proposed built area is on natural terrain having a slope of less than fifteen (15%) percent, the applicant may meet with Town staff in a presubmittal meeting to determine if plans may be submitted without a professional stamp. The Development Review Committee shall review all plans. In addition, once the Committee has approved the plans the applicant shall submit final plans, in accordance with the Development Review Committee’s approved plans, to the Community Development Department for building permits. Plan review fees for each such submittal shall be paid at the time of submittal of such plans in the amount specified in the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside fee schedule, as such may be amended from time to time. The following plans and materials shall be required:

1.    If for a subdivision, all plans as required in Chapter 16.16.

2.    If for a building, detailed site plan (twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36)), sealed by a registered engineer or land surveyor, with topographic information for the entire lot including under the footprint of the building. This site plan shall depict: the limits of disturbance; the building envelope including the building footprint, driveway(s), swimming pools, mechanical equipment, sanitary sewer or septic systems; location, size and type of mechanical screen walls and pool barrier fencing; length and height of retaining walls; all accessory buildings; and significant natural features.

3.    A detailed grading and drainage plan (twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36)) sealed by a registered engineer, with topographic information for the entire lot. This plan shall show proposed finished contours at one (1) foot intervals within a twenty (20) foot perimeter from the building, with maximum five (5) foot intervals elsewhere, and shall show existing and proposed contours. This plan shall show limits of excavation and fill; slope of cut and fill; total cubic yards of excavation and fill; method of concealment for each fill or exposed cut; and the calculations for amount of disturbance for the total development. This plan shall show the original drainage pattern (natural course) and proposed changes. If any structures are involved, it will be necessary to include an estimate of peak flows for a one hundred (100) year frequency storm to establish drainage facility cross-sections. Sheet flow diverted from its original drainage pattern shall be returned to its natural course before leaving the property. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.04.070 Development standards.

A.    Mountain Profile Inviolate.

1.    No development shall occur which will alter the mountaintop ridgelines. Further, no structure may extend above a plane that originates on the primary ridgeline and angles downward from the primary ridgeline by ten (10) degrees (See Figure 2a). The point along the ridgeline from which this plane originates shall be as near as practical to perpendicular to the site proposed for development (See Figure 2b).

Figure 2a – Ridgeline Ten (10) Degree Delineation
[IMAGE]


Figure 2b – Ten (10) Degree Plane Origin
[IMAGE]


B.    Architectural Standards.

1.    For development within the mountainside development areas, the height of structures shall be determined by the following four (4) subsections and not by the zoning district regulations that apply to lots or parcels outside the mountainside development area:

a.    The height of a building or structure is limited to a thirty (30) foot high imaginary plane that parallels the existing predevelopment natural grade, as measured vertically from any point under the building (see Figure 3). The subterranean portion of the structure is not included in the total height calculation; provided, that at least one-half (1/2) of the volume of the subterranean portion of the structure is below natural grade.

b.    In the case where the natural grade has been cut and is not restored back against the building, no exposed face in any vertical plane shall exceed thirty (30) feet measured from the lowest, finished grade.

c.    The maximum overall height of the building or structure, including chimneys and accessory buildings, shall not exceed forty (40) feet from the highest point of the building to natural grade at the lowest point adjacent to the structure or column (see Figure 3).

Figure 3 – Building Height on Mountainside
[IMAGE]


2.    Structures employing the use of a cantilever may extend the cantilever a horizontal distance twice the height of the support. The maximum vertical height of the support shall be eight (8) feet. One-half (1/2) the area underneath the cantilevered element shall be calculated as disturbed area (see Figure 4).

Figure 4 – Height for a Cantilevered Element
[IMAGE]


3.    All of the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply in the mountainside development area.

4.    Material used for exterior surfaces such as structures, walls, roofs, and fences shall blend with the surrounding natural setting and avoid high contrasts. There shall be no paint or material colors used which have a LRV (light reflecting value) greater than thirty-eight (38%) percent. Limited use of contrasting accent colors (in excess of thirty-eight (38%) percent LRV) for small elements such as doors and window mullions may be allowed upon explicit approval of the Development Review Committee.

5.    All electrical service equipment and sub-panels and all mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, air conditioning, evaporative cooling, and antennas greater than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter shall not be allowed on the roof. All mechanical, electrical, and natural gas equipment along with antennas shall be screened in such a manner that they are not visible from outside the property when viewed from the same or a lower elevation. Solar panels may be allowed if they are integrated into the building design and approved by the Development Review Committee.

6.    Mirrored surfaces or reflective treatment that changes or enhances ordinary glass into a mirrored surface is prohibited. Permanently reflective metallic surfaces shall be prohibited.

7.    The building design should minimize the reflection of daytime glare from glass and the emission of light from within the structure during evening hours.

C.    Land Disturbance Standards.

1.    The limits of construction and proposed disturbed areas shall be clearly staked in the field, with visible roping, prior to and during construction, and shall conform to the approved subdivision, or individual site plan. No disturbance shall be permitted beyond the areas designated as the limits of disturbance both during and after construction. If land disturbance in violation of this title occurs, the illegally disturbed area(s) shall be restored to its natural grade and revegetated with plant material of the same species, size, and similar density prior to the illegal disturbance.

2.    All disturbed land that is not otherwise used for approved development shall be restored to the natural grade and revegetated with natural plant material.

3.    All buildings, structures, roads, and drives shall, to the fullest extent practicable, follow and utilize the natural contours of the land to minimize disturbance. The maximum height of any cut used to establish a building site shall not exceed thirty (30) feet.

4.    All surplus excavated material shall be removed from the lot prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.

5.    After final grading, not more than five (5%) percent of the lot shall be steeper than the natural grade of the lot.

6.    The total disturbance area shall not exceed the allowed percentage of the lot area as shown in Table 1 below.

7.    Grading within street right-of-way or tracts of land for private roads is exempt from the disturbance calculations. Any roadway grading beyond the limits of the dedicated rights-of-way or private road tract shall be placed in slope easements and included within the calculations for land disturbance limitations.

8.    A legally preexisting disturbed area may be excluded from disturbed area calculations when the applicant has committed to comply with the following restoration conditions:

a.    The restored area shall follow original natural contours.

b.    The restoration shall be treated with an aging agent approved by the Town Engineer and planted with indigenous plant material.

c.    The restoration process shall be approved, stamped and sealed by a landscape architect and/or a registered engineer or architect.

Table 1 – Slope Category/Lot Disturbance Limitation 

	Average Lot Slope	% Allowance Land Disturbance	Building Site Slope	% Allowed Land Disturbance

	15%	45%	45%	18%

	20%	40%	50%	16%

	25%	35%	55%	15%

	30%	30%	60%	14%

	35%	25%	65%	13%

	40%	20%	70%	12%

	 	 	75%	10%

D.    Driveways.

1.    Driveways that serve a new single residence shall be: (a) a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide; (b) designed with an overall grade that does not exceed (i) twenty (20%) percent if longer than one hundred (100) feet or (ii) twenty-five (25%) percent if one hundred (100) feet or shorter; (c) constructed in full conformance with the requirements of the local Fire District; and (d) developed only as specifically approved by the Development Review Committee. The driveway shall be included in the calculations for land disturbance limitations.

2.    Any street or driveway cut greater than eight (8) feet shall not have a length greater than one hundred (100) feet.

3.    A twenty (20) foot by thirty (30) foot driveway apron may be required by the Fire Marshal or the Building Official at or near the garage, with no more than a five (5%) percent grade, to serve as a staging platform to fight a fire.

4.    The maximum height, measured vertically, of any cut used to establish a street or driveway shall not exceed thirty (30) feet.

E.    Grading and Drainage Standards.

1.    There shall be no clearing, grubbing, grading, importing or stockpiling of fill material on, or to, any site prior to approval of such development by the Development Review Committee and approval of a grading plan by the Town Engineer, unless such clearing, grubbing, or grading is required by the Town for public safety purposes.

2.    The maximum depth of fill shall not exceed eight (8) feet except beneath the footprint of a main residence. All exposed disturbed area fill shall be contained behind retaining walls or covered with a natural rock veneer and treated with an aging agent and landscaped with indigenous plant material.

3.    Rip-rap spill slopes may be allowed; provided, that they are approved by the Development Review Committee, and:

a.    The vertical height of the spill slope does not exceed the vertical height of the exposed cut with the base of the spill slope engineered for stability and keyed into the mountain or supported by a retaining wall.

b.    The spill slope does not exceed a two to one (2:1) slope.

c.    Retaining walls used to limit the height of the spill slope are color treated or veneered to blend in with the surrounding natural colors.

4.    Raw spill slopes are prohibited. Any violation will be subject to a stop work order until the spill slope is removed, restored to its natural grade, revegetated, and approved by the Town.

5.    A mountainside wash shall not be diverted, relocated, or moved from its present position to another location; however, a mountainside wash may be bridged by a structure so long as such structure does not impede the flow of the mountainside wash.

6.    Earth contiguous to the structure shall contact that structure at an angle approximating that of the natural grade.

F.    Walls and Fences.

1.    Curbs less than twelve (12) inches above finished grade are not considered walls.

2.    No more than three hundred (300) total linear feet of wall shall be visible from any point on the property line.

3.    Walls are prohibited in the mountainside development area except as expressly approved by the Development Review Committee. Retaining walls, walls used to screen mechanical equipment and tennis/sport court fencing are allowed; provided, that they are of minimum lengths and heights, as further specified below, and are approved by the Development Review Committee.

a.    Retaining Walls.

i.    The maximum length of any continuous retaining wall shall not be more than one hundred (100) linear feet. The maximum height of any retaining wall shall not be more than eight (8) feet. The height of a retaining wall is measured from the low side of natural grade when retaining fill slopes and from finished grade when retaining cut slopes to the top of the wall; whether the top is retaining earth or not.

ii.    Retaining walls shall be used for the purpose of containing fill material or for minimizing cut or fill slopes. The retaining wall may only extend six (6) inches above the material it is retaining.

iii.    A terraced combination of retaining walls shall be measured as a single retaining wall provided the combined walls are: (A) no more than eight (8) feet total vertical height; (B) terraced with a minimum distance between walls of four (4) feet and a maximum separation of eight (8) feet; and (C) contain appropriate vegetation between the walls so as to soften the visual impact of the combined walls (see Figure 5).

iv.    When a safety fence, on top of a retaining wall, is required by code it shall be a view fence and shall be painted to blend with surrounding natural colors.

v.    Where retaining walls are provided they shall be color treated, textured, or veneered to blend in with the surrounding natural colors and textures of the native rock and soils at the site.

b.    Walls Used to Screen Mechanical Equipment. These walls may be solid walls provided they are of minimum height and length needed to screen the mechanical equipment and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.

Figure 5 – Terraced Vertical Retaining Walls
[IMAGE]


G.    Additions to Existing Structures.

1.    The Development Review Committee may review applications for additions to existing structures if the Town Engineer in consultation with the Development Review Committee determines that the proposed addition: (a) increases the building height; or (b) increases the existing building footprint by more than one thousand (1,000) square feet or more than fifty (50%) percent of the original building square footage; or (c) creates an additional disturbance area; or (d) creates a significant adverse visual impact.

2.    If no new disturbance area is required and the addition meets all other mountainside requirements including allowable disturbed area, a permit for an addition to a mountainside building may be obtained without requirements for disturbed area calculations or any other specific requirements as determined by the Town Engineer.

3.    Any proposed improvements to existing mountainside structures, which require additional disturbed area, shall be accompanied by calculations of prior disturbed area to determine if the entire site is within the allowed limits.

H.    Sewers and Utilities.

1.    Grading for utility lines, including water and sewer lines and lateral lines, electric, gas, telephone and cable services, shall be included within the calculations for land disturbance limitations unless:

a.    Trenches are placed under a driveway, under paving or in other areas already counted as disturbed; or

b.    Trenches and related disturbed area are restored to appear as original ground, color treated and planted to blend with surrounding natural growth.

I.    Fire Protection. The forest health and fire prevention ordinance (Chapter 17.96) shall be followed in its entirety. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.04.080 Density and subdivision/lot split standards.

A.    The maximum number of lots into which mountainside development area land may be subdivided shall be the sum of the number of lots allowed in each slope category of land as shown by the following Table 2, Density/Slope Category.

B.    Slope shall be calculated using a minimum of three (3) slope lines per acre. The slope lines shall be perpendicular to the slope and at equal distances across the lot.

C.    Each of the resulting lots shall meet the minimum lot size requirements based upon the average lot slope shown on Table 2.

D.    Building envelopes shall be conceptually indicated on preliminary plats and accurately shown on final plats.

E.    The subdivider shall demonstrate by sketches, engineering drawings, charts or other means that roads, public or private, and driveway access and placement of residential structure will conform, for each lot, to current mountainside development regulations and without the need for a variance.

F.    All subdivision development and minor land division applications shall comply with the mountainside development requirements in the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Subdivision Ordinance.

Table 2 – Density/Slope Category 

	Average Lot Slope – %	Minimum Lot Size – Square Feet	Minimum Lot Size – Acres	Average Lot Slope – %	Minimum Lot Size – Square Feet	Minimum Lot Size – Acres

	15%	12,500	0.29	45%	43,560	1.0

	20%	15,000	0.34	50%	57,935	1.33

	25%	17,500	0.40	55%	73,745	1.67

	30%	20,000	0.46	60%	87,120	2.0

	35%	21,780	0.0	65%	108,900	2.50

	40%	32,670	0.75	70%	130,680	3.0

	 	 	 	75%	174,240	4.0

(Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 05-240)


Chapter 17.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.08.010    Adopted.

17.08.020    Title.

17.08.030    Declaration.

17.08.040    Purpose.

17.08.050    Building permits.


17.08.010 Adopted.

That certain document known as "The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Zoning Regulations," three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 90-246 of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, is referred to, adopted and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § 1 (part))


17.08.020 Title.

These regulations may be cited as "The Town of Pinetop-Lakeside Zoning Regulations." (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(101))


17.08.030 Declaration.

The zoning regulations for the Town are an enactment for the incorporated areas of the Town, dividing the area of said Town into zoning districts appropriate for various classes of residential and commercial uses; providing for the establishment of setback lines; providing for adequate light, air and parking facilities; providing for expediting traffic within the zoning districts; providing criteria for tree removal, criteria for evaluation of waste disposal and landscaping in areas of development; and establishing the percentage of a lot or parcel which may be covered by buildings, and the size of yards and other unbuilt lot area. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(102))


17.08.040 Purpose.

These regulations are designed to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the Town by guiding and regulating future growth and development in the Town, by protecting the character and stability of residential, commercial and other areas within the Town, by provision for prevention of fire and other dangers and by conservation of property values in the Town. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(103))


17.08.050 Building permits.

Any parcel or lot created, purchased or sold not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.1, Section 9-462 et seq. shall not be used or developed with either residential or commercial buildings and shall be subject to the requirements of Section 15.04.100 (Building permits – Approval required prior to issuance). (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-165, § 1)


Chapter 17.12 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.12.010    General rules for construction of language.

17.12.020    Definitions.


17.12.010 General rules for construction of language.

All words used in the present tense shall include future tense. All words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and all words in the plural number shall include the singular number. The word "structure" includes the word "building," the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, and the word "may" is permissive. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-303 § 2 (part))


17.12.020 Definitions.

A.    For the purposes of these regulations, certain words are defined:

1.    "Airport" means a landing area used regularly by aircraft for receiving or discharging passengers or cargo.

a.    "Heliport" means a landing area solely for the use of helicopter. A heliport may include one (1) or more helipads.

b.    "Landing area" means any locality, either land or water, including airports, and landing fields, which is used or intended to be used for the landing and take-off of aircraft, whether or not facilities are provided for the shelter, servicing or repair of aircraft, or for receiving or discharging passengers or cargo.

c.    "Landing area boundary" means the outer limit of the land or water of a landing area.

2.    "Alley" means a passage or way open to public travel which affords generally a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots and is not intended for general traffic circulation.

3.    "Alley line" means the boundary which separates the right-of-way of an alley from the abutting property.

4.    "Area of jurisdiction" means that area within the incorporated limits of the Town.

5.    "Automobile graveyard" means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.

6.    "Basement" means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.

7.    "Boarding house" means a building where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons.

8.    "Buildable area" means the portion of a lot which is within the envelope formed by the required yards. See "Yard, Required."

9.    "Building" means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for housing, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.

10.    "Building, accessory" means a building or structure which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the principal building, structure, or use on the same lot.

11.    "Building, community" means a public building designed or used for community activities of an educational, recreational or public service nature.

12.    "Building height" means the vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the roof.

13.    "Building, principal" means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In a residential zoning district any dwelling is deemed to be the principal building on the lot on which it is situated.

14.    "Carport" means a roofed structure with two (2) or more open sides under which a vehicle may be driven.

15.    "Cellar" means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to floor below is greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.

16.    "Condominium" means real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.

17.    "Corral" means a pen or enclosure for containing animals. (Does not include a pasture.)

18.    "County Health Department" means the Navajo County Health Department.

19.    "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family, two (2) family, and multi-family dwellings, but not including hotels, boarding and lodging houses.

20.    "Dwelling group" means a group of three (3) or more buildings which occupy a parcel of land in one (1) ownership and have a yard in common.

a.    Dwelling, Multiple. "Multiple dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families.

b.    Dwelling, Single-Family. (See "Single-family residence.")

c.    Dwelling, Duplex. "Duplex dwelling" means a building designed for occupancy by two (2) families.

d.    Dwelling, Unit. "Unit dwelling" means one (1) or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one (1) family for living purposes and having its own cooking and sanitary facilities.

21.    "Family" means one (1) or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, or hotel as herein defined.

22.    "Farm" means an area of not less than two (2) contiguous acres which is used for the commercial production of farm crops such as vegetables, fruit trees, grain and other crops and their storage on the area, as well as the raising thereon of farm poultry and farm animals, such as horses, cattle and sheep for commercial purposes. Swine are not permitted within the Town. The term "farm" includes the operating of such an area for one (1) or more of the above uses, including dairy farms, with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, that the operation of any such accessory use is secondary to that of the farm activities; and provided further, that the farm activities do not include commercial pen feeding or commercial feed lots, or the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to animals.

23.    "Floor area" means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of every floor of all buildings on the lot measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating the buildings, including basement floor area, elevator shafts and wells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment, penthouses, attic space whether or not a floor has actually been laid and having headroom of seven (7) feet or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, and enclosed porches, but not including any space devoted to parking, or to loading and unloading.

24.    Garage, Private. "Private garage" means an accessory building or portion of a principal building designed or used for the parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles of occupants in the building to which such garage is accessory, but not including the parking or temporary storage of delivery or truck motor vehicles having a capacity in excess of one (1) ton.

25.    Garage, Public. "Public garage" means a building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or storing motor vehicles.

26.    Grade.

a.    For buildings having walls adjoining one (1) street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street, or if there is no sidewalk, then the elevation of the roadway at the center of the wall adjoining the street.

b.    For buildings having walls adjoining more than one (1) street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls adjoining the streets, or if there is no sidewalk, then the average of the elevation of the roadway at the centers of all walls adjoining the street.

c.    For buildings having no walls adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the centers of all exterior walls of the building.

d.    Any wall parallel or nearly parallel to and not more than five (5) feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.

27.    "Guest" means any transient person who rents or occupies a room for sleeping purposes.

28.    "Guest ranch" means a building or group of buildings containing two (2) or more guest rooms, other than a boarding house, hotel or motel, and including outdoor recreational facilities such as, but not limited to, horseback riding, swimming, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, barbecue and picnic facilities and dining facilities intended only for the use by guests of the guest ranch.

29.    "Guest room" means a room which is designed for occupancy by one (1) or more guests for sleeping purposes, but having no cooking facilities and not including dormitories.

30.    "Home occupation" means an activity or pursuit in which the owner or possessor of a home is engaged and which is a permitted or accessory use in residential districts conducted in accordance with Section 17.104.130. All home occupations shall be conducted in such a manner that they are compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood.

31.    "Hospital" means an institution for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments. The term "hospital" is deemed to include sanitarium, preventorium, clinic, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home and maternity home.

32.    "Hotel" means a building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided for more than twenty (20) persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all guest rooms are made through an inside lobby or office.

33.    Hotel, Resort. "Resort hotel" means a building or group of buildings, other than a motel, boarding house or lodging house, containing individual guest rooms, suites or guest rooms, and dwelling units, and which furnishes services customarily provided by hotels.

34.    "Junk" means any old scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, wood and rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.

35.    "Junkyard" means an establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard. The term "junkyard" includes garbage dumps and sanitary fills.

36.    "Kennel" means any establishment at which dogs and cats are bred or raised for sale, or boarded, cared for, commercially or on a nonprofit basis, exclusive of dental, medical or surgical care, or for quarantine purposes.

37.    "Labor camp" means any camp or similar place of temporary abode, establishment by or for the care of workmen engaged in construction, repair or alteration work on roads or highways, railroads, or in lumbering or agricultural operations, or in other industrial activities.

38.    Laundry, Self-Service. "Self-service laundry" means a building within which clothes washing and drying machines, and clothes dry cleaning machines, either coin operated or attendant operated, are provided on a rental basis for use by individuals for doing their own laundry and dry cleaning. Self-service laundry does not include outdoor drying facilities.

39.    "Loading and unloading spaces" means a permanently maintained space on the same lot as the principal building accessible to a street or alley and not less than ten (10) feet in width, twenty (20) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height.

40.    "Lodging house" means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons.

41.    "Lot" means any lot, parcel, tract of land, or combination thereof shown on a plat of record or recorded by metes and bounds that is occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in these regulations, including one (1) principal building together with its accessory buildings, the unbuilt lot area and parking spaces required by these regulations, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.

42.    "Lot area" means the area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines of a lot.

43.    Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot which has an interior angle of one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less at the intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street is considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less.

44.    "Lot coverage" means the percentage of the area of a lot which is occupied by all buildings or other covered structures.

45.    "Lot depth" means, for lots having front and rear lot lines which are parallel, the shortest horizontal distance between such lines; for lots having front and rear lot lines which are not parallel, the shortest horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line; and for triangular shaped lots, the shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line and line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten (10) feet.

46.    Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot.

47.    Lot, Key. "Key lot" means a lot adjacent to a corner lot having its side lot line in common with the rear lot line of the corner lot and fronting on the street which forms the side boundary of the corner lot.

48.    "Lot line" means any line bounding a lot.

49.    Lot Line, Front. "Front lot line" means the boundary of a lot which separates the lot from the street; and in the case of the corner lot, the front lot line is the shorter of the two (2) lot lines separating the lot from the street except that where these lot lines are equal or within fifteen (15) feet of being equal, either lot line may be designated the front lot line but not both.

50.    Lot Line, Rear. "Rear lot line" means the boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line; except that in the absence of a real lot line, as in the case of the triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line may be considered as a line with the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten (10) feet.

51.    Lot Line, Side. "Side lot line" means the boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

52.    "Lot of record" means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Navajo County; or a lot, parcel or tract of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Navajo County.

53.    Lot, Through. "Through lot" means a lot having a pair of opposite lines abutting two (2) streets, and which is not a corner lot. On such lot, both lot lines are front lot lines.

54.    Lot Width. The width of a lot is the shortest distance between the side property lines measured at the front lot line, except along cul-de-sac lots where the following apply:

a.    If the side property lines are not parallel, but are fan-shaped and on a curved frontage with a radius of less than one hundred (100) feet, width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the lot axis, at a distance midway along the lot axis line measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. The axis of the lot shall be determined by a line through the midpoint of the rear lot line and through the midpoint of the curve length of the front lot line.

b.    If the side property lines are not parallel, width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot, at a distance equal to the required front or rear building setback lines, whichever is the lesser. The axis of a lot shall be a line generally perpendicular to the fronting street which divides the lot into two (2) equal parts.
[IMAGE]


55.    "Mobile home" or "manufactured home" means a dwelling unit, factory built and factory assembled, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976), designed for conveyance after fabrication, on streets and highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations such as locating on blocks, permanent visible foundation and connection to utilities.

56.    "Mobile home, manufactured home park" means any parcel of land upon which two (2) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.

57.    "Mobile home, manufactured home space" means a plot of ground within a mobile home, manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home, or manufactured home, together with its accessory structures, including carports, ramadas, cabanas, patios, patio covers, awnings, and similar appurtenances.

58.    "Mobile home, manufactured home subdivision" means a subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is in mobile homes, manufactured homes, and/or modular homes exclusively.

59.    "Modular home" means a dwelling unit fabricated, either wholly or partially, off site that is transported to the site and assembled on a conventional home foundation. A modular home meets the standards of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, and National Electrical Code as adopted by the Town.

60.    "Motel" means a building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some or all of which have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building with garage or parking space located on the lot and designed, used or intended wholly or in part for the accommodation of automobile transients. "Motel" includes motor courts, motor lodges and tourist courts, but not manufactured home parks or travel trailer parks.

61.    "Nonconforming use" means the lawful use of any building, lot, parcel or tract of land existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter, or amendments thereto, becomes effective which does not conform with the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.

62.    "Open space" means a zoning district designation and a single lot or larger.

63.    "Parking lot" means an area, other than a street or alley, devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.

64.    "Parking space" means a permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, of not less than eight (8) feet, six (6) inches in width and having an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, together with a driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.

65.    "Pasture" means a field, plot or area set aside for the grazing of allowable livestock. All allowable livestock shall be kept confined by stock-tight fences or other restraints of sufficient strength and durability to prevent the livestock from roaming at large. Usable pasture is the area exclusive of coverage by dwelling units, accessory buildings (except accessory buildings used exclusively for the care and keeping of allowable livestock), parking and driveway areas.

66.    "Qualified forester" means a person who has knowledge and practical experience in forestry or a related science and has been recently employed as a professional in the field of forestry.

67.    "Recreational vehicle (RV)" means a vehicular type unit, not exceeding eight (8) feet in width nor more than forty (40) feet in length, primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. The unit may have its own motive power or may be mounted on or drawn by another vehicle upon the highway.

68.    "Recreational vehicle (RV) park" means any parcel of land upon which two (2) or more recreational vehicles, for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.

69.    "Recreational vehicle (RV) space" means a plot of ground within a recreational vehicle (RV) park designed for the accommodation of one (1) recreational vehicle together with its accessory structures including carports or other off-street parking areas, storage lockers, ramadas, cabanas, patios, patio covers, awnings and similar appurtenances.

70.    "School" means an institution of learning, such as elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, which offers instruction in several branches of learning and study, but not including business colleges, nursery schools, dancing schools, riding academies, or trade or vocational schools.

71.    "Service station" means a building or use devoted to the retail sale of fuels, lubricants, and other supplies for motor vehicles, including minor repair or activities which are subordinate to the sale of petroleum products.

72.    "Setback line" means a line which defines the future right-of-way of streets.

73.    "Single-family residence" means a building designed for occupancy by one (1) family, not including mobile homes, manufactured homes, or recreational vehicles.

74.    "Single-family residential complex" means a group of single-family dwellings designed for individual separate ownership with unified management that provides common services and outdoor recreational facilities, but not including public bars, public restaurants or any commercial activity in connection therewith.

75.    "Story" means that portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the surface of such floor and the ceiling or roof above it.

76.    "Street" means all property dedicated or otherwise reserved for public or private street uses, or having thereon a public easement for such use.

77.    "Street line" means the boundary which separates the right-of-way of a street from the abutting property.

78.    "Structural alteration" means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls.

79.    "Structure" means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground and attached to something having location on the ground, including mobile homes and manufactured homes, but not including tents, vehicles or travel trailers.

80.    "Time share project" means a project in which a purchaser receives the right in perpetuity, for life or for a term of years, to the recurrent, exclusive use or occupancy of a lot, parcel, unit or segment of real property, annually or on some other periodic basis, for a period of time that has been or will be allotted from the use or occupancy periods into which the project has been divided.

81.    "Townhouse development" means a subdivision consisting of single dwellings constructed as part of a series of dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent dwelling or dwellings by party walls, or are located immediately adjacent thereto with no visible separation between walls or roofs.

82.    "Unbuilt area" means an area of land exclusive of structure or pavement.

83.    "Unbuilt common area" means an area of land within a development that may include trails, drainage areas and recreational facilities held for the use of multiple parties.

84.    "Unbuilt lot area" means any lot area exclusive of structure or paving.

85.    "Use" means the purpose or purposes for which land or a building is occupied, maintained, arranged, designed or intended.

86.    Use, Accessory. "Accessory use" means a use which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a lot or a building, including bona fide servant or caretaker quarters, and located on the same lot therewith.

87.    Use, Principal. "Principal use" means the main use of land or a building as distinguished from an accessory use.

88.    "Yard" means the unbuilt lot area at grade level between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in these regulations. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the principal building is to be used; however, on any lot wherein a setback line has been established by the regulations of this title for any street abutting the lot, such measurement is to be taken from the principal building to the setback line. See "Yard, Required."

89.    Yard, Front. "Front yard" means a yard extending across the front width of a lot and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the principal building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies and unenclosed porches. The front yard of a corner lot is the yard adjacent to the designated front lot line.

90.    Yard, Rear. "Rear yard" means a yard extending between the side yards of a lot or between the side lot lines in the absence of side yards, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the principal building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard is in all cases at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.

91.    Yard, Required. "Required yard" means the minimum unbuilt lot area as specified by the regulations of this title for front, rear and side yards, as distinguished from any yard in excess of the minimum required. See "Buildable area."

92.    Yard, Side. "Side yard" means a yard between the building and the side lot line of a lot and extending from the front yard to the rear lot line as defined or along the full depth in absence of front and rear yards and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the principal building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. An "interior side yard" is defined as the side yard adjacent to a common lot line.

93.    "Zoning district" means any portions of the incorporated area of the Town in which the same zoning regulations apply. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-331 § 2 (Exh. A) (part))


Chapter 17.16 ZONING DISTRICTS

Sections:

17.16.010    Establishment of zoning districts.

17.16.020    Boundary lines on the zoning map.

17.16.030    Boundary determination.

17.16.040    Public way vacation.

17.16.050    Lands not previously zoned.

17.16.060    Lands previously zoned by other jurisdiction.

17.16.070    Interpretation.

17.16.080    Land use compliance – Approval required before development.

17.16.090    Sign and parking requirements.


17.16.010 Establishment of zoning districts.

For the purpose of these regulations, the incorporated area of the Town is classified into the following zoning districts. Additional districts may be added or these districts rezoned by amendment to these regulations.

	R-Low	One (1) acre rural zoning district

	R1-2	Single-family residential zoning district

	R1-4	Single-family residential zoning district

	R1-6	Single-family residential zoning district

	R-2	Multiple-family residential zoning district

	R-3	Multiple-family residential zoning district

	MH-4	Manufactured home neighborhood zoning district

	MH-6	Manufactured home neighborhood zoning district

	MHP	Manufactured home park zoning district

	RVP	Recreational vehicle park zoning district

	C-R	Commercial recreational zoning district

	C-1	Light commercial zoning district

	C-2	Heavy commercial zoning district

	PUD	Planned unit development zoning district

	OS	Open space/park zoning district

(Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(301))


17.16.020 Boundary lines on the zoning map.

The boundaries of the zoning districts for the Town are shown upon the maps designated "zoning map" for the Town as of the date of the ordinance codified in these regulations. The areas within the Town boundaries shown on these maps, together with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, are a part of these regulations and have the same force and effect as if said maps and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(302))


17.16.030 Boundary determination.

Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

A.    Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or alley lines or the centerlines thereof, such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundaries.

B.    Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundaries.

C.    Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the line of any stream, irrigation canal or other waterway or railroad right-of-way, or the boundary line of public land, the center of such stream, canal or waterway, or of such railroad right-of-way, or the boundary line of such public land shall be construed to be the zoning districts boundaries.

D.    In unsubdivided land or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot or parcel of land, the location of such boundary, unless indicated by dimensions shown on the zoning district maps, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on said maps.

E.    Where such boundaries have been changed by the Town Council pursuant to Chapter 17.132 and where such changed boundaries are shown on detailed maps, the detailed maps shall govern in the event there is any difference between the boundaries shown on the zoning district maps adopted as part of these regulations, or subsequent amendments thereto, and the detailed maps. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(303))


17.16.040 Public way vacation.

Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by the Town Council, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be considered as extended to the center of such vacation and all areas included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended zoning districts. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(304))


17.16.050 Lands not previously zoned.

Lands which for reason of law, change in ownership or for any other reason come under the authority of the Town after the ordinance codified in these regulations becomes effective and which have not been zoned prior thereto by any other jurisdiction having zoning authority shall be subject to the regulations of the R-Low one (1) acre zoning district until such time as soon as practicable thereafter public hearings are held as required by law for the express purpose of zoning such lands pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(305))


17.16.060 Lands previously zoned by other jurisdiction.

Lands which for reason of law, change in ownership or for any other reason come under the authority of the Town after the ordinance codified in these regulations becomes effective and which have been zoned prior thereto by another jurisdiction having zoning authority shall retain such zoning until such time as soon as practicable thereafter public hearings are held as required by law for the express purpose of zoning such lands pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(306))


17.16.070 Interpretation.

In interpreting and applying these regulations, the regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. It is not intended by these regulations to interfere with, abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of these regulations, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with these regulations; nor is it intended by these regulations to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, except that if these regulations impose a greater restriction, these regulations shall regulate. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(307))


17.16.080 Land use compliance – Approval required before development.

Land use in any district must comply with the regulations applicable to that district as described in Chapters 17.16 through 17.76 unless a variance is granted. In addition, development of any parcel of property within the Town must receive prior approval by the Town Council, Planning and Zoning Commission or the Director, when applicable, after review of a plot plan or site plan as described in Chapters 17.84 and 17.132. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(308))


17.16.090 Sign and parking requirements.

All requirements pertaining to signs in a zoning district shall be those set forth in Chapter 17.108. All requirements pertaining to parking shall be as specified in a particular section, or as specified in Section 17.104.090. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(309))


Chapter 17.20 (R-LOW 1 ACRE) RURAL ZONING DISTRICT – ONE (1) ACRE PER DWELLING UNIT

Sections:

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    Permitted uses.

17.20.030    Conditional uses.

17.20.040    Height regulations.

17.20.050    Yard regulations.

17.20.060    Intensity of use regulations.


17.20.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this district is to conserve and protect open land uses, protect environmentally sensitive areas and prevent urban and agricultural land use conflicts. The purpose of requiring large minimum parcels of not less than one (1) acre in area is to discourage small lots of residential subdivisions where public facilities such as water, sewage disposal, parks, and playgrounds are not available or could not reasonably be made currently available. (Ord. 16-398 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-303 § 2 (part))


17.20.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted in the R-Low zoning district:

A.    Single-family dwellings excluding mobile homes and manufactured homes;

B.    Farms, as defined in Section 17.12.020;

C.    Public and private forest and wildlife reservations;

D.    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses, including private swimming pools along with incidental installations, such as pumps and filters, provided such pool and incidental installations are screened from adjoining lots by a solid wall or protective fence at least six (6) feet in height, with self-latching gates, and provided such pool sets back from all lot lines a distance of not less than seven (7) feet. (Ord. 16-398 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-303 § 2 (part))


17.20.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted in the R-Low zoning district subject to a conditional use permit:

A.    Churches;

B.    Private schools with a curriculum the same as customarily given in public schools;

C.    Golf courses including club houses located thereon, but not including miniature courses or practice driving tees operated for commercial purposes;

D.    Service to the public of water, gas, electricity, telephone, telegraph, steam, hot or cold air and sewage including waste treatment plants. The foregoing shall be deemed to include attendant facilities and appurtenances to these uses, including, without limitations, distribution, collector and feeder lines, pumping or booster stations along pipelines, and substations along electric transmission lines;

E.    Hospitals and institutions of an educational, religious, charitable, or philanthropic nature, homes for the aged, nursing homes, and convalescent homes;

F.    Home occupations;

G.    Guest ranch, provided the site contains at least ten (10) acres and the buildings housing animals are set back from all lot lines a distance of fifty (50) feet, subject to securing a conditional use permit, and the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations);

H.    Public riding stables and boarding stables, provided the site contains at least ten (10) acres and the buildings housing animals are set back from all the lot lines a distance of fifty (50) feet, subject to the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations);

I.    Plant nurseries and greenhouses;

J.    Pasture for keeping of horses for private use, subject to the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations). (Ord. 16-398 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-303 § 2 (part))


17.20.040 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 16-398 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-303 § 2 (part))


17.20.050 Yard regulations.

The required yards are as follows:

A.    Front Yard.

1.    There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet.

2.    For through lots, a front yard shall be provided along both front lot lines.

3.    Yards along each street side of corner lots shall have a width equal to the depth of the required front yard.

B.    Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than twenty (20) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet. (Ord. 16-398 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-303 § 2 (part))


17.20.060 Intensity of use regulations.

The intensity of use regulations are as follows:

A.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of one (1) acre.

B.    Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred fifty (150) feet.

C.    Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be one (1) acre.

D.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be fifteen (15%) percent of the lot area.

E.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be fifteen (15) feet. (Ord. 16-398 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-303 § 2 (part))


Chapter 17.24 (R1-2) SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT – TWENTY THOUSAND (20,000) SQUARE FEET PER DWELLING UNIT

Sections:

17.24.010    Purpose.

17.24.020    Permitted uses.

17.24.030    Conditional uses.

17.24.040    Height regulations.

17.24.050    Yard regulations.

17.24.060    Intensity of use regulations.


17.24.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to conserve and protect single-family residential development where minimum lots of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, present lot sizes, future land use needs and the availability of public utilities, and community facilities and services. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 97-138 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(4.1.01))


17.24.020 Permitted uses.

Buildings or premises used for the following purposes:

A.    Single-family dwellings excluding mobile homes and manufactured homes.

B.    Parks, playgrounds, tennis courts, and community buildings, provided such uses are conducted on a nonprofit basis.

C.    Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incidental to the above uses, including:

1.    All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a solid wall, wood or chain link fence not less than five (5) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height so as to prevent uninvited access, with self-latching gates, and shall be set back from all lot lines in accordance with Section 17.24.050.

2.    Fences or freestanding walls not to exceed a height of three (3) feet, six (6) inches in any required front yard, and not to exceed a height of six (6) feet in the side and rear yards. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part); Ord. 01-193; Ord. 97-138 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(4.1.02))


17.24.030 Conditional uses.

Buildings or premises used for the following purposes provided a conditional use permit is attained:

A.    Churches.

B.    Private schools.

C.    Day care center or home facility.

D.    Home occupations.

E.    Bed and breakfast.

F.    Corrals or pastures for the keeping of horses, subject to the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations). (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-193; Ord. 97-138 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(4.1.03))


17.24.040 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-293: Ord. 99-167, § 1: Ord. 97-138 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(4.1.04))


17.24.050 Yard regulations.

The required yards are as follows:

A.    Front Yard.

1.    There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    For through lots, a front yard shall be provided along both front lot lines.

3.    Yards along each street side of corner lots shall have a width not less than equal to the depth of the required front yard.

B.    Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than ten (10) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet, or in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel, fifteen (15%) percent of the total depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 97-138 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(4.1.05))


17.24.060 Intensity of use regulations.

A.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet.

C.    Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

D.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be thirty (30%) percent of the lot area.

E.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be fifteen (15) feet. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 97-138 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(4.1.06))


Chapter 17.28 (R1-4) SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT – TEN THOUSAND (10,000) SQUARE FEET PER DWELLING UNIT

Sections:

17.28.010    Purpose.

17.28.020    Use regulations.

17.28.030    Height regulations.

17.28.040    Yard regulations.

17.28.050    Intensity of use regulations.


17.28.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to conserve and protect single-family residential development where minimum lots of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, present lot sizes, future land use needs and the availability of public utilities. Principal uses permitted in this zoning district include single-family dwellings, churches, schools, parks, playgrounds and other community facilities. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(501))


17.28.020 Use regulations.

A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:

A.    Permitted uses under the R-Low zoning district, Section 17.20.020;

B.    Churches, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

C.    Private schools with a curriculum the same as customarily given in public schools, subject to a conditional use permit;

D.    Parks, playgrounds, tennis courts, and community buildings, provided such uses are conducted on a nonprofit basis;

E.    Home occupation subject to securing a conditional use permit;

F.    Fences or freestanding walls not to exceed a height of three (3) feet, six (6) inches in any required front yard, and not to exceed a height of six (6) feet in the side and rear yards;

G.    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses, including:

1.    Private swimming pools along with incidental installations, such as pumps and filters, provided such pool and incidental installations are screened from adjoining lots by a solid wall or protective fence at least six (6) feet in height, with self-latching gates, and provided such pool sets back from all lot lines in accordance with Section 17.28.040.

2.    Corrals for the keeping of horses, subject to securing a conditional use permit and the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations);

H.    Service to the public of water, gas, electricity, telephone, telegraph, steam, hot or cold air and sewage including waste treatment plants, subject to securing a conditional use permit. The foregoing shall be deemed to include attendant facilities and appurtenances to these uses, including, without limitations, distribution, collector and feeder lines, pumping or booster stations along pipelines, and substations along electric transmission lines. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-193; Ord. 99-164, § 1; Ord. 95-106 (part); Ord. 90-82 § (1)(502))


17.28.030 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-293; Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(503))


17.28.040 Yard regulations.

The required yards are as follows:

A.    Front Yard.

1.    There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    For through lots, a front yard shall be provided along both front lot lines.

3.    Yards along each street side of corner lots shall have a width equal to the depth of the required front yard.

B.    Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than ten (10) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet, or, in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel, fifteen (15%) percent of the total depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(504))


17.28.050 Intensity of use regulations.

A.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of eighty-five (85) feet.

C.    Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

D.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be thirty (30%) percent of the lot area.

E.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be fifteen (15) feet. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-284; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(505))


Chapter 17.32 (R1-6) SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT – SIX THOUSAND SIX HUNDRED (6,600) SQUARE FEET PER DWELLING UNIT

Sections:

17.32.010    Purpose.

17.32.020    Use regulations.

17.32.030    Height regulations.

17.32.040    Yard regulations.

17.32.050    Intensity of use regulations.


17.32.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to conserve and protect single-family residential development where minimum lots of not less than six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet in area are suitable and appropriate, taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, present lot sizes, future land use needs and the availability of public utilities. Principal uses permitted in this zoning district include single-family dwellings, churches, parks, playgrounds and other community facilities. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(601))


17.32.020 Use regulations.

A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:

A.    Single-family dwellings excluding mobile homes and manufactured homes;

B.    Churches, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

C.    Parks, playgrounds, tennis courts and community buildings provided such uses are conducted on a nonprofit basis;

D.    Home occupation subject to securing a conditional use permit;

E.    Fences or freestanding walls not to exceed a height of three (3) feet, six (6) inches in any required front yard, and not to exceed a height of six (6) feet in the side and rear yard;

F.    Private swimming pools along with incidental installations, such as pumps and filters, provided such pool and incidental installations are screened from adjoining lots by a solid wall or protective fence at least six (6) feet in height, with self-latching gates, and provided such pool sets back from all lot lines in accordance with Section 17.32.040.

F.    Corrals for the keeping of horses, subject to securing a conditional use permit and the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations). (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-193; Ord. 95-106 (part); Ord. 90-82 § (1)(602))


17.32.030 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-293; Ord. 99-167 § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(603))


17.32.040 Yard regulations.

The required yards are as follows:

A.    Front Yard.

1.    There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    For through lots, a front yard shall be provided along both front lot lines.

3.    Yards along each street side of corner lots shall have a width equal to the depth of the required front yard.

B.    Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than six (6) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet, or, in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel, fifteen (15%) percent of the total lot depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(604))


17.32.050 Intensity of use regulations.

A.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of fifty-five (55) feet.

C.    Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet.

D.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be thirty (30%) percent of the lot area.

E.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be twelve (12) feet. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(605))


Chapter 17.36 (R-2) MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT – TWELVE (12) DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE

Sections:

17.36.010    Purpose.

17.36.020    Use regulations.

17.36.030    Height regulations.

17.36.040    Yard regulations.

17.36.050    Intensity of use regulations.


17.36.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide for multiple-family housing along with other types of high-density housing in locations which are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, future land use needs, and the availability of public utilities. The minimum lot required is seven thousand (7,000) square feet in area and the maximum allowable density is twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. Principal uses permitted in this zoning district include multiple-family dwellings and other types of high-density housing, orphanages, rest homes, nursing homes and convents. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(701))


17.36.020 Use regulations.

A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:

A.    Single-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes and manufactured homes;

B.    Churches, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

C.    Private schools with a curriculum the same as customarily given in public schools, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

D.    Service to the public of water, gas, electricity, telephone, telegraph, steam, hot or cold air and sewage including wastewater treatment plants, subject to securing a conditional use permit. The foregoing shall be deemed to include attendant facilities and appurtenances to these uses, including, without limitation, distribution, collector and feeder lines, pumping or booster stations along pipelines, and substations along electric transmission lines;

E.    Golf courses including club houses located thereon, but not including miniature courses or practice driving tees operated for commercial purposes, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

F.    Parks, playgrounds, tennis courts and community buildings, provided such uses are conducted on a nonprofit basis;

G.    Home occupation, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

H.    Fences of freestanding walls not to exceed a height of three (3) feet, six (6) inches in any required front yard, and not to exceed a height of six (6) feet in the side and rear yards;

I.    Multiple-family dwellings, including townhouses, condominiums, apartments, and two (2) or three (3) family dwellings ("duplexes" and "triplexes");

J.    Boarding and lodging houses;

K.    Orphanages, rest homes, nursing homes and convents subject to securing a conditional use permit;

L.    Private swimming pools along with incidental installations, such as pumps and filters, provided such pool and incidental installations are screened from adjoining lots by a solid wall or protective fence at least six (6) feet in height, with self-latching gates, and provided such pool sets back from all lot lines in accordance with Section 17.36.040;

M.    Corrals for the keeping of horses, subject to securing a conditional use permit and the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations). (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-193; Ord. 95-106 (part); Ord. 90-82 § (1)(702))


17.36.030 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-293; Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(703))


17.36.040 Yard regulations.

The required yards are as follows:

A.    Front Yard.

1.    There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    For through lots, a front yard shall be provided along both front lot lines.

3.    Yards along each street side of corner lots shall have a width equal to not less than one-half (1/2) the depth of the required front yard. Yards along each street side of corner lots shall otherwise conform with regulations applicable to front yard.

B.    Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than five (5) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet, or, in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel, fifteen (15%) percent of the total lot depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(704))


17.36.050 Intensity of use regulations.

The intensity of use regulations are as follows:

A.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of seventy (70) feet.

C.    Building Area. The minimum building footprint for all residential structures in a multi-family development shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet.

D.    Density. The maximum allowable density is twelve (12) dwelling units per acre.

E.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50%) percent of the lot area.

F.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be ten (10) feet.

G.    Townhouses.

1.    Lot Size. Townhouse lots shall have no minimum lot area or width.

2.    Lot Coverage. Townhouse developments shall have no lot coverage requirements.

3.    Density. The maximum allowable density is twelve (12) dwelling units per acre.

4.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be ten (10) feet.

5.    All townhouse developments will be treated as subdivisions, and are subject to regulation under Chapter 16.04, subdivision regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(705))


Chapter 17.40 (R-3) MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT

Sections:

17.40.010    Purpose.

17.40.020    Use regulations.

17.40.030    Height regulations.

17.40.040    Yard regulations.

17.40.050    Intensity of use regulations.


17.40.010 Purpose.

A.    The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide for high-density housing along with certain nonresidential neighborhoods in locations which are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, future land use needs, and the availability of public utilities. The minimum lot required is six thousand (6,000) square feet in area and the maximum allowable density is twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.

B.    Principal uses permitted in this zoning district include high-density housing, hospitals and institutions of an educational, religious, charitable or philanthropic nature. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(801))


17.40.020 Use regulations.

A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:

A.    Apartments, townhouses, condominiums, two (2) and three (3) family dwellings ("duplexes" and "triplexes");

B.    Class A manufactured and factory-built homes. Class A homes meet the following definitions:

1.    "Class A factory-built home" means a residential dwelling unit or habitable room thereof which is either wholly or in substantial part manufactured at an off-site location to be assembled on site, except that it does not include a manufactured home. A factory-built home includes modular homes which meet state and local building codes.

2.    "Class A manufactured home" means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly on location, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976).

3.    Class A definitions will include the following design standards for either type of home:

a.    The home has a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and a minimum length of forty (40) feet.

b.    The pitch of the home’s roof has a minimum vertical rise of four (4) feet for each twelve (12) feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in conventional residential construction.

c.    The home has a minimum eave overhang of twelve (12) inches per side.

d.    The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick or masonry. The siding shall be compatible in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction.

e.    A foundation wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access and constructed of masonry, is installed so that it encloses the area under the home to the ground level. This foundation wall shall be constructed per the installation standards established by the State of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing.

f.    The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus are removed after placement on a residential lot and before occupancy.

g.    The home has a permanent landing of not less than sixty-four (64) square feet at each door opening.

h.    The Class A home being placed on a residential lot must be of new construction and its first placement.

i.    A Class A manufactured home placement permit will be required to ensure that all of the above design standards have been met prior to occupancy of the home;

C.    Any use permitted in the R-2 zoning district, subject to all the regulations for such R-2 zoning district unless the use is otherwise regulated in this chapter;

D.    Hospitals and institutions of an educational, religious, charitable or philanthropic nature, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

E.    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses;

F.    Corrals for the keeping of horses, subject to securing a conditional use permit and the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations). (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-193; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(802))


17.40.030 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-293: Ord. 99-167 § 1: Ord. 90-82 § (1)(803))


17.40.040 Yard regulations.

The required yards are as follows:

A.    Front Yard.

1.    There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    For through lots, a front yard shall be provided along both front lot lines.

3.    Yards along each street side of corner lots shall have a width equal to not less than one-half (1/2) the depth of the required front yard. Yards along each street side of corner lots shall otherwise conform with regulations applicable to front yards.

B.    Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of building having a width of not less than five (5) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet, or, in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel, fifteen (15%) percent of the total lot depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(804))


17.40.050 Intensity of use regulations.

The intensity of use regulations are as follows:

A.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet.

C.    Building Area. The minimum building footprint for all residential structures in a multi-family development shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet.

D.    Density. The maximum allowable density is twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.

E.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50%) percent of the lot area.

F.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be ten (10) feet. 

G.    Townhouses.

1.    Lot Size. Townhouse lots shall have no minimum lot area or width.

2.    Lot Coverage. Townhouse developments shall have no lot coverage requirements.

3.    Density. The maximum allowable density is twelve (12) dwelling units per acre.

4.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be ten (10) feet. 

H.    All townhouse developments will be treated as subdivisions, and are subject to regulation under Chapter 16.04, subdivision regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(705), (805)).


Chapter 17.44 (MH-4) MANUFACTURED HOME NEIGHBORHOOD ZONING DISTRICT – TEN THOUSAND (10,000) SQUARE FEET PER DWELLING UNIT

Sections:

17.44.010    Purpose.

17.44.020    Use regulations.

17.44.030    Height regulations.

17.44.040    Yard regulations.

17.44.050    Intensity of use regulations.


17.44.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide location for neighborhoods that can accommodate manufactured home subdivisions where minimum lots of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, present lot sizes, future land use needs and the availability of public utilities. Principal uses permitted in this zoning district include single-family dwellings; mobile, manufactured, and modular homes; and churches, parks, and other community facilities. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(901))


17.44.020 Use regulations.

A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:

A.    Single-family dwellings, including mobile, manufactured, and modular homes;

B.    Churches, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

C.    Private schools with a curriculum the same as customarily given in public schools, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

D.    Parks, playgrounds, tennis courts and community buildings, provided such uses are conducted on a nonprofit basis;

E.    Home occupation subject to securing a conditional use permit;

F.    Fences or freestanding walls not to exceed a height of three (3) feet, six (6) inches in any required front yard, and not to exceed a height of six (6) feet in the side and rear yards;

G.    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses, including:

1.    Private swimming pools along with incidental installations, such as pumps and filters, provided such pools and incidental installations are screened from adjoining lots by a solid wall or protective fence at least six (6) feet in height, with self-latching gates, and provided such pool sets back from all lot lines in accordance with Section 17.44.040;

2.    Corrals for the keeping of horses, subject to securing a conditional use permit and the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations). (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-193; Ord. 96-116 § 2; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(902))


17.44.030 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-293; Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(903))


17.44.040 Yard regulations.

The required yards are as follows:

A.    Front Yard.

1.    There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    For through lots, a front yard shall be provided along both front lot lines.

3.    Yards along each street side of corner lots shall have a width equal to the depth of the required front yard.

B.    Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than ten (10) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet, or, in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel, fifteen (15%) percent of the total lot depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(904))


17.44.050 Intensity of use regulations.

A.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet.

C.    Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

D.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be thirty (30%) percent of the lot area.

E.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be fifteen (15) feet. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(905))


Chapter 17.48 (MH-6) MANUFACTURED HOME NEIGHBORHOOD ZONING DISTRICT – SIX THOUSAND SIX HUNDRED (6,600) SQUARE FEET PER DWELLING UNIT

Sections:

17.48.010    Purpose.

17.48.020    Use regulations.

17.48.030    Height regulations.

17.48.040    Yard regulations.

17.48.050    Intensity of use regulations.


17.48.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide location for neighborhoods that can accommodate manufactured home subdivisions where minimum lots of not less than six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet in area are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, present lot sizes, future land use needs and the availability of public utilities. Principal uses permitted in this zoning district include mobile homes, manufactured homes, modular homes, churches, parks, and other community facilities. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1001))


17.48.020 Use regulations.

A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:

A.    Mobile, manufactured or modular homes;

B.    Churches, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

C.    Private schools with a curriculum the same as customarily given in public schools, subject to securing a conditional use permit;

D.    Parks, playgrounds, tennis courts and community buildings, provided such uses are conducted on a nonprofit basis;

E.    Home occupation subject to securing a conditional use permit;

F.    Fences or freestanding walls not to exceed a height of three (3) feet, six (6) inches in any required front yard, and not to exceed a height of six (6) feet in the side and rear yards;

G.    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses, including:

1.    Private swimming pools along with incidental installations, such as pumps and filters, provided such pools and incidental installations are screened from adjoining lots by a solid wall or protective fence at least six (6) feet in height, with self-latching gates, and provided such pool sets back from all lot lines in accordance with Section 17.48.040;

2.    Corrals for the keeping of horses, subject to securing a conditional use permit and the requirements of Section 17.104.110 (Equine regulations). (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-193; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1002))


17.48.030 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-293; Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1003))


17.48.040 Yard regulations.

The required yards are as follows:

A.    Front Yard.

1.    There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    For through lots, a front yard shall be provided along both front lot lines.

3.    Yards along each street side of corner lots shall have a width equal to the depth of the required front yard.

B.    Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than six (6) feet.

C.    Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet, or, in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel, fifteen (15%) percent of the total lot depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1004))


17.48.050 Intensity of use regulations.

A.    Lot Area. Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet.

C.    Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet.

D.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be thirty (30%) percent of the lot area.

E.    Distance Between Buildings. The minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be twelve (12) feet. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1005))


Chapter 17.52 (MHP) MANUFACTURED HOME PARK ZONING DISTRICT

Sections:

17.52.010    Purpose.

17.52.020    Uses permitted.

17.52.030    Site plan approval required.

17.52.040    Streets.

17.52.050    Detached accessory buildings.

17.52.060    Private use accessory buildings.


17.52.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide seasonal or permanent housing where residence is exclusively in manufactured home use, taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, future land use needs, and the availability of infrastructure. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1101))


17.52.020 Uses permitted.

Manufactured home park, subject to the following:

A.    The manufactured home park lot or parcel shall be not less than five (5) acres, inclusive of rights-of-way, easements or dedications, and shall observe the minimum area standards set forth herein.

B.    Each manufactured home space shall have an area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet and a width of less than forty-five (45) feet.

C.    Manufactured homes shall be located on manufactured home spaces so as to provide a minimum setback from the nearest edge of any interior drive or roadway of not less than eight (8) feet and so as to provide a minimum setback from any manufactured home space boundaries not in common with the edge of any interior drive or roadway of not less than five (5) feet, except that in the case of manufactured home spaces having boundaries in common with two (2) or more interior drives or roadways then the minimum setback from the nearest edge of the interior drive or roadway shall be not less than twenty (20) feet on the manufactured home’s entry side and not less than five (5) feet on the manufactured home’s nonentry side.

D.    The minimum distance between manufactured homes in the same manufactured home park shall be ten (10) feet.

E.    Minimum distance or setbacks required herein shall be the shortest of horizontal dimensions measured from the nearest portion of the sidewalk of a manufactured home or from the patio cover, carport, cabana, ramada or similar appurtenances.

F.    The manufactured home park shall be screened from adjoining lots or parcels, not in manufactured home park use, by a solid fence or wall of not less than four (4) feet in height nor more than six (6) feet in height. The screening fence or wall shall be constructed within six (6) months from the date of approval of the manufactured home park plans. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1102))


17.52.030 Site plan approval required.

Site plan review, in accordance with Chapter 17.84, is required for any proposed manufactured home park. In addition to the requirements as specified in Chapter 17.84, the following shall be required:

A.    All manufactured home park spaces on the plan shall be clearly numbered for proper identification.

B.    A permit to construct shall not be issued until the sanitation facilities and water supply have been approved by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

C.    Thirty (30%) percent of the property, exclusive of roads and parking, shall be maintained as meaningful open space. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1103))


17.52.040 Streets.

A.    All streets within the manufactured home park shall be private. Installation and maintenance will be the responsibility of the owner.

B.    If the manufactured home park is bordered by a potential or existing major thoroughfare, section line, mid-section line, collector street, minor street or marginal street, that portion bordering the manufactured home park shall be dedicated for public use and constructed in accordance with the current uniform standard details and specifications for public works construction.

C.    If it is determined that the dedication and construction of the street will be required, as described in subsection B of this section, then construction of the streets shall begin within six (6) months from the date of approval of the park plans and shall be completed within twelve (12) months after approval of the park plans. Necessary financial assurances shall be submitted to guarantee construction of all required off-site improvements. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1104))


17.52.050 Detached accessory buildings.

A.    All accessory buildings requiring a building permit, as established by the Town Building Code, shall be located on the site in accordance with the following schedule:

1.    Maximum height: thirty (30) feet;

2.    Minimum front yards: fifteen (15) feet;

3.    Minimum side yards: ten (10) feet;

4.    Minimum rear yard: ten (10) feet.

B.    The minimum setbacks, as established above, shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of the site. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1105))


17.52.060 Private use accessory buildings.

All accessory buildings not requiring a building permit, as established by the Town Building Code, shall be located in accordance with Chapter 17.104. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1106))


Chapter 17.56 (RVP) RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK ZONING DISTRICT

Sections:

17.56.010    Purpose.

17.56.020    Uses permitted.

17.56.030    Site plan approval required.

17.56.040    Streets.

17.56.050    Detached accessory buildings.

17.56.060    Private use accessory buildings.


17.56.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide seasonal or permanent housing where residence is exclusively in recreational vehicle use, taking into consideration existing conditions, including present use of land, future land use needs and the availability of infrastructure. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1201))


17.56.020 Uses permitted.

Recreational vehicle (RV) park, subject to the following:

A.    The recreational vehicle (RV) park lot or parcel shall be not less than five (5) acres, inclusive of rights-of-way, easements or dedications, and shall observe the minimum area standards set forth herein.

B.    Each recreational vehicle space shall have an area of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and a width of not less than thirty (30) feet.

C.    Recreational vehicles shall be located on spaces so as to provide a minimum setback from the nearest edge of any interior drive or roadway of not less than five (5) feet and so as to provide a minimum setback from any RV space boundary not in common with the edge of any interior drive or roadway of not less than five (5) feet, except that in the case of RV spaces having boundaries in common with two (2) or more interior drives or roadways then the minimum setback from the nearest edge of the interior drive or roadway shall be not less than twenty (20) feet on the recreational vehicle entry side and not less than five (5) feet on the nonentry side.

D.    The minimum distance between recreational vehicles in the same park shall be fifteen (15) feet.

E.    Minimum distance or setbacks required herein shall be the shortest of horizontal dimensions measured from the nearest portion of the sidewall of a recreational vehicle or from the patio cover, ramada or similar appurtenances.

F.    The RV park shall be screened from adjoining lots or parcels, not in RV park use, by a solid fence or wall of not less than four (4) feet in height nor more than six (6) feet in height. The screening fence or wall shall be constructed within six (6) months from date of approval of the RV park plans. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1202))


17.56.030 Site plan approval required.

Site plan review, in accordance with Chapter 17.84, is required for any proposed RV park. In addition to the requirements as specified in Chapter 17.84, the following shall be required:

A.    All RV park spaces on the plan shall be clearly numbered for proper identification.

B.    A permit to construct shall not be issued until the sanitation facilities and water supply have been approved by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

C.    Thirty (30%) percent of the property, exclusive of roads and parking, shall be maintained as meaningful open space. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1203))


17.56.040 Streets.

A.    All streets within the RV park shall be private. Installation and maintenance will be the responsibility of owner.

B.    If the RV park is bordered by a potential or existing major thoroughfare, section line, mid-section line, collector street, minor street or marginal street, that portion bordering the RV park shall be dedicated for public use and constructed in accordance with the current uniform standard details and specifications for public works construction.

C.    If it is determined that the dedication and construction of the streets will be required, as described in subsection B of this section, then construction of the streets shall begin within six (6) months from the date of approval of the park plans and shall be completed within twelve (12) months after approval of the park plans. Necessary financial assurances shall be submitted to guarantee construction of all required off-site improvements. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1204))


17.56.050 Detached accessory buildings.

A.    All accessory buildings requiring a building permit, as established by the Town Building Code, shall be located on the site in accordance with the following schedule:

1.    Maximum height: thirty (30) feet;

2.    Minimum front yard: fifteen (15) feet;

3.    Minimum side yards: ten (10) feet;

4.    Minimum rear yard: ten (10) feet.

B.    The minimum setbacks, as established above, shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of the site. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1205))


17.56.060 Private use accessory buildings.

All accessory buildings, not requiring a building permit, established by the Town Building Code, shall be located in accordance with Chapter 17.104. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1206))


Chapter 17.60 (C-R) COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL ZONING DISTRICT

Sections:

17.60.010    Purpose.

17.60.020    Use regulations.

17.60.030    Height regulations.

17.60.040    Yard regulations.

17.60.050    Intensity of use regulations.

17.60.070    Additional regulations.

Code reviser’s note: At the Town’s request, Section 17.60.060, Loading and unloading regulations, has been deleted to reflect Ord. 19-419’s amendment of Chapter 17.104.


17.60.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide for recreational, entertainment, lodging and dining type facilities. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1301))


17.60.020 Use regulations.

A.    Any uses provided for in R-Low 1;

B.    Antique stores;

C.    Art and dance instruction;

D.    Art galleries;

E.    Automobile parts and supplies, but not including the dismantling and sale of used parts from vehicles on the premises;

F.    Bakeries and candy stores;

G.    Banks;

H.    Barber and beauty shops;

I.    Book, stationery and gift stores;

J.    Bowling alleys;

K.    Catering establishments;

L.    Craft shops which include ceramics, mosaics, fabrics, jewelry, leather goods, silk screening, dress designing, sculpturing and wood carving, provided such operations do not create offensive noise, dust, odor or health hazards;

M.    Day nursery and nursery schools;

N.    Florist shops;

O.    Hotels and motels;

P.    Ice cream stores;

Q.    Jewelry stores;

R.    Miniature golf courses;

S.    Music conservatory and music instruction;

T.    Nightclubs;

U.    Offices;

V.    Photographers and artists studios;

W.    Restaurants and cafes;

X.    Sporting goods stores;

Y.    Taxidermists; and

Z.    Other similar uses as determined by the Director and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1302))


17.60.030 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1303))


17.60.040 Yard regulations.

A.    Front Yard. Along Highway 260 there will be a twenty (20) foot front yard requirement. Native trees and vegetation must be used to establish a forest landscaping theme. Landscaping plans shall be developed in accordance with the landscaping regulations of the Town. Parking is not allowed in front yard setbacks.

B.    Side Yard.

1.    There shall be a side yard having a width of not less than three (3) feet.

2.    If a lot is occupied by a dwelling, there shall be a side yard on each side of the dwelling having a width of not less than five (5) feet.

3.    Where a lot is adjacent to a rural or residential zoning district, there shall be a side yard on the side of the lot adjacent to such rural or residential zoning district having a width of not less than fifteen (15) feet.

4.    Where a corner lot abuts a rural or residential zoning district, whether or not separated by an alley, there shall be a side yard on the street side of such corner lot having a width of not less than ten (10) feet.

C.    Rear Yard.

1.    There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than five (5) feet.

2.    Where a lot abuts a rural or residential zoning district, whether or not separated by a public street or alley, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

3.    If a lot is occupied by a dwelling, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet, or, in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel, fifteen (15%) percent of the total lot depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1304))


17.60.050 Intensity of use regulations.

The intensity of use regulations are as follows:

A.    Lot Area. Any lot shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Any lot shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet.

C.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50%) percent of the lot area. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1305))


17.60.070 Additional regulations.

The additional regulations are as follows:

A.    Any use including incidental or accessory storage, not within a completely enclosed building, shall be screened from adjoining rural or residential zoning districts by a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height.

B.    Any lighting shall be placed so as to reflect the light away from adjoining rural or residential zoning districts. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1307))


Chapter 17.64 (C-1) LIGHT COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT

Sections:

17.64.010    Purpose.

17.64.020    Use regulations.

17.64.030    Conditional uses.

17.64.040    Height regulations.

17.64.050    Yard regulations.

17.64.060    Intensity of use regulations.

17.64.080    Additional regulations.

Code reviser’s note: At the Town’s request, Section 17.64.070, Loading and unloading regulations, has been deleted to reflect Ord. 19-419’s amendment of Chapter 17.104.


17.64.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide for shops and services in convenient locations to meet the daily needs of families in the immediate residential neighborhoods and wholesaling or distribution activities in locations where there is adequate access to major streets or highways. Principal uses permitted in this zoning district include retail commerce, commercial entertainment, and some uses of a light manufacturing nature. This chapter is not intended to allow uses which would impose hazards or a nuisance to adjacent or other properties by reason of smoke, soot, odor, noise, glare, fumes or other conditions that would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-287; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1401))


17.64.020 Use regulations.

A.    Any use permitted in the R-3 zoning district is subject to all the regulations specified in the use regulations for such R-3 zoning district unless the use is otherwise regulated in this chapter;

B.    Any use permitted in the C-R zoning district;

C.    Antique stores;

D.    Art and dance instruction and art galleries;

E.    Art shops;

F.    Automobile laundries, provided steam cleaning is confined to a completely enclosed building;

G.    Automobile parts and supplies, but not including the dismantling and sale of used parts from vehicles on the premises;

H.    Automobile repair shops or public garages, provided heavy repairs and objectionable activities are conducted within a completely enclosed building or a work area which is fully screened from view from any public street or surrounding property. Such screening shall be approved by the Design Review Board. Heavy repairs and objectionable activities are considered to include, but are not limited to, engine overhaul, replacement of transmission or drive train, steam cleaning, body and fender work, or incidental painting. Incidental repairs and nonobjectionable activities which would not impose hazards or a nuisance to adjacent or other properties may be conducted outside the building or screened area. Any automobile repair shop or public garage existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be classified as a nonconforming use subject to the terms and conditions of Chapter 17.112;

I.    Automobile sales and rentals including display room;

J.    Awning and canvas stores;

K.    Banks;

L.    Bakeries and candy stores, including the manufacturing of bakery and candy products for on-site retail sales only;

M.    Barber and beauty shops;

N.    Bars and liquor stores;

O.    Baths, Turkish, including masseurs;

P.    Blueprinting and photostating establishments;

Q.    Boat sales;

R.    Book, stationery and gift stores;

S.    Bowling alleys;

T.    Catering establishments;

U.    Clock and watch repair shops;

V.    Clothing and costume rentals;

W.    Clothing and dry goods stores;

X.    Craft shops which include ceramics, mosaics, fabrics, jewelry, leather goods, silk screening, dress designing, sculpturing, and wood carving;

Y.    Dance halls and nightclubs;

Z.    Day nurseries and nursery schools;

AA.    Delicatessen stores;

BB.    Drive-in restaurants and refreshment stands;

CC.    Drugstores and soda fountains;

DD.    Electrical shops;

EE.    Equipment rentals and sales, provided all repairs, reconditioning or rebuilding are in compliance with subsection H of this section;

FF.    Feed stores;

GG.    Florist shops;

HH.    Funeral homes and chapels;

II.    Furniture stores;

JJ.    Gasoline service stations;

KK.    Grocery stores and meat markets, provided there is no slaughtering of animals or poultry on the premises;

LL.    Hardware stores, appliance stores and indoor lumber sales;

MM.    Ice cream stores;

NN.    Jewelry stores;

OO.    Key and gun shops, including incidental repair work;

PP.    Laundry agencies and self-service laundries;

QQ.    Medical marijuana cultivation in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17.102, Medical Marijuana;

RR.    Medical marijuana dispensary in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17.102, Medical Marijuana;

SS.    Miniature golf courses;

TT.    Music conservatory and music instruction;

UU.    Offices;

VV.    Paint and wallpaper stores;

WW.    Parking lots;

XX.    Pet shops, not involving treatment or boarding;

YY.    Photographers and artists’ studios;

ZZ.    Pool halls;

AAA.    Private schools operated as a commercial enterprise;

BBB.    Precision and musical instrument repair shops, including optical repair;

CCC.    Radio and television broadcasting stations and studios, but not including transmitter towers and stations;

DDD.    Radio and television stores and repair shops;

EEE.    Restaurants and cafes;

FFF.    Retail stores;

GGG.    Shoe repair shops;

HHH.    Tailor shops;

III.    Taxidermists;

JJJ.    Used car and truck sales lots;

KKK.    Variety stores;

LLL.    Veterinary clinic, not involving boarding of animals;

MMM.    Accessory building and uses customarily incidental to the above stores, does not include public warehousing or mini-storage complexes; and

NNN.    Other similar uses as determined by the Director and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-346 § 2; Ord. 06-287; Ord. 95-106 (part); Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1402))


17.64.030 Conditional uses.

Buildings or premises used for the following purposes subject to conditional use permit:

A.    Veterinary hospitals or kennels. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.64.040 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-287; Ord. 99-167, § 1: Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1403))


17.64.050 Yard regulations.

A.    Front Yard. Along Highway 260 there shall be a twenty (20) foot front yard requirement. Native trees and vegetation must be used to establish a forest landscaping theme. Landscaping plans shall be developed in accordance with the landscaping regulations of the Town. Parking is not allowed in front yard setbacks.

B.    Side Yard.

1.    There shall be a side yard having a width of not less than three (3) feet.

2.    If a lot is occupied by a dwelling, there shall be a side yard on each side of the dwelling having a width of not less than five (5) feet.

3.    Where a lot is adjacent to a rural or residential zoning district, there shall be a side yard on the side of the lot adjacent to such rural or residential zoning district having a width of not less than fifteen (15) feet.

4.    Where a corner lot abuts a rural or residential zoning district, whether or not separated by an alley, there shall be a side yard on the street side of such corner lot having a width of not less than ten (10) feet.

C.    Rear Yard.

1.    There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than five (5) feet.

2.    Where a lot abuts a rural or residential zoning district, whether or not separated by a public street or alley, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

3.    If a lot is occupied by a dwelling, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet, or in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel fifteen (15%) percent of the total lot depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1404))


17.64.060 Intensity of use regulations.

The intensity of use regulations are as follows:

A.    Lot Area. Any lot shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Any lot shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet.

C.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50%) percent of the lot area. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1406))


17.64.080 Additional regulations.

The additional regulations are as follows:

A.    Any use including incidental or accessory storage, not within a completely enclosed building, shall be screened from adjoining rural or residential zoning districts by a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height.

B.    Any lighting shall be placed so as to reflect the light away from adjoining rural or residential zoning districts.

C.    No uses which would impose hazards or create a nuisance to adjacent or other properties by reason of smoke, soot, odor, noise, glare, fumes or other conditions that would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare shall be allowed in the C-1 zone. A court may order the owner of property to abate any such hazard or nuisance in a civil or criminal proceeding in addition to any other sanctions or penalties authorized by this Town Code or other applicable law. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1407))


Chapter 17.68 (C-2) HEAVY COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT

Sections:

17.68.010    Purpose.

17.68.020    Use regulations.

17.68.030    Height regulations.

17.68.040    Yard regulations.

17.68.050    Intensity of use regulations.

17.68.070    Additional regulations.

Code reviser’s note: At the Town’s request, Section 17.68.060, Loading and unloading regulations, has been deleted to reflect Ord. 19-419’s amendment of Chapter 17.104.


17.68.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to provide for heavy commercial uses in locations which are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration land uses on adjacent or nearby properties, access to a major street or highway, or other means of transportation, and the availability of public utilities. This chapter is not intended to allow uses which would impose hazards or a nuisance to adjacent or other properties by reason of smoke, soot, odor, noise, glare, fumes or other conditions that would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1501))


17.68.020 Use regulations.

A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:

A.    Any use permitted in the C-1 zoning district is subject to all the regulations in the use regulations for such C-1 zoning district unless the use is otherwise regulated in this chapter. Dwelling units, except as allowed herein, or other places of domicile, hotels, resort hotels and motels, and horse corrals and/or other facilities for the keeping of livestock shall not be permitted;

B.    Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios, and phonographs, including the manufacture of small parts only, such as coils, condensers, transformers and crystal holders;

C.    Automobile repair shops or public garages;

D.    Books, hand binding and tooling;

E.    Cabinet and carpenter shops;

F.    Compounding of cosmetics and pharmaceutical products;

G.    Construction equipment: sales, service and rental;

H.    Construction material sales yard including the manufacture of material such as concrete and asphalt and the storage of aggregates;

I.    Frozen food lockers;

J.    Gasoline or flammables bulk station provided the design, construction and maintenance conforms to applicable codes governing such bulk station;

K.    Ice distributing stations;

L.    Jewelry manufacture from precious metals and minerals;

M.    Laboratories, medical, dental, experimental, photo or motion pictures, research or testing;

N.    Lumber yards located out of doors, including any outdoor lumber sales;

O.    Manufacture of medical, dental and drafting instruments;

P.    Manufacture of optical goods and equipment, watches, clocks and other similar precision instruments;

Q.    Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as candy, cosmetics, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, but not including the refining and rendering of fats and oils;

R.    Manufacture of electrical or electronic apparatus, musical instruments, games and toys;

S.    Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment, including the use by artists, of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, glass, hair, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wire, yarns, wood not involving planing mills, and paint not employing a boiling process;

T.    Medical marijuana cultivation in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17.102, Medical Marijuana;

U.    Medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facilities in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17.102, Medical Marijuana;

V.    Milk depots;

W.    Manufactured home and travel trailer sales;

X.    Offices;

Y.    Plumbing shops;

Z.    Public garages;

AA.    Printing, lithography and publishing establishments;

BB.    Radio and television broadcasting stations and studios, but not including transmitter towers and stations;

CC.    Sexually oriented businesses as defined in Section 5.20.020;

DD.    Stone monument sales;

EE.    Tinsmith shops;

FF.    Trade schools;

GG.    Upholstery shops;

HH.    Veterinary hospital or kennels;

II.    Wholesale stores;

JJ.    Any other office, laboratory and manufacturing uses similar to those uses enumerated herein which do not create any danger to the public health, safety and general welfare in surrounding areas and which do not create any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare and which by reason of high value in relation to size and weight of merchandise received and shipped create very little truck traffic;

KK.    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses;

LL.    Warehousing and storage, including construction material and equipment storage, public utilities materials and equipment storage, public warehouses (including mini-storage complexes), but not including the warehousing and storage of explosives and junk;

MM.    Waste control facility including all equipment necessary to collect and dispose of garbage, trash, and the like (does not include sanitary landfills);

NN.    Welding and blacksmith shop or machine shop, electroplating and electrowinning lightweight nonferrous metals not causing noxious fumes or odors;

OO.    Single-family dwelling or manufactured home to be used exclusively by the business owner, operator, watchman or caretaker;

PP.    Any other similar uses as determined by the Director and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-346 § 3; Ord. 06-287; Ord. 01-193; Ord. 00-179; Ord. 95-106 (part); Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1502))


17.68.030 Height regulations.

Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof, unless otherwise provided in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-287; Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1503))


17.68.040 Yard regulations.

A.    Front Yard. There shall be a twenty (20) foot front yard requirement for properties adjacent to existing and proposed major streets. Parking is not allowed in front yards. For other properties located within the interior of any proposed development, there shall be a front yard of not less than ten (10) feet.

B.    Side yards are not required except as follows:

1.    If a lot is occupied by a dwelling, there shall be a side yard on each side of the dwelling having a width of not less than fifteen (15) feet.

2.    Where a lot is adjacent to a rural or residential zoning district, there shall be a side yard on the side of the lot adjacent to such rural or residential zoning district having a width of not less than fifteen (15) feet.

3.    Where a corner lot abuts a rural or residential zoning district, whether or not separated by a street or alley, there shall be a side yard on the street side of such corner lot having a width of not less than twenty (20) feet.

C.    Rear yards are not required except as follows:

1.    Where a lot abuts a rural or residential zoning district, whether or not separated by a street or alley, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    If a lot is occupied by a dwelling, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet, or in the case of a legally recorded undersized lot or parcel fifteen (15%) percent of the total lot depth. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1504))


17.68.050 Intensity of use regulations.

The intensity of use regulations are as follows:

A.    Lot Area. Any lot shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet.

B.    Lot Width. Any lot shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet.

C.    Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50%) percent of the lot area. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1505))


17.68.070 Additional regulations.

The additional regulations are as follows:

A.    Any property proposed for development, adjoining a rural or residential zoning district, or abutting a street or alley, shall be screened by a solid masonry (block, stone or brick) wall six (6) feet in height. Said wall shall be subject to review by the Design Review Board.

B.    Native trees and vegetation must be used to establish a forest landscaping theme along all major streets bordering the proposed development and within the twenty (20) foot front yard requirements. Properties located within the interior of any proposed development shall be landscaped in accordance with the criteria as contained within the Town landscaping regulations and subject to approval by the Design Review Board.

C.    Any lighting shall be placed so as to reflect the light away from neighboring lots or properties.

D.    No uses which would impose hazards or create a nuisance to adjacent or other properties by reason of smoke, soot, odor, noise, glare, fumes or other conditions that would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare shall be allowed in the C-2 zone. A court may order the owner of property to abate any such hazard or nuisance in a civil or criminal proceeding in addition to any other sanctions or penalties authorized by this Town Code or other applicable law. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-287; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1507))


Chapter 17.72 (PUD) PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT

Sections:

17.72.010    Purpose.

17.72.020    Provisions required within the PUD zone.

17.72.030    Types of planned unit development.

17.72.040    Special provisions.


17.72.010 Purpose.

A.    The purpose of the planned unit development zone is to provide for the development of subdivisions and other land use projects containing various dwelling types, necessary commercial center, off-street parking areas, unbuilt lot areas for recreation, and to preserve a rural atmosphere.

B.    Deviations from design standards for a specific zone or zones may be permitted provided unbuilt lot areas are developed and maintained for the use of the residents; and provided further, that the parcel size, soil conditions, terrain, ground cover and other significant natural features favor this type of development. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.72.020 Provisions required within the PUD zone.

Planned unit development segments are required within the planned unit development zone. A planned unit development will provide for:

A.    Careful application of design which shall be encouraged in order that a more functional, aesthetically pleasing and harmonious living and working environment may be achieved within the Town which otherwise may not be possible by strict adherence to the other chapters of these regulations. In all cases a planned unit development design shall, together with dwelling types and land use, complement each other and harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the area.

B.    Submission of documents detailing the method of title conveyance, type of estate to be granted, method of maintenance of open areas and service areas, conditions of use of the open or recreation areas shall be made available to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its approval. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1602))


17.72.030 Types of planned unit development.

A.    Residential Planned Unit Developments.

1.    Residential planned unit development property uses may be designed to contain mixtures of single-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings including townhouses, condominiums, apartments or patio houses, either single or two (2) story. The proposed structures may be arranged individually, in groups, or in clusters, without regard to lot areas or immediate density, providing an appropriate amount of land is set aside under a common ownership of all the property owners for permanent recreation and unbuilt lot area uses.

2.    The purpose of the residential planned unit development is to provide for residential development wherein variation in the lot size, dwelling types and unbuilt lot area about them is warranted due to topography or other considerations.

3.    The owners or authorized agents of a site may submit to the Director a plan to develop the entire site as a residential planned unit development.

4.    The plan shall be referred to the Director for its review.

5.    The Director shall then present his or her report and recommendation and the plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation to the Town Council.

6.    The recommendation of the Commission shall include the reasons for approval or disapproval of the plan, and if recommended for approval specific evidence and facts showing that the plan meets with the following:

a.    That the buildings shall be used only for single-family dwellings, two (2) family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings, customary accessory uses such as off-street parking and community facilities.

b.    That the average lot area per dwelling unit, exclusive of the area occupied by streets, shall not be less than that required by the zoning district regulation otherwise applicable to the site.

c.    That the proposed residential planned unit development will not adversely affect adjacent property or the permitted use thereof.

7.    The recommendation of the Commission may include reasonable conditions as deemed necessary to promote the purpose of these regulations including but not limited to the following:

a.    Yards and unbuilt lot area;

b.    Fences and walls;

c.    Regulations of points of vehicular ingress and egress;

d.    Regulation of signs;

e.    Landscaping and maintenance thereof;

f.    Maintenance of grounds;

g.    Time limit within which the proposed residential planned unit development shall be developed.

8.    Building permits that are in accordance with the approved plan may be issued even though the use of land and the location of the buildings to be erected do not conform to the zoning district regulations otherwise applicable to the site.

9.    The establishment of the residential planned unit development may be accomplished in any rural or residential zoning district and not in any other zoning district.

10.    Amendments shall be processed in the same manner as the initial plan to develop a site as a residential planned unit development.

B.    Neighborhood Planned Unit Developments. When a neighborhood planned unit development is granted, the property uses may be designed to contain a range of dwelling types, necessary shopping center, off-street parking areas, parks, playgrounds, school sites and other community facilities. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1603))


17.72.040 Special provisions.

A.    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions as prescribed in Chapter 17.104, except as herein modified, including but not limited to the following:

1.    Off-street parking, for residential planned unit developments, shall be required as set forth in Section 17.104.070.

2.    Signs: as determined appropriate by Commission action.

3.    No minimum lot size is established for planned unit developments which may be located in subdivisions, other residential and commercial areas, in which unbuilt lot area, recreational area and other facilities are provided.

B.    The following development standards shall apply to all planned unit developments:

1.    Building heights shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in conjunction with a development plan. Thirty (30%) percent of the property, exclusive of roads and parking areas, shall be maintained as meaningful unbuilt lot area.

2.    All trash collection areas shall be enclosed with a fence or wall. Said fence or wall shall be subject to review by the Design Review Board.

3.    The minimum distance between one (1) story main buildings shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. A two (2) story main building shall not be erected closer than twenty (20) feet to any other main building.

4.    No part of any building shall be closer than five (5) feet from the setback line as prescribed in Section 17.104.060. Where off-street parking is provided, a minimum distance of five (5) feet from this parking area shall be required.

5.    No individual sewage disposal system shall be permitted until a report has been received by the Town Council from the County Health Department, the Arizona Department of Health Services and the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District, stating that such a system will be acceptable. All individual and community sewage disposal systems must be approved by the State and County Health Departments and the Pinetop-Lakeside Sanitary District.

6.    Water system shall be approved by State and County Health Departments and be of such adequacy to support fire hydrants of type and number as recommended by the appropriate fire department.

7.    All recreation areas shall be of a size, based upon the particular use, adequate to meet the needs of the anticipated population, and shall be arranged so as to be readily accessible to the residents of the development.

8.    Adequate and permanent access of each family dwelling shall be provided for pedestrians and emergency vehicles.

9.    A site plan conforming to the requirements of Chapter 17.84 shall be submitted to the Town.

10.    Any area shown on the final subdivision plat as a public or private street shall be constructed to standards as specified in the Town subdivision regulations and shall provide building setbacks as detailed in Section 17.104.060.

C.    Driveways may be constructed in the common ownership areas of the development to serve one (1) or more dwelling units.

D.    It is recommended that parking areas be provided close to each dwelling unit and access be provided via driveways.

E.    As part of the review process, the overall road and driveway layout will be checked to ascertain that provisions have been made for the public health and safety. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-167, § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1604))


Chapter 17.76 (OS) OPEN SPACE/PARK ZONING DISTRICT

Sections:

17.76.010    Purpose.

17.76.020    Uses permitted.

17.76.030    Site plan approval required.

17.76.040    Special provisions.


17.76.010 Purpose.

The principal purpose of this zoning district is to preserve, conserve and protect the native and manmade open space and recreation areas throughout the Town. It is intended that this district will provide open space for a variety of uses such as conservation of natural amenities, aesthetics, hiking, wildlife habitat, equestrian riding areas, and park and recreation facilities among other similar uses. The open space/park zoning district shall be applied only to land dedicated to or owned by the state, County, Town, Forest Service, or to private property, upon consent of its owner. This shall apply to a single lot or larger. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.76.020 Uses permitted.

Uses shall include the following:

A.    Open space uses, which include the retention of land in its natural state or the provision of such uses which are compatible with the natural state and the natural environment, including but not limited to walking and hiking trails, nature trails and rehabilitating land to its natural state.

B.    Facilities, structures and uses that are designed for park, outdoor recreation, educational and sport activities, including caretaker’s dwelling, subject to securing a conditional use permit.

C.    Waterfront uses, which include, but are not limited to, walking and hiking trails, boat ramps and pedestrian bridges.

D.    Public and private forest and wildlife reservations.

E.    Fences for the protection of certain natural features and other uses subject to securing a conditional use permit.

F.    Parking areas.

G.    Communication towers on governmental property for governmental uses, public safety and emergency services. Any commercial use added to an established tower may be permitted. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-371 § 1)


17.76.030 Site plan approval required.

Site plan review, in accordance with Chapter 17.84, and design review are required for any proposed facilities, structures, including utility, and uses that are designed for park, recreation, and sport activities. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


17.76.040 Special provisions.

All uses shall be subject to the general provisions as prescribed in Chapter 17.104, except as herein modified, including but not limited to the following:

A.    Signs: as determined appropriate by Commission action.

B.    It is recommended that parking areas be provided close to recreation facilities and access be provided via walking trails. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part))


Chapter 17.80 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sections:

17.80.010    Purpose.

17.80.020    Applications.

17.80.030    Hearing required – Notices and posting.

17.80.040    Conditional use permit review criteria.

17.80.050    Conditions of approval.

17.80.060    Planning and Zoning Commission action.

17.80.070    Appeals to the Board of Adjustment.

17.80.080    Effect of approval.

17.80.090    Development under an approved conditional use permit.

17.80.100    Compliance and revocations.

17.80.110    Existing nonconforming uses.

17.80.120    Fees.


17.80.010 Purpose.

Conditional use permits shall be authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission, after a public hearing, to allow a conditional use of land or structures within the Town. Conditional use permits shall only be granted for uses expressly authorized by these zoning regulations. Uses which are not permitted in the various zoning districts shall not be authorized by conditional use permit. The Town may permit as a conditional use only the following:

A.    Any conditional use expressly authorized by the "Use Regulations" section of each respective zoning district, or for a use which is substantially similar to any such use.

B.    Signs, but only for uses permitted by Chapter 17.108. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.020 Applications.

A completed application, nonrefundable filing fee and an advertising fee shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The application form for conditional use permit shall contain the following information:

A.    The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the affected property.

B.    A statement of the reasons for the request in accordance with review criteria listed in Section 17.80.040.

C.    If the applicant is a person other than the owner(s) of the affected property, written consent signed by all owners of the affected property authorizing the filing of the application and authorizing the conditional use requested.

D.    An accurate legal description for the affected property.

E.    That portion of the official assessor’s map maintained by the Navajo County Tax Assessor’s Office reflecting the actual boundaries of the property affected, or a certified survey. Maps must be legible and reasonably useful for the purposes herein intended.

F.    A map showing the affected property as well as the surrounding property located within a distance of three hundred (300) feet. A portion of the official Assessor’s map maintained by the Navajo County Tax Assessor will suffice.

G.    The current land use zoning classification, or conditional use permit, with any specified conditions.

H.    The land use zoning classification or conditional use classification.

I.    Facilities and services impact analyses, including traffic/access, water system, sewer system, electric power, or other public or private facilities/services analyses as requested by the Director.

J.    A description of the intended use(s) of the affected property.

K.    A conceptual site plan and schedule of development, if applicable. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.030 Hearing required – Notices and posting.

A.    No conditional use permit will be granted without the public hearing(s) and notice(s) required by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.1.

B.    In addition to the notice requirements set forth in subsection A of this section, notice of the public hearing for the requested zoning map amendment shall be posted on the Town Hall bulletin board, the Pinetop and the Lakeside Post Offices, and at such other places as the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends.

C.    A courtesy notice may be mailed to the property owners of record within a radius of three hundred (300) feet; provided, however, that failure to mail or receive such courtesy notice shall not affect any action or proceedings taken hereunder. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.040 Conditional use permit review criteria.

The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider, where applicable, the following criteria:

A.    Access and traffic; pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation.

B.    Dedication and development of streets adjoining the property.

C.    Adequacy of site and open space provisions, including site capacity and resource protection standards where applicable.

D.    Noise, vibration, light, visual, and other considerations.

E.    Proposed style and siting of structure(s), and relationship to the surrounding properties.

F.    Site plan or building permit requirements, if applicable.

G.    Landscaping and screening provisions.

H.    Impact on public and private utilities or services.

I.    On-site and off-site improvements.

J.    Signage and outdoor lighting.

K.    Compliance with the official zoning map and the General Plan.

L.    Impacts on historical, cultural, prehistoric, or natural resources.

M.    Frequency of use.

N.    Size of land area required.

O.    Other unique and relevant circumstances which exist. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.050 Conditions of approval.

A conditional use permit shall be issued with the following conditions:

A.    Conditions reasonably necessary to ensure the property’s compatibility with surrounding properties and the neighborhood.

B.    Conditions imposed to ensure adequate on-site and off-site improvements.

C.    Any other conditions of the conditional use permit or the site plan imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, including:

1.    Limitations on lot size, building dimensions, and location.

2.    Requirements for additional landscaping or unbuilt lot area buffers.

3.    Provision of adequate ingress and egress. 

4.    Duration of the conditional use permit.

5.    Hours of operation of the use.

6.    Time limits on construction.

7.    Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts.

8.    Noise, vibration, and light limitations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.060 Planning and Zoning Commission action.

After public hearing on the application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall render a decision for disapproval or approval, with or without conditions. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.070 Appeals to the Board of Adjustment.

A.    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to approve or disapprove a conditional use permit may file an application for appeal with the Board of Adjustment. Within ten (10) calendar days of the decision, such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Director and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Director shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal was filed.

B.    The Board of Adjustment shall fix a time for hearing the appeal and shall give notice of the hearing to the parties in interest and the public as required by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.1. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.080 Effect of approval.

A.    Issuance of a conditional use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use and site plan for which it is issued.

B.    Issuance of the conditional use permit and the conditions of approval shall be binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns; shall run with the land; shall limit and control the issuance and validity of certificates of occupancy, and shall restrict and limit the construction, location, use, and maintenance of all land and structures within the development. The applicant shall also be required to sign the conditional use permit, have it notarized, and have it recorded by the Town in the Office of the Navajo County Recorder. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.090 Development under an approved conditional use permit.

A.    A conditional use permit shall become null and void two (2) years after the date of approval unless the following have occurred:

1.    The conditional use has been established when a building permit has been issued.

2.    An extension has been granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such extension shall be for a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days, and no extension may be granted which would extend the validity of the permit more than thirty (30) months beyond the date of approval of the original conditional use permit. The Commission may, when granting an extension to a conditional use permit, modify the original conditions or add conditions to the original conditional use permit.

B.    Development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits and approvals required by these zoning regulations or other codes of the Town, or other applicable County, state, or federal codes or regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.100 Compliance and revocations.

The Director, upon inspection and review of any conditional use permit, shall report to the Planning and Zoning Commission when the conditions of operation imposed in the approval and issuance of the permit have not been or are not being complied with. The Director shall notify the permit holder and shall set the matter of revocation for a hearing with Planning and Zoning Commission. If the Planning and Zoning Commission finds, following a public hearing, that the conditions imposed in the issuance of a conditional use permit have not been complied with, the conditional use permit may be revoked and further operation of the use for which the permit was approved shall constitute a violation of these zoning regulations in accordance with Chapter 17.132. Following any revocation, the Town may file a document evidencing such revocation with the Navajo County Recorder. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.110 Existing nonconforming uses.

Nonconforming uses in existence at the time of the initial adoption of these zoning regulations (February 21, 1985) shall be considered legal nonconforming uses and shall be governed by Chapter 17.112. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.80.120 Fees.

The Town Council shall establish a schedule of fees for a conditional use permit from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-328 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 17.84 SITE PLAN AND PLOT PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL

Sections:

17.84.010    Purpose.

17.84.020    Applicability.

17.84.030    Exceptions/exemptions.

17.84.040    Preapplication conference.

17.84.050    Conceptual site plan submittal requirements.

17.84.060    Site plan administrative duties.

17.84.070    Site plan requirements.

17.84.080    Site plan applications.

17.84.090    Site plan review process and approval.

17.84.100    Site plan application concurrent with zoning map amendment.

17.84.110    Site plan alterations.

17.84.120    Violations.

17.84.130    Binding condition and revocation.

17.84.140    Site plan appeals.

17.84.150    Plot plan reviews for single-family residences.


17.84.010 Purpose.

The intent of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for development activities that are compatible with land uses permitted by right. The Community Development Director shall review to determine adequate location, design, configuration, operating characteristics, intensity or density, in order to assure the following:

A.    All land uses proposed should be in conformity with the surrounding land uses and the environment.

B.    Consistency with the official zoning map and General Plan.

C.    Coordination of public and private utilities and services, including traffic safety and control, access, and drainage. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.020 Applicability.

A.    This chapter shall be applicable to any residential, commercial or other nonresidential development project involving less than four (4) divisions of a parcel, tract or lot, including a new building site occurring within any preexisting development.

B.    No building permits or development approvals shall be granted unless all requirements are met in accordance with site plan approval, as applicable, as described herein. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.030 Exceptions/exemptions.

A.    One (1) single-family residence or one (1) duplex residence on a single parcel shall be exempted from the site plan process if approved pursuant to Section 17.84.150, Plot plan reviews for single-family residences.

B.    Any proposed development which is subject to the Town Subdivision Code.

C.    Paving projects are exempt from the standards herein, but shall conform to the Town grading and drainage requirements.

D.    Landscaping projects are exempt from the standards herein. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.040 Preapplication conference.

A preapplication conference shall be required by the Director prior to the submittal of a complete site plan application, in which case a conceptual site plan shall be provided to the Director for preliminary review. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.050 Conceptual site plan submittal requirements.

A.    Conceptual Site Plan. A conceptual site plan should be drawn at a scale no smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch and should include the following:

1.    Accurate lot dimensions, including lot width, length, and area calculations.

2.    Parking areas accurately depicting location, size, and number.

3.    Location and dimensions of all structures, including height, and area setbacks.

4.    Location, type, and dimensions of proposed signage.

5.    Data on any relevant existing site conditions such as physical characteristics, adjacent land uses, community facilities, and public or private utilities as required by the Director.

6.    Design Information. Sufficient information regarding architectural design, building materials, landscaping, fencing and/or walls sufficient to permit the Director or Commission to provide a preliminary evaluation of the plan.

7.    Location of environmentally sensitive areas, including watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, natural habitat, and major trees or major groups of trees. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.060 Site plan administrative duties.

The Director shall be responsible for the overall coordination of the site plan approval process with other Town staff in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.070 Site plan requirements.

A site plan shall be required for both new construction and development and for changes or additions to existing site plans as required by Section 17.84.020. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.080 Site plan applications.

A.    Application. A completed application shall be filed with the Community Development Department on the prescribed form/format accompanied by the items set forth in subsection C of this section, and other relevant information as may be required by the Director to show enough detail of the proposed use(s) and/or building(s).

B.    Application Fee. The application fee, as established by Town resolution, is required at the time of application submittal.

C.    Site Plan. Plans shall be submitted to the Community Development Department: for the purposes of a staff review, six (6) copies, and for a Planning and Zoning Commission site plan review, twelve (12) copies. The following information should be included on the site plan:

1.    Name of the proposed development.

2.    Name(s) of the developer.

3.    Survey data including boundaries of the tract, parcel, or lot shown with bearings, distances, and property corner monumentation.

4.    Name of owner and/or agent, surveyor, architect, engineer and/or land planner.

5.    Acreage of total site plan.

6.    Acreage of streets, easements and other land usage.

7.    The existing zoning classification, both on the land to be developed and on adjoining lands and Town boundary lines, if applicable.

8.    Existing streets, driveways, and easements within and adjacent to site, if applicable.

9.    Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate dimensions, if applicable.

10.    Vicinity map showing relationship between development and surrounding area. A description of all uses proposed, other than single-family, in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those uses on producing air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards, or other factors which may impact the health, safety, and welfare of the public.

11.    Typical cross-sections of proposed grading, roadways, paving, and sidewalks pursuant to Town street standards.

12.    A topographic data map by a registered land surveyor showing:

a.    The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, culverts, and drain pipes, water mains, Town limit lines, and any public utility easements.

b.    Wooded areas, streams, lakes, marshes, and any other physical conditions affecting the site.

c.    Contours based on U.S. coast and geodetic datum with a contour interval of one (1) foot.

13.    Utilities and Services. As required by the Subdivision Code of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, engineering drawings of the following applicable utility systems and improvements and letters of serviceability from the described utilities providers as indicated on the site plan. Thereafter, each phase of the development or building proposals shall be submitted to the Director, Town Engineer and applicable public and private utilities.

14.    Lighting Plan. Pursuant to Section 17.104.100.

15.    Grading and Drainage Plan. Pursuant to Chapter 15.08.

16.    Parking Facilities. As required by Section 17.104.070.

17.    Access Control, Streets and Sidewalks. Proposed streets and sidewalks to serve the development, street names, rights-of-way, pavement widths, and approximate grades pursuant to Town street design standards and access control measures.

18.    Tree Protection Plan. As required by Section 17.92.040.

19.    Walls and Fences. Shall meet characteristics set forth in Section 17.92.060.

20.    Phasing. If the project is to be developed in phases, sufficient information to evaluate the timing and placement of all improvements. Phased projects may require the use of a development agreement.

21.    Special studies or additional information may be required. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.090 Site plan review process and approval.

Applications for site plan approval will be reviewed and approved according to the following procedures:

A.    Site Plan Procedures for Staff Review.

1.    All plans and specifications for site plan approval shall be submitted by the applicant and either accepted or denied by the Director for the review process. Applicants will receive initial notification of the status within five (5) working days of receiving any accepted application. Submittal requests satisfying the requirements of Section 17.84.080 will be promptly processed.

2.    Written comments from other reviewing agencies and/or letters of serviceability from private or public utilities will be requested. The Director will make a final determination regarding the site plan’s completeness, as well as conformity with the General Plan and these zoning regulations, within fifteen (15) days.

3.    If deficiencies are reported, the Director will issue a letter describing the deficiencies which require correction before final approval. If no deficiencies are reported, the site plan will be approved and notice of action will be sent to the applicant. A building permit may be issued pursuant to other Town codes.

B.    Site Plan Procedures for Planning and Zoning Commission Review.

1.    When the Director deems necessary the application may be submitted to the Commission. Applicants will receive prompt notification of the status of an application. Submittal requests satisfying the requirements of Section 17.84.080 will be promptly processed.

2.    A Planning and Zoning Commission meeting should be promptly scheduled for either a regular or special meeting.

3.    The Planning and Zoning Commission should (a) approve, (b) approve subject to conditions, or (c) deny the site plan. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.100 Site plan application concurrent with zoning map amendment.

The application for site plan review may be in conjunction with or related to a request for a zoning map amendment. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.110 Site plan alterations.

Upon the site plan being approved and a notice of action being issued, the development shall be built substantially in accordance with the approved site plan. After approval, if there are any changes to the site plan, such changes shall first be submitted to the Director. If the Director finds that there is a change or deviation from that which is shown on the approved site plan, the owner/applicant or his successors may be required to submit the changed site plan for approval. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.120 Violations.

Any deviation from the approved site plan shall be deemed a violation of the Town Zoning Code as enforced by Chapter 17.132 and the Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.1, Section 9-462.05. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.130 Binding condition and revocation.

All approved site plans shall become a binding condition on the use of land encompassed by the site plan submittal. Any conveyance of any portion of such land encompassed by the approved site plan prior to completion of construction shall notice the Director prior to conveyance. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.140 Site plan appeals.

Appeals shall be in writing and filed with the Town Clerk within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the Director’s or Commission’s action. The Board of Adjustment should consider such appeals within forty-five (45) days from the date of filing the appeal. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.84.150 Plot plan reviews for single-family residences.

A.    A plot plan shall be submitted per Section 17.84.090.

B.    Costs of plot plan review shall be covered by building permit fees and shall not require a separate plot plan review fee.

C.    The prescribed information for plot plan review shall be filed for all development of individual lots by construction of a single-family residence and directly related uses, and shall include the following information:

1.    Property delineation, lot number, recording data (if property is metes and bounds description) and a description of any easements or rights-of-way.

2.    Location of all proposed and existing buildings.

3.    Indication of all setbacks.

4.    Indicate driveway(s) and culvert location.

5.    Plan for all utilities: water, electric, fire, sanitary, telephone.

6.    Tree Plan. Per Chapter 17.96, Forest Health and Fire Protection.

7.    Plot plans shall be approved by the Director without review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Appeals of such decisions shall be heard by the Board of Adjustment.

8.    An applicant may file an appeal within ten (10) calendar days of such decision to the Board of Adjustment which shall conduct the appeal in accordance with Chapter 17.120. (Ord. 18-409 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-369 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 17.88 DESIGN REVIEW

Sections:

17.88.010    Purpose.

17.88.020    Application.

17.88.030    Procedure generally.

17.88.040    Building design guidelines.

17.88.050    Commission powers.

17.88.060    No changes to building design.

17.88.070    Appeals.


17.88.010 Purpose.

This chapter will help encourage, protect and enhance the attractive appearance of the Town. (Ord. 18-410 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1901))


17.88.020 Application.

A.    This chapter shall apply to all commercial buildings, structures or signs which are to be hereafter constructed, converted, or modified.

B.    Exceptions:

1.    Nonilluminated directional leasing or informational signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area. (Ord. 18-410 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1903). Formerly 17.88.030)


17.88.030 Procedure generally.

The Community Development Director shall perform design review duties. Design review is considered part of the site plan review process as required by Chapter 17.84.

A.    Prior to the preparation of final architectural or engineering drawings for any building or structure to which this section is applicable, the property owner or his or her representative shall submit the following information for consideration by the Community Development Director:

1.    Application for design review on forms furnished by the Community Development Department;

2.    Site plan;

3.    Elevation drawings of the front, side, and rear of the building or structure illustrating the building’s appearance and treatment. Exterior materials and colors shall be included on the drawings or a separate list;

4.    Landscaping plan per Chapter 17.92. (Ord. 18-410 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-192; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1904). Formerly 17.88.040)


17.88.040 Building design guidelines.

A.    Building and Topography.

1.    Policy.

a.    Building should conform to natural topography of the site.

2.    Guidelines.

a.    Step a building foundation to follow the slope (fifteen (15%) percent or greater) of the site.

i.    An exposed foundation greater than eighteen (18) inches in height shall feature an exterior treatment allowed under these rules, such as a stone casing or split-faced masonry block.

B.    Building Materials.

1.    Guidelines.

a.    The Town encourages the use indigenous and conforming building materials that blend with the natural settings.

b.    Materials that are highly reflective are inappropriate as primary building materials.

c.    Metals are an appropriate structural building material, not generally for exterior use. Metals may generally be used for roofs and as an accent only on exterior surfaces. Metal sidings and wall surfaces are generally prohibited on new structures, except on buildings located within the C-2 zoning district. Metal sided buildings are allowed in C-2, but shall utilize a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches of other materials on the building sides visible from a public street.

C.    Service Canopies.

1.    Policy.

a.    Minimize the visual impacts of a service area canopy.

i.    Use a low profile section for the canopy itself.

ii.    Screen lights under the canopy.

iii.    Use a muted color on the perimeter of the canopy.

D.    Color.

1.    Policy.

a.    Building finish colors should help a structure blend with the natural setting and reduce its perceived scale. (Ord. 18-410 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-367 § 1; Ord. 01-192. Formerly 17.88.060)


17.88.050 Commission powers.

A.    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove all applications for design review. Approval shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval by the Commission or the Town Council. Applications which have been disapproved by the Commission may be reconsidered by the Commission upon resubmittal by the applicant. Extensions to the one (1) year may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission provided such extension is requested prior to the date of expiration.

B.    The Community Development Director shall have the same powers of the Commission in regard to buildings and structures and signs. If there are problems that cannot be resolved between the Director and the applicant, the matter may be referred to the Commission. (Ord. 18-410 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-367 § 2; Ord. 01-192; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1907). Formerly 17.88.070)


17.88.060 No changes to building design.

A building, structure or sign which has been approved must be constructed and maintained according to the design. (Ord. 18-410 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part). Formerly 17.88.080)


17.88.070 Appeals.

The applicant for design review, or the Director with the consent of the Town Manager, or any member of the Town Council may appeal a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Director to the Town Council by filing written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the Commission’s action. Notice of such appeal and the date for its consideration by the Town Council shall be published once, not less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the Town Council meeting at which such appeal is to be heard. The Town Council, on appeal, by this section, shall take legal action on such appeal within thirty (30) days of its initial consideration. (Ord. 18-410 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-282; Ord. 01-192; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(1908). Formerly 17.88.090)


Chapter 17.92 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.92.010    Purpose.

17.92.020    Definitions.

17.92.030    General regulations.

17.92.040    Tree protection.

17.92.050    Landscaping.

17.92.060    Walls and screening devices.


17.92.010 Purpose.

These landscaping regulations serve to help provide for the well-designed landscape treatment of all developments while preserving the existing flora within the Town. Landscaping shall provide for the treatment of spaces near lot boundaries, especially boundaries which border public streets and roads. This will improve the overall quality of the development, will strive to preserve mature, healthy trees and shrubs which are not in direct conflict with reasonable, logical building needs, and will provide for consistency in design standards for landscaping. (Ord. 19-422 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.92.020 Definitions.

A.    "Landscaping" means the process of making a yard or other piece of land more attractive by altering the existing design, adding ornamental features, and planting trees and shrubs. (Ord. 19-422 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.92.030 General regulations.

A.    This section shall apply to all new buildings, to all significant new uses of land, and to addition of at least twenty-five (25%) percent to existing buildings and uses in all commercial districts.

B.    Any proposed use or building shall be shown on a site plan indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, parking areas, street improvements, and screening devices. Nine (9) copies of the site and landscaping plan (the landscaping plan may be presented on the site plan or on a separate copy) shall be submitted to the Community Development Department at the time of the application for site plan review.

C.    Landscape, watering devices, walls and screening structures shall be installed in accordance with the approved final landscape and site plan prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building or use. (Ord. 19-422 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.92.040 Tree protection.

A.    Healthy trees located outside building pads shall be preserved to the extent reasonably feasible. Buildings, lot configurations, and parking layouts shall be designed to minimize the disturbance to healthy trees.

B.    Before any lot clearing, grubbing, site preparation or any building construction commences, the Town Forester shall visit the site with the developer to determine which trees should remain undisturbed and which trees, due to poor health, crowding, or unavoidable development conflicts, should be removed.

C.    During the construction phase, caution shall be applied with all building activities near any trees or plants which the Town Forester and developer determined should be protected.

1.    Prior to and during construction, barriers shall be erected around all at risk trees with orange fencing a minimum of four (4) feet in height, secured with metal T-posts, no closer than six (6) feet. There shall be no storage or movement of equipment, hazardous material, debris or fill within the fence.

a.    Large property areas containing trees and separated from construction or land clearing areas, road rights-of-way and utility easements by a minimum of ten (10) feet may be ribboned off, rather than erecting protective fencing around each tree. This may be accomplished by placing metal T-post stakes a maximum of fifty (50) feet apart and tying ribbon or rope from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of such areas being cleared.

2.    No damaging attachment, wires, signs or permits may be fastened to any tree.

3.    During the installation of utilities, irrigation lines or any underground fixture requiring excavation, feasible efforts shall be used to protect the root systems of the trees.

D.    Failure to follow these tree protection guidelines will result in the property owner, developer, contractor or other violator being subject to civil violation as described in Section 17.92.050(E). (Ord. 19-422 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.92.050 Landscaping.

A.    Standards of Design and Development.

1.    Landscaping shall be established along the street frontages in the area between the public sidewalk, structures, parking areas, loading areas, or actual storage areas on the property except for necessary driveways.

a.    A landscaped area of at least ten (10) feet in width shall be located between any street property line and any parking area.

b.    Where other buildings on nearby parcels are built to the street property line, the required landscaping along the frontage may be modified or located elsewhere with the approval of the Community Development Director.

2.    Underground irrigation is required to all landscaped areas.

3.    Street trees shall be required along all arterial streets as specified.

a.    Street trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch diameter.

b.    Street trees shall be planted so that on average there exists at least one (1) tree for every twenty (20) feet of lineal arterial street frontage unless the species calls for greater separation.

4.    Common area landscaping and amenities shall include at least one (1) two (2) inch diameter tree for each dwelling unit, prior to issuance of any occupancy permits in a residentially zoned planned unit development.

5.    In addition to street tree requirements, all new commercial uses shall provide the following landscaping:

a.    One (1) tree for each eight hundred (800) square feet of hard surface paving or parking area; and

b.    One (1) shrub for each two hundred (200) square feet of hard surface paving or parking area.

c.    In addition to the above requirements, one (1) tree must be planted or one (1) existing tree must remain undisturbed for each parking space in excess of the minimum parking requirements as required in Section 17.104.090, Parking regulations.

d.    The planting of grass shall allow for the following adjustments to the number of required trees and shrubs planted:

	Square feet of grass planted 	Reduction in trees and shrubs required 

	500 to 1,000	20%

	1,001 to 2,000	40%

	2,001 or greater 	50%

e.    Any additional adjustments to this section will require approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.

6.    No person or entity shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove top soil except in connection with the construction of a building.

7.    The landscaping plan must be completed and implemented within eight (8) months of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Failure to comply will result in the issuance of a civil violation.

B.    Tree Placement, Tree Care and Public Safety.

1.    No tree shall be planted within thirty-three (33) feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs. Trees must be kept pruned so that no branches below eight (8) feet in height protrude within a ten (10) foot distance of any street corner.

2.    Owners of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the Town shall properly prune the branches of such tree(s) so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any intersection.

a.    Tree branches shall be a clearance space of fifteen (15) feet above any highway or street surface and eight (8) feet above any sidewalk surface. Owners of trees on private property shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees and branches which constitute a hazard.

3.    No tree, shrub, or other plant shall be planted within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant.

4.    No tree, shrub or other plant shall be planted within fifteen (15) feet of any traffic regulatory signal or sign.

5.    No trees may be planted under or within five (5) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire or line, or within three (3) feet of any underground utility line.

C.    Maintenance.

1.    Landscaped areas shall be reasonably maintained to create an attractive appearance for the development.

2.    Any plant materials dead, dying or hazardous shall be replaced within thirty (30) days.

3.    Lack of maintenance shall constitute a violation of the zoning regulations, and property owners may be subject to a civil violation as described in subsection E of this section.

D.    Abuse of Trees. No person shall post upon, cut, carve or otherwise damage any tree. Violators will be subject to civil violation as described in subsection E of this section.

E.    Civil Violation and Penalty.

1.    Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter may be subject to a civil violation.

2.    The amount of the civil penalty is as follows:

a.    First violation: a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500);

b.    Second or additional violations within twenty-four (24) months: a minimum civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) up to a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500);

3.    The imposition of a civil penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of these regulations.

4.    The Community Development Director may request that the court issue an injunction against a violator. (Ord. 19-422 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.92.060 Walls and screening devices.

A.    Definitions.

1.    "Height of screening devices" shall be measured from the highest finished adjacent grade of the element to be screened.

Figure 1 – Screening Wall Heights
[IMAGE]


2.    "Screening devices" are any structures installed to conceal areas used for refuse, mechanical equipment, parking, service and loading bays or lanes, multi-family habitation and commercial or industrial activities, from adjacent residential districts and from street view.

3.    "Walls or fences" are any structures intended for the use of confinement, prevention of intrusion, boundary identification, or screening.

B.    Standards of Design and Development.

1.    All outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, mechanical equipment, vehicles, or other similar items shall be screened from view by a minimum six (6) foot high wall or fence constructed of or finished with materials to match the main building of the site.

2.    Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapet walls or other screening device.

3.    All loading, delivery, and service bays shall be screened from street view and at least six (6) feet in height.

4.    A screening wall, approved by the Director, shall be constructed on a site used for multi-family, or commercial use along any lot lines in common with, or separated only by an alley from, a residential property. Such walls shall be a suitable height. Requirements of landscaping in Section 17.92.050(A)(5) shall also be complied with.

5.    Commercial property that directly abuts residential property must properly shield the commercial lot from the residential lots. This shall be accomplished through the use of trees and/or screening walls. Trees may  be spaced a maximum of fifteen (15) feet from one another. The trees must run the entire length of the border shared with residential property. The wall shall be a minimum six (6) foot height and must run the entire length of the border shared with residential property.

6.    Exterior boundaries of manufactured home and travel trailer parks shall be provided with a screening wall having a minimum height of five (5) feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet. (Ord. 19-422 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 17.96 FOREST HEALTH AND FIRE PROTECTION

Sections:

17.96.010    Purpose.

17.96.020    Scope.

17.96.030    Definitions.

17.96.040    Forest health and fire protection.

17.96.050    Fuel modification.

17.96.060    Recommendations for creating survivable space.

17.96.070    Three (3) zone plan for developed parcels and for undeveloped parcels.

17.96.080    Fuel modification plan for undeveloped parcels.

17.96.090    Other landscape or vegetation management plans acceptable.

17.96.100    Time for compliance.

17.96.110    Tree removal.

17.96.120    Fuel modification or removal by the Town.

17.96.130    Enforcement.

17.96.140    Appeals – Forest Health Committee.


17.96.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Pinetop-Lakeside. The Town also intends to promote the health of the Town’s "urban forest" which will help protect residential, commercial, and undeveloped property values, help reduce the threat of wildland fire, and help reduce infestation and disease of the ponderosa pine trees and other coniferous trees within the Town. This chapter establishes requirements and recommendations to help property owners nurture healthy trees and plants while mitigating the risk to life and property from the threat of wildland fire and to help keep the fire on the ground. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.020 Scope.

This chapter shall apply to all land within the Town. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.030 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

1.    "Basal area" is a measurement of tree density. The basal area is the cross-sectional area of a tree forty-two (42) inches above ground. The basal area of all trees in a given land area describes the degree to which an area is occupied by trees and is generally expressed in square feet per acre. The basal area calculation is: X2 times 0.005454 where X equals tree diameter in inches at forty-two (42) inches above ground. For example: The basal area of a twelve (12) inch dbh (diameter at breast height) tree = 144 x 0.005454 = 0.7854 square feet or (12 x 12 = 144 x 0.005454 = 0.7854 square feet).

    The Concept of Basal Area
[IMAGE]


Exhibit 1

2.    "Canopy closure" is a measurement of tree density. It is an important factor in the initiation of and sustainment of crown fires. "Canopy closure" is the percentage of area above a parcel of land filled with vegetative foliage. Measurements of canopy closure can be made on the ground with a spherical densiometer, sighting periscope or with aerial photography measurement methods.

3.    "Survivable space" is the area around a structure that is intentionally maintained to provide a separation of the structure from non-fire-resistant vegetation to help prevent the spread of fire. The Town uses a three (3) zone approach to help create a survivable space around and between neighboring properties. Survivable space refers to structures and property.

4.    "Director" means the Director of the Community Development Department of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

5.    Forest Health Committee. The Town Council shall serve as the Forest Health Committee until such time as a separate Forest Health Committee is appointed by the Town Council at which time the Council will establish provisions for creation, appointment, term of office, qualifications of members and meetings.

6.    "Fuel modification" means changing the type or amount of plant fuels to reduce fire danger.

7.    "Ladder fuels" are living or dead trees, bushes and grasses that allow a fire to travel from the ground to the forest or tree canopy. Ladder fuels help convert a ground fire to a crown fire.

8.    "Non-fire-resistant vegetation" includes trees and other plant material, dead or alive, which increase the fire danger to unreasonably high levels. The fire danger which results may be due to low moisture content, high levels of oil or pitch, a dense plant structure or other characteristics which make the trees or plants capable of producing or spreading high intensity fire.

9.    "Remove or removal" means the actual removal of a tree by digging up, cutting down, or the effective removal through damage. A tree shall be deemed "removed" even if a stump and roots remain.

10.    "Responsible person" means the owner and the possessor of land, and includes owners in possession, landlords and lessors, tenants and lessees, real property managers and any other person or entity which has possession, a right to possession or any management or supervisory authority over land. "Responsible person" may be one (1) or more persons, which persons shall be jointly and severally liable and responsible for forest health and fire protection of land within the Town.

11.    "Trees" means any self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally, in the area, grows at maturity to an overall height of not less than ten (10) feet, and is greater than four (4) inches in diameter at a height of four (4) feet six (6) inches from the ground.

12.    "Urban-wildland interface" is the area where buildings, structures and people come together and mix with the forest or non-fire-resistant vegetation. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.040 Forest health and fire protection.

The responsible person shall be responsible for modifying or removing trees, plants and other non-fire-resistant, insect infested, or disease ridden vegetation and debris on the land, and for carrying out such other fuel modification which is necessary to promote forest health and to help prevent the spread of fire to adjacent property by establishing and maintaining survivable space. Fuel modification shall meet the minimum survivable space requirements as described herein. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.050 Fuel modification.

Fuel modification shall be accomplished to help prevent or significantly limit the spread of fire to or from all buildings and property. The required and recommended fuel modification for each of the three (3) zones around buildings is set forth in Section 17.96.070(A), (B) and (C) and in the Three (3) Zone Plan Chart, Exhibit 2.

A.    General Guidelines.

1.    Fire resistant plants used as ground cover, such as green grass, ivy, succulents or other approved fire-resistant ground cover which do not form a means of readily transmitting fire to or from buildings are recommended and encouraged.

2.    Coniferous trees within the survivable area should be spaced so that the trees do not unnaturally compete for water and soil nutrients, and should also be spaced so that the horizontal distance between crowns of adjacent coniferous trees or groupings of coniferous trees meets the survivable space guidelines outlined in Section 17.96.070(B)(2)(b) and in the Three (3) Zone Plan Chart, Exhibit 2.

3.    Dead wood and vegetative litter shall be regularly removed from the ground and from trees.

4.    The concepts and practices recommended by The Urban-Wildland Interface Code, as amended; Firewise Communities; the Arizona Wildfire and Environmental Series of the University of Arizona College of Agriculture and Life Sciences; as well as other programs, lists or publications approved by the Pinetop-Lakeside Town Council ("authoritative sources") shall be made available to the public, to foresters and to others who attempt to comply with this chapter, and they shall be considered authoritative sources for the Forest Health Committee and the municipal court when deciding matters relating to this chapter. Excerpts from any document approved as an "authoritative source" shall be admissible when offered by any party or witness in an appeal or court proceeding relating to this chapter. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.060 Recommendations for creating survivable space.

Ways to create survivable space include:

A.    Decrease the amount of non-fire-resistant vegetation by reducing the density of trees and plants and creating sufficient space between trees and plants to promote forest and plant health and help reduce the spread of fire.

B.    Increase the amount of unbuilt lot area.

C.    Increase the moisture content of vegetation (adequate watering of trees and plants).

D.    Plant fire-resistant plants.

E.    Rearrange existing trees and plants.

F.    Thin coniferous trees to achieve an overall average density of not more than sixty (60) square feet basal area (60 sq. ft. B.A.) per acre or canopy closure shall not exceed thirty-three (33%) percent noninclusive of deciduous and non-fire-prone species.

G.    Remove all combustible materials and fire-prone vegetation from under decks and porches and within ten (10) feet of buildings.

H.    Regular, continued maintenance of the area. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.070 Three (3) zone plan for developed parcels and for undeveloped parcels.

A three (3) zone approach shall be applied to accomplish the survivable space requirements of this code on all parcels where there is a building or structure and for vacant parcels. (See Exhibit 2.)

A.    Zone 1: zero (0) feet to ten (10) feet from buildings, structures, decks, etc.

1.    Required Zone 1 Fuel Modification.

a.    Remove fuel ladders and eliminate non-fire-resistant brush, leaving fire-resistant low growing specimens.

b.    Remove and destroy all insect infested, diseased, and dead trees to prevent spread to healthy vegetation.

c.    Remove all dead plant material from the ground which may create fuel ladders or contribute to the spread of fire.

d.    Where applicable, trim coniferous trees to where the lowest branches or roofline and a minimum of ten (10) feet from chimneys or other sources of ignition.

e.    Remove flammable debris from gutters and roof surfaces.

f.    Remove all combustible materials and vegetation from under decks. Non-fire-resistant trees within three (3) feet of buildings, structures and decks should be spaced and pruned to limit ignition from surrounding vegetation and the creation of fuel ladders.

2.    Zone 1 Recommended Fuel Modification.

a.    Survivable space should be regularly maintained annually by the property owner.

b.    Provide adequate hydration for all vegetation.

B.    Zone 2: ten (10) feet to thirty (30) feet from buildings, structures, decks, etc.

1.    Required Zone 2 Fuel Modification.

a.    Remove all ladder fuels and dead material.

b.    Remove and destroy all insect infested, diseased, and dead trees to prevent spread to healthy vegetation.

c.    Thin coniferous trees to achieve an overall average density of not more than sixty (60) square feet basal area (60 sq. ft. B.A.) per acre or canopy closure shall not exceed thirty-three (33%) percent noninclusive of deciduous and non-fire-prone species.

2.    Recommended Zone 2 Fuel Modification.

a.    Zone 2 survivable space shall be regularly maintained by the property owner.

b.    Reduce continuity of fuels by creating clear space around brush or planting groups.

c.    Control erosion and sedimentation from exposed soils through terracing, gravel beds, rocked or other appropriate ground cover. Emphasis is placed on slopes greater than twenty (20%) percent gradient, in which case additional vegetation treatment may be required.

d.    Remove all but one (1) inch of pine needle or leaf droppings. It is important to leave a layer of decomposing plant material to maintain adequate moisture levels for further decomposition and plant hydration.

C.    Zone 3: thirty (30) feet from buildings, structures, decks, etc., to property line.

1.    Required Zone 3 Fuel Modification.

a.    Remove all ladder fuels and dead material.

b.    Thin coniferous trees to achieve an overall average density of not more than sixty (60) square feet basal area (60 sq. ft. B.A.) per acre or canopy closure shall not exceed thirty-three (33%) percent noninclusive of deciduous and non-fire-prone species.

c.    Remove and destroy all insect infested, diseased, and dead trees to prevent spread to healthy vegetation.

2.    Recommended Zone 3 Fuel Modification.

a.    Zone 3 survivable space should be regularly maintained by the property owner.

THREE (3) ZONE PLAN CHART – EXHIBIT 2 

	Survivable Space Criteria	Required Actions	Recommended Actions	Time for Compliance

	Zone 1 (0 to 10 feet from structures)	 	 	Within 1 year of enactment (See Section 17.96.100(A))

	1. Remove all ladder fuels (see subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section)	X	 	 

	2. Reduce flammable vegetation (see subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section)	X	 	 

	3. Remove and destroy all insect infested, diseased, and dead trees (see subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section)	X	 	 

	4. Remove all dead plant material from ground (see subsection (A)(1)(c) of this section)	X	 	 

	5. Prune tree limbs overhanging roof (see subsection (A)(1)(d) of this section)	X	 	 

	6. Remove branches within 10 feet of chimney (see subsection (A)(1)(d) of this section)	X	 	 

	7. Remove flammable debris from gutters and roof surfaces (see subsection (A)(1)(e) of this section)	X	 	 

	8. Remove all combustible material and vegetation from under decks (see subsection (A)(1)(f) of this section)	X	 	 

	9. Regularly maintain survivable space (see subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section)	X	 	 

	10. Provide adequate hydration (See subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section)	 	X	 

	Zone 2 (10 to 30 feet from structures)	 	 	Within 2 years of enactment (see Section 17.96.100(B))

	1. Remove all ladder fuels (see subsection (B)(1)(a) of this section)	X	 	 

	2. Remove and destroy all insect infested, diseased, and dead trees (see subsection (B)(1)(b) of this section)	X	 	 

	3. Regularly maintain survivable space (see subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section)	X	 	 

	4. Create separation between trees, tree crowns, grouping of trees and other plants based on fuel type, density, slope and other topographical features (see subsection (B)(1)(c) of this section). Achieve a maximum density of 60 sq. ft. basal area in conifers or conifer crown closure equal to or less than 33%	X	 	 

	5. Reduce continuity of fuels by creating clear space around brush or planting groups (see subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section)	X	 	 

	6. Control erosion and sedimentation (see subsection (B)(2)(c) of this section)	 	X	 

	7. Remove all but 1 inch of pine needle or leaf droppings (see subsection (B)(2)(d) of this section)	 	X	 

	Zone 3 (30 feet to the property line)	 	 	Within 4 years of enactment (see Section 17.96.100(C))

	1. Remove all ladder fuels (see subsection (C)(1)(a) of this section)	X	 	 

	2. Maximum Basal

Conifers – 60 sq. ft. Basal Area

or conifer crown closure equal to or less than 33%	60 sq. ft. B.A.	 	 

	3. Remove and destroy all insect infested, diseased, and dead trees (see subsection (C)(1)(c) of this section)	X	 	 

	4. Regularly maintain survivable space (see subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section)	X	 	 

(Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.080 Fuel modification plan for undeveloped parcels.

Undeveloped parcels shall meet, at a minimum, Zone 3 standards as defined in Section 17.96.070.

The responsible person for parcels of vacant property proposed for development shall prepare a fuel modification plan. This section shall also apply to undeveloped tracts, new subdivisions and parcels or voluntary groupings of parcels.

A.    It is recommended that the fuel modification plan be prepared or certified by a professional forester, a certified arborist, or another qualified individual or organization and approved by the Community Development Director. A fuel modification plan identifies actions necessary to promote forest health and to help prevent the spread of fire to adjacent property by establishing and maintaining survivable space. The plan should include considerations for both wildlife and ground water protection. The action identified by the fuel modification shall be completed prior to the issuance of any building permit or the approval of any maps or plans for subdivisions or property.

B.    After a site visit and inspection of the property, the Director may request submission of a fuel modification plan before or as a part of the plans required for plat approval, issuance of a building permit, or, in the case of existing developed areas, for fuel modification required by this chapter.

C.    A fuel modification plan shall include at least the following information:

1.    A copy of the site plan.

2.    Methods and timetables for controlling, changing, or modifying fuels on the property(ies) in a timely and effective manner.

3.    Elements of the plan shall include removal of slash, snags, vegetation that may grow into overhead electrical lines, other ground fuels, ladder fuels and dead trees, and the thinning of live trees.

4.    Methods and timetables for control and elimination of diseased and/or insect infested vegetation.

5.    A plan for the ongoing maintenance of the proposed fuel-reduction and disease and insect infestation control measures. To be considered fuel modification and disease/infestation control for purposes of this code, continuous maintenance of the clearance or control measure is required.

6.    When a grouping of parcels in multiple ownership is proposed to achieve compliance with this chapter, the proposed vegetation management plan shall be accepted by all owners of property covered by the plan. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.090 Other landscape or vegetation management plans acceptable.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit a property owner(s) from developing a landscape plan or a fuel modification plan that is not in strict accord with the survivable space guidelines established by this chapter, so long as the plan accomplishes the purposes of this chapter and so long as the plan is certified by a professional forester, a certified arborist, or another qualified individual or organization and approved by the Director. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.100 Time for compliance.

All property subject to this chapter shall be brought into compliance in accordance with the following schedule:

A.    Within one (1) year of enactment:

1.    Compliance with all requirements of Section 17.96.070, Zone 1.

B.    Within two (2) years of enactment:

1.    Compliance with all requirements of Zones 1 and 2 for property governed by Section 17.96.070.

2.    Where an undeveloped parcel adjoins a parcel with a building or structure, and the distance from the property line to a structure is less than thirty (30) feet, that portion of the undeveloped parcel that is within thirty (30) feet of a structure shall achieve Zone 2 standards.

C.    Within four (4) years of enactment:

1.    Compliance with Zone 1, 2 and 3 standards shall be achieved on all property regulated by Section 17.96.070.

2.    All property regulated by this section shall have trees and other plants modified and maintained in accordance with an acceptable or an approved fuel modification plan.

D.    All new residential and commercial construction of any building or structure shall comply with Zone 1, 2, and 3 requirements prior to completion of construction. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the requirements of this chapter are met.

E.    All proposed new subdivisions shall provide, as part of the preliminary and final plat approval process, a fuel modification plan meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.110 Tree removal.

A.    Permits for removal of trees in accordance with this chapter shall not be required.

B.    All other tree removal shall be in accordance with an approved site or plot plan, or pursuant to other approval by the Director, the Community Development Department, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Town Council, or other authority of the Town.

C.    Removal shall be in accordance with commonly accepted practices and management standards such as those promulgated by the International Society of Arboriculture and the University of Arizona Cooperative Extension.

D.    Trees cut down shall be removed from the property within two (2) weeks or cut and stored on the property in a manner which is not a hazard to public health and safety and which shall not encourage the propagation of insects.

E.    Trees not properly removed or stored shall be considered a nuisance pursuant to this chapter or Chapter 17.100. The Town may remove, abate, enjoin or otherwise cause the removal of such solid waste and all costs of such removal, abatement or injunction of such nuisance or solid waste shall be assessed against the land in accordance with this chapter or Section 17.100.050. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.120 Fuel modification or removal by the Town.

A.    In the event that the responsible person does not perform the fuel modification or removal of trees, plants or other vegetation in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the property shall be a public nuisance, which nuisance may be abated by the Town, and for which the responsible person may be cited, be found responsible or be enjoined by appropriate court proceeding.

B.    The cost of any fuel modification, removal, abatement or injunction of such public nuisance, along with any associated legal costs, shall be assessed against the land where the nuisance existed. The Town may record the cost of removal, abatement or injunction as an assessment in the Navajo County Recorder’s Office, including the date and amount of the assessment, the legal description of the property and the full name and address of the property owner. Any such assessment is prior and superior to all other liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances except liens for general taxes. A sale of the land to satisfy an assessment obtained under the provisions of this chapter shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The Town shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the assessment in the Navajo County Superior Court at any time after the recording of the assessment. The failure to enforce the assessment by such legal action shall not affect the assessment’s validity. A recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein, and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof.

C.    Assessments that are imposed under this chapter run against the land until paid, accrue interest at the rate of ten (10%) percent per year or as otherwise prescribed by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 44, Chapter 9, Article 1, Section 44-1201; and are due and payable in equal annual installments as follows:

1.    Assessments of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be paid within one (1) year after the assessment is recorded.

2.    Assessments of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more but less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) shall be paid within two (2) years after the assessment is recorded.

3.    Assessments of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more but less than five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be paid within three (3) years after the assessment is recorded.

4.    Assessments of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more but less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be paid within six (6) years after the assessment is recorded.

5.    Assessments of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more shall be paid within ten (10) years after the assessment is recorded.

D.    Subsequent Assessments. A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this chapter shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for the same or similar purposes; and any number of assessments on the same land may be enforced in the same legal action.

E.    Civil Penalty. Any owner, tenant or other responsible person who, after notice as required by Section 17.96.130(A), does not perform the fuel modification or removal of trees, plants or other vegetation in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and abate the condition which constitutes a hazard to the public health and safety, by the date stated in the notice, shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in Chapter 17.132. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.130 Enforcement.

A.    Notice of Civil Violation.

1.    Notice of Civil Violation. A written notice of any violation of this chapter shall be delivered to the responsible person. This written notice shall give a minimum of at least thirty (30) additional days before the date set for compliance, and shall include the following information:

a.    The name and address of the responsible person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and

b.    The physical property address or the legal description of the land upon which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

c.    A description of the violation, including a reference to this chapter by section number; and

d.    A brief statement of the action required to be taken to correct the violation; and

e.    The date before which the corrective action shall be taken, which date shall be at least thirty (30) days after the date of the notice of civil violation; and

f.    The estimated maximum cost of such removal to the Town if the responsible person does not comply.

2.    Delivery of Notice. Delivery of a written notice of civil violation may be made by posting the notice at or on the property in a conspicuous place and by any of the following additional methods:

a.    Personal service on the responsible person;

b.    By certified mail to the responsible person at his/her last known residence or business address, or at the address to which the tax bill for the land was last mailed.

3.    Recording of Notice. The Town may record the notice of civil violation in the Navajo County Recorder’s Office; provided, that if compliance with the notice of civil violation is subsequently satisfied, the Town shall record a release of the notice also.

4.    In the event that the notice of violation or assessment is mailed, delivery shall be conclusively presumed to have occurred five (5) days from the date of mailing. In the event of personal service, the date of delivery is the date of such service. In the event of a posting of the notice at or on the property, delivery shall be conclusively presumed to have occurred five (5) days from the date of posting.

B.    Continuing Duty to Correct. Payment of a civil monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve a responsible person of the duty to correct the violation as ordered by the Town in any notice of civil violation.

C.    Civil Court Action. In any civil action brought to enforce the provisions of this chapter, photographic evidence that the public nuisance or other violation of this chapter was present on the land within ten (10) days of preparation of the notice of civil violation shall create a presumption that the defendant is in violation of this chapter.

D.    Collection of Civil Monetary Penalty. The Magistrate Court shall have the primary duty to collect civil monetary penalties pursuant to this chapter. In addition, the Town Attorney, on behalf of the Town, is authorized to collect the civil monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter by use of appropriate legal remedies.

E.    Enforcement Officers. The Community Development Department and the Police Department are authorized to request compliance with and enforce the provisions of this chapter. In addition, employees of any fire district with authority within the Town boundaries may request compliance with this chapter and may report violations of this chapter to the Director. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.96.140 Appeals – Forest Health Committee.

A.    Appeals resulting from enforcement of this chapter are heard by the Town Council who shall serve as the Forest Health Committee.

B.    The Forest Health Committee will hear appeals resulting from the enforcement of this chapter by the Town staff.

C.    The Forest Health Committee shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement or decision of the Director of the Community Development Department relating to this chapter.

D.    When the Director deems it appropriate, the Director may defer orders, requirements or decisions relating to this chapter to the Forest Health Committee for its consideration or decision. In any such circumstance where the Director elects to defer the Director’s decision on an issue or question relating to this chapter, the Forest Health Committee shall meet and hear from both the Director and the responsible person and reach a decision within thirty (30) days from the date the landscaping plan, vegetation management plan or other issue was first presented to the Director.

E.    Within ten (10) days from the delivery of a notice of civil violation or the recording of an assessment, the responsible person may appeal the notice of civil violation or assessment to the Forest Health Committee. All such appeals shall be in writing and filed with the Director. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal, the Forest Health Committee shall set a time and place for an appeal hearing. Within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the appeal hearing the Forest Health Committee shall enter its order affirming, denying or modifying the notice of violation or assessment. In the event that the Forest Health Committee affirms or modifies the notice of violation or assessment, the responsible person shall remove or abate the public nuisance, perform the required fuel modification or otherwise comply with the requirements of this chapter within thirty (30) days of the date of the order. The decision and order of the Forest Health Committee shall be final and binding, and any party wishing to appeal from such order shall do so based upon the record of proceedings of the Forest Health Committee in the Navajo County Superior Court, only. Appeal proceedings in the Navajo County Superior Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction shall not be de novo. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-337 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 17.100 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE

Sections:

17.100.010    Purpose.

17.100.020    Scope.

17.100.030    Definitions.

17.100.040    Maintenance of property – Storage.

17.100.050    Removal – Costs.

17.100.060    Enforcement.

17.100.070    Appeal from notice.


17.100.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Pinetop-Lakeside and to protect residential and commercial neighborhoods against nuisance or blighting and deteriorating influences by requiring minimum standards for the exterior condition of buildings and real property. The Town encourages its citizens to keep residential and commercial property neat, clean and safe. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 97-141 § 2 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(21.2.01))


17.100.020 Scope.

This chapter shall apply to all land and buildings within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside (hereinafter referred to as the "Town") without regard to the use, date of construction or alternation; and is based upon the authority granted by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 8, Section 9-499. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 97-141 § 2 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(21.2.02))


17.100.030 Definitions.

A.    The following definitions pertain to, and are to be used in conjunction with, this chapter only, and in no way replace or modify definitions contained in other Town codes or ordinances.

1.    "Director" refers to the Community Development Director of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

2.    "Graffiti" means any unauthorized inscription, work, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property.

3.    "Hazardous waste" means any material that is subject to the hazardous waste manifest requirements of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

4.    "Land" means any lot, parcel, tract of land or combination thereof, located within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. Property shall include adjacent sidewalks, streets, alleys and other easements.

5.    "Nuisance" means (a) any public nuisance as defined by state statute or local ordinance; or (b) any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot. "Nuisance" includes, but is not limited to: abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, graffiti, abandoned refrigerators, washing machines, dryers and other appliances, abandoned motor vehicles, inoperable motor vehicles, junk motor vehicles, other motor vehicles without current license or registration, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash or other debris; or (c) an accumulation of solid waste which would weigh more than one hundred (100) pounds or which would occupy a space greater than one (1) cubic yard; or (d) fire hazards.

6.    "Owner" means a person who is the rightful owner of property and/or the person listed as the current owner as recorded in the official records of the Navajo County Recorder’s Office.

7.    "Person" includes a corporation, limited liability company, company, partnership, firm, association, or society, as well as a natural person. When the word "person" is used to designate the party whose property is subject to this chapter, the term includes the United States, this state, or any territory, state, or country, or any political subdivision of this state which may lawfully own any property, or a public or private corporation, or partnership or association. When the word "person" is used to designate the violator or offender of any law, it includes corporation, limited liability company, company, partnership, firm, association, or society or any other association of persons.

8.    "Property manager" means a person with the authority and the ability to make emergency repairs and with the responsibility to oversee the maintenance and protection of the building and/or property, and to represent the owner’s interest.

9.    "Responsible person" means an owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee, or other person having possession, the right to possession, control or a right to control property.

10.    "Solid waste" means any garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or pollution control facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material. Solid waste also includes abandoned, inoperable, junk or unlicensed/unregistered vehicles, refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers and other appliances, structurally unsound fences, buildings and other structures, lumber, etc. Solid waste includes hazardous waste, waste containing radioactive materials, domestic sewage and landscaping rubble.

11.    "Structure" means buildings, improvements and other manmade structures that are constructed or placed on land.

12.    "Tenant" means a person or entity entitled under an oral or written rental agreement to occupy land or a structure, whether residential or commercial use, to the exclusion of or in conjunction with others.

13.    "Zoning regulations" means the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside zoning regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-357 § 1; Ord. 97-141 § 2 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(21.2.03))


17.100.040 Maintenance of property – Storage.

A.    Maintenance. An owner, tenant or other responsible person shall maintain land and structures within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside free from graffiti, solid waste, hazardous waste, rubbish, trash, weeds, debris or other conditions constituting a nuisance which constitute a hazard to the public health or safety of the occupants, pedestrians, children or other persons who come upon or near the premises.

B.    Responsibility for Removal. The owner, tenant or other responsible person shall have the duty and responsibility of removing graffiti, solid waste, hazardous waste, rubbish, trash, weeds, debris or other conditions constituting a nuisance or which constitute a hazard to the public health or safety of the occupants, pedestrians, children or other persons who come upon or near the premises.

C.    Storage Out of View. Storage of personal property including abandoned vehicles, inoperable vehicles, junk vehicles, other vehicles without current license or registration, refrigerators and other appliances and other personal property which would otherwise constitute a nuisance or public health or safety hazard may be stored within enclosed buildings or screened from view from neighboring lots as well as public streets, sidewalks or other public easements. Any such storage and screening shall effectively prevent both access and view of the stored materials by the public. Further, all abandoned, inoperable or junk refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers or other appliances shall be stored and maintained with the doors removed or in such other manner as to prevent entry by children and others into the appliance. The storage of functional items such as children’s play structures, fire wood, operable vehicles which are licensed, and bicycles shall be exempt from this provision. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-357 § 2; Ord. 97-141 § 2 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(21.2.04))


17.100.050 Removal – Costs.

A.    Removal. In the event that any owner, tenant or other responsible person does not remove such nuisance, solid waste or dilapidated structure which constitutes a nuisance or a hazard to public health and safety from any land or building as set forth in the notice of violation; the Town may remove, abate, enjoin or otherwise cause its/their removal.

B.    Cost of Removal. The cost of removal, abatement or injunction of such nuisance, solid waste or dilapidated structures from any land or structure, along with any associated legal costs for abatement or injunctions, shall be assessed against the land from which the solid waste is removed, abated or enjoined. The Town may record the cost of removal, abatement or injunction as an assessment in the Navajo County Recorder’s Office, including the date and amount of the assessment, the legal description of the property and the full name and address of the property owner. Any such assessment is prior and superior to all other liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances except liens for general taxes. A sale of the land to satisfy an assessment obtained under the provisions of this chapter shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The Town shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the assessment in the Navajo County Superior Court at any time after the recording of the assessment. The failure to enforce the assessment by such legal action shall not affect the assessment’s validity. A recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein, and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof.

C.    Payment of Assessments. Assessments that are imposed under this chapter run against the land until paid, accrue interest at the rate of ten (10%) percent per year or as otherwise prescribed by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 44, Chapter 9, Article 1, Section 44-1201; and are due and payable in equal annual installments as follows:

1.    Assessments of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be paid within one (1) year after the assessment is recorded.

2.    Assessments of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more but less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) shall be paid within two (2) years after the assessment is recorded.

3.    Assessments of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more but less than five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be paid within three (3) years after the assessment is recorded.

4.    Assessments of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more but less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be paid within six (6) years after the assessment is recorded.

5.    Assessments of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more shall be paid within ten (10) years after the assessment is recorded.

D.    Subsequent Assessments. A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this chapter shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for the same or similar purposes; and any number of assessments on the same land may be enforced in the same legal action.

E.    Civil Penalty. Any owner, tenant or other responsible person who, after notice as required by Section 17.100.060(A) does not remove such solid waste or dilapidated structure and abate the condition which constitutes a hazard to the public health and safety, by the date stated in the notice, shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in Chapter 17.132. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 97-141 § 2 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(21.2.05))


17.100.060 Enforcement.

A.    Notice of Noncompliance.

1.    Notice of Noncompliance. A written notice of any noncompliance with this chapter will be given to the owner, tenant or responsible person after a field inspection is completed. This written notice shall give a minimum of ten (10) days to correct the noncompliance.

2.    When the violation pertains to a nuisance deemed to be a threat to the public health and safety or is a graffiti nuisance, the responsible party may be given less than ten (10) days to correct the violation. The date by which to correct the noncompliance will be clearly stated in the written notice.

B.    Notice of Civil Violation.

1.    Notice of Civil Violation. A written notice of any violation of this chapter shall be given to the owner, tenant or responsible person who fails to correct a violation identified in the notice of noncompliance. This written notice shall give a minimum of ten (10) additional days before the date set for compliance, and shall include the following information:

a.    The name and address of the property owner or other person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and

b.    The physical property address or the legal description of the land upon which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

c.    A description of the violation, including a reference to this chapter by section number; and

d.    A brief statement of the action required to be taken to correct the violation; and

e.    The date before which the corrective action shall be taken, which date shall be at least thirty (30) days after the date of the notice of civil violation; and

f.    The estimated maximum cost of such removal to the Town if the owner, tenant or responsible person does not comply.

2.    Delivery of Notice. Delivery of a written notice of noncompliance in subsection A of this section and civil violation in this subsection B may be made by posting the notice at or on the property in a conspicuous place and by any of the following additional methods:

a.    Personal service on the owner, tenant or other responsible person;

b.    By mail to the owner, tenant or other responsible person at his/her last known residence or business address, or at the address to which the tax bill for the land was last mailed.

C.    Continuing Duty to Correct. Payment of a civil monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve a person of the duty to correct the violation as ordered by the Town in any notice of civil violation. Each day of noncompliance may constitute a violation of this code.

D.    Civil Court Action. In any civil action brought to enforce the provisions of this chapter, photographic evidence that the nuisance, solid waste or other violation was present on the land within ten (10) days of preparation of the notice of civil violation shall create a presumption that the defendant is in violation of this chapter.

E.    Collection of Civil Monetary Penalty. The Magistrate Court shall have the primary duty to collect civil monetary penalties pursuant to this chapter. In addition, the Town Attorney, on behalf of the Town, is authorized to collect the civil monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter by use of appropriate legal remedies.

F.    Non-Owner Criminal Liability. Any person that creates a nuisance or who places any solid waste upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of that person is guilty of a Class One misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Title 13, Chapters 7 and 8, Arizona Revised Statutes. In addition such person shall be liable for any and all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this chapter for removing, abating or enjoining the nuisance or solid waste.

G.    Enforcement Officers. The Community Development Department and the Police Department are authorized to request compliance with and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-357 § 3; Ord. 97-141 § 2 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(21.2.06))


17.100.070 Appeal from notice.

Within ten (10) days from the delivery of a notice of civil violation or an assessment, the owner, tenant or other responsible person may appeal the notice of civil violation or assessment to the Town Council or to a board of citizens appointed by the Town Council to hear such appeals. In the event that the notice of violation or assessment is mailed, delivery shall be conclusively presumed to have occurred five (5) days from the date of mailing. In the event of personal service, the date of delivery is the date of such service. In the event of a posting of the notice at or on the property, delivery shall be conclusively presumed to have occurred five (5) days from the date of posting. All such appeals shall be in writing and filed with the Director. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal, the Town Council or board of citizens shall set a time and place for an appeal hearing. Within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the appeal hearing the Town Council or board of citizens shall enter its order affirming, denying or modifying the notice of violation or assessment. In the event that the Town Council or board of citizens affirms or modifies the notice of violation or assessment, the owner, tenant or responsible person shall remove or abate the nuisance, solid waste, or dilapidated building within thirty (30) days of the date of the order. The decision and order of the Town Council or board of citizens shall be final and binding, and any party wishing to appeal from such order shall do so in the Navajo County Superior Court, only. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 01-189; Ord. 97-141 § 2 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(21.2.07))


Chapter 17.102 MEDICAL MARIJUANA

Sections:

17.102.010    Purpose.

17.102.020    Definitions.

17.102.030    Medical marijuana cultivation only in (C-2) heavy commercial zoning districts and (C-1) light commercial zoning districts.

17.102.040    Medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facilities only in (C-2) heavy commercial zoning districts.

17.102.050    Medical marijuana dispensaries (no cultivation) only in (C-1) light commercial zoning districts.

17.102.060    Enforcement, injunctive relief and penalties.


17.102.010 Purpose.

A.    The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and visitors of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside by enacting reasonable zoning regulations that limit the use of land for medical marijuana dispensaries, medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facilities, and medical marijuana cultivation in accordance with the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1. 

B.    The provisions of this chapter are generally intended to apply to a licensed and regulated "medical marijuana" activity under current A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1, Medical Marijuana Act. The provisions of this chapter will also apply to any other person or entity that is selling, distributing, transmitting, giving, dispensing, cultivating, infusing, and manufacturing marijuana; or otherwise involved in similar activities with marijuana or marijuana products to the public or others. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 14-381: Ord. 11-346 §1 (part))


17.102.020 Definitions.

A.    "Applicant" means any person or entity that is required to apply for approval, registration or certification or that has applied for and received approval, registration or certification in accordance with the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1, to own, operate or be employed by a medical marijuana dispensary, a medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility or the cultivation of medical marijuana.

B.    "Medical marijuana" means all parts of the genus Cannabis whether growing or not, and the seed of such plants that may be administered to treat or alleviate a qualifying patient’s debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the patient’s debilitating medical condition.

C.    "Medical marijuana cultivation" means the process by which a person grows a marijuana plant. A "facility" shall mean a building, structure, or premises used for the cultivation or storage of medical marijuana that is physically separate and off site from a medical marijuana dispensary.

D.    "Medical marijuana dispensary" means a nonprofit entity, defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801(11), that sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses, or otherwise provides medical marijuana to qualifying patients.

E.    "Medical marijuana infusion (or manufacturing) facility" means a facility that incorporates medical marijuana (cannabis) by the means of cooking, blending, or incorporation into consumable/edible goods.

F.    "Medical marijuana qualifying patient" means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition as defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801.13. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-346 §1 (part))


17.102.030 Medical marijuana cultivation only in (C-2) heavy commercial zoning districts and (C-1) light commercial zoning districts.

A.    Medical marijuana cultivation shall be a permitted use in the (C-2) heavy commercial zoning district and (C-1) light commercial zoning district within the Town subject to the conditions and limitations of the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1, and the following additional conditions and limitations:

B.    An applicant who is registered and licensed in accordance with the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1, shall provide the following things to the Director before beginning operation of a cultivation facility:

1.    The name(s) and location(s) of the off-site medical marijuana dispensary associated with the cultivation operation;

2.    A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(c); and

3.    A survey sealed by a registered professional engineer/surveyor of the State of Arizona showing the location of the nearest medical marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility or medical marijuana cultivation location if within one thousand (1,000) feet.

C.    Medical marijuana cultivation locations shall:

1.    Allow no retail sales of medical marijuana.

2.    Allow no use of medical marijuana at the location.

3.    Be a maximum of five thousand (5,000) gross square feet in size for cultivation facilities.

4.    Be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of the same type of use or a medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility. This distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line for the properties in which the businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted.

5.    Be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of other residentially zoned property. This distance shall be measured from the exterior wall of the building in which the cultivation business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the nearest exterior wall of the closest residence not located on the property in which the cultivation business is conducted or proposed to be conducted.

6.    Be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of a preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or high school, place of worship, public park or community center. This distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line for the property where the cultivation business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property line of the protected use. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-346 §1 (part))


17.102.040 Medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facilities only in (C-2) heavy commercial zoning districts.

A.    Medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facilities shall be a permitted use in the (C-2) heavy commercial zoning district within the Town subject to the conditions and limitations of the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1, and the following conditions and limitations:

B.    An applicant who is registered and licensed in accordance with the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1, to operate a medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility shall provide the following things to the Director before beginning operation of the facility:

1.    The name(s) and location(s) of the off-site medical marijuana cultivation registrant(s) and any off-site medical marijuana dispensary and the location(s) of same which are associated with the medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility.

2.    A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1.

3.    A survey sealed by a registered professional engineer/surveyor of the State of Arizona showing the location of the nearest medical marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility or medical marijuana cultivation location if within one thousand (1,000) feet.

4.    A site plan, floor plan, detailed security plan, and building permits, when required by the Town Building Code.

C.    A medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility shall:

1.    Be located in a permanent building affixed to real property and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, building that has axles with wheels, or in any motor vehicle.

2.    Be a maximum of three thousand (3,000) gross square feet for a medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility.

3.    Be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of the same type of use. This distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line for the properties in which the businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted.

4.    Be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of a residentially zoned property. This distance shall be measured from the exterior wall of the building in which the medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the nearest exterior wall of the closest residence not located on the property in which the medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility is conducted or proposed to be conducted.

5.    Be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of a preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or high school, place of worship, public park, or public community center. This distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line for the property where the medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the lot line of the protected use.

6.    Have operating hours not earlier than 7:00 a.m. to not later than 10:00 p.m.

7.    Drive-through, drop-off and pick-up services are prohibited.

8.    Allow no use of medical marijuana on the premises or on the property where the premises is located.

9.    The cultivation of medical marijuana is prohibited.

10.    Provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or byproducts, which remnants or byproducts shall not be placed in the facility’s exterior refuse containers.

11.    Emit no dust, fumes, vapors or odors which can be seen, smelled or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the property where the medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility business is conducted or proposed to be conducted. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-346 §1 (part))


17.102.050 Medical marijuana dispensaries (no cultivation) only in (C-1) light commercial zoning districts.

A.    Medical marijuana dispensaries shall be a permitted use in the (C-1) light commercial zoning district within the Town subject to the conditions and limitations of the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1, and the following conditions and limitations:

B.    An applicant who is registered and licensed in accordance with the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1, to operate a medical marijuana dispensary shall provide the following things to the Director before beginning operation of the dispensary:

1.    The name(s) and location(s) of the off-site medical marijuana cultivation registrant(s) and any off-site medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility and the location(s) of same which are associated with the medical marijuana dispensary.

2.    A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1.

3.    A survey sealed by a registered professional engineer/surveyor of the State of Arizona showing the location of the nearest medical marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility or medical marijuana cultivation location, if any are located within one thousand (1,000) feet.

4.    A site plan, floor plan, detailed security plan, and building permits, when required by the Town Building Code.

C.    A medical marijuana dispensary shall:

1.    Be located in a permanent building affixed to real property and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container, building that has axles with wheels, or in any motor vehicle.

2.    Be a maximum one thousand (1,000) gross square feet for a medical marijuana dispensary.

3.    Be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of the same type of use. This distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line for the properties in which the businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted.

4.    Be located not closer than five hundred (500) feet of a residentially zoned property. This distance shall be measured from the exterior wall of the building in which the medical marijuana dispensary is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the nearest exterior wall of the closest residence not located on the property in which the medical marijuana dispensary is conducted or proposed to be conducted.

5.    Be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of a preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or high school, place of worship, public park, or public community center. This distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line for the property where the medical marijuana dispensary is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the lot line of the protected use.

6.    Have operating hours not earlier than 7:00 a.m. to not later than 10:00 p.m.

7.    Drive-through, drop-off and pick-up services are prohibited.

8.    Allow no use of medical marijuana on the premises or on the property where the premises is located.

9.    The cultivation of medical marijuana is prohibited.

10.    Provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or byproducts, which remnants or byproducts shall not be placed in the facility’s exterior refuse containers.

11.    Emit no dust, fumes, vapors or odors which can be seen, smelled or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the property where the medical marijuana dispensary is conducted or proposed to be conducted. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-346 §1 (part))


17.102.060 Enforcement, injunctive relief and penalties.

A.    Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer, sworn police officers, and the Town Attorney are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B.    A person who operates or causes to be operated a medical marijuana cultivation, medical marijuana dispensary, or medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility business without a valid registration, certification or license issued by the State of Arizona or a medical marijuana cultivation, medical marijuana dispensary, or medical marijuana infusion (manufacturing) facility business which is in violation of this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief closing the business temporarily or permanently in addition to prosecution for criminal violations.

C.    Criminal Penalties.

1.    A violation of this chapter by a person or enterprise is punishable as a Class I misdemeanor. See Section 1.20.050(C) and Arizona Revised Statutes Chapters 7 and 8.

2.    In addition to any penalties or fines prescribed by the court, the court or Hearing Officer may order a person adjudged guilty to perform community service, and to abate any violation or nuisance temporarily or permanently.

D.    Continuing Violation. Each day that an applicant or defendant himself, herself or itself remains in violation of this title after being served with a citation or other notice of the violation shall be a separate and distinct violation of this title. The Town shall not be required to issue a citation for each day of violation subsequent to the date of the violation listed on the citation or notice; and the court may receive evidence and exact a penalty for each day the defendant is in violation subsequent to the date of violation noted on the citation or notice. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-346 §1 (part))


Chapter 17.104 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.104.010    Applying supplemental provisions.

17.104.020    Administrative adjustment.

17.104.030    Accessory building and uses.

17.104.040    Additional yard and unbuilt lot area regulations.

17.104.050    Additional height regulations.

17.104.060    Setback lines.

17.104.070    Parking regulations.

17.104.080    Temporary buildings and uses.

17.104.090    Location and storage of manufactured homes or any other type of trailer.

17.104.100    Outdoor light control.

17.104.110    Equine regulations.

17.104.120    Residential care facilities.

17.104.130    Home occupations.


17.104.010 Applying supplemental provisions.

The regulations set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the zoning district regulations appearing in these regulations. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2101))


17.104.020 Administrative adjustment.

A.    The purpose of this section is to grant authority to the Community Development Director to take action on requests for minor modifications or adjustments to certain requirements of the zoning code when such requests constitute a reasonable use of property not permissible under a strict literal interpretation of the regulations.

B.    For the purpose of administering this section, an adjustment is any variance to the terms or requirements of this chapter, which, if granted, would allow the following:

1.    A decrease of not more than ten (10%) percent of the required building site area, width, or depth.

2.    A decrease of not more than ten (10%) percent of the required width of a side yard or the yard between buildings.

3.    A decrease of not more than ten (10%) percent of the required front or rear yard.

4.    An increase of not more than ten (10%) percent of the permitted projection of steps, stairways, landings, eaves, overhangs, masonry chimneys, and fireplaces into any required front, rear, side, or yard between buildings.

5.    A decrease in the number of required parking spaces of not more than ten (10%) percent.

6.    An increase of not more than ten (10%) percent in the maximum allowable lot coverage.

7.    An increase of not more than ten (10%) percent in the permitted height of buildings. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part))


17.104.030 Accessory building and uses.

A.    Accessory buildings shall not be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the principal building has been actually commenced, and accessory buildings shall not be used for dwelling purposes.

B.    Accessory buildings may be built in the required rear yard but such accessory buildings shall not occupy more than thirty (30%) percent of the required rear yard and shall not be nearer than two (2) feet (measured to the eave of the building) to any side or rear lot line or setback line, except that in the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall not be nearer to the street than a distance equal to not less than one-half (1/2) of the depth of the required front yard of the corner lot when a garage is entered from an alley, it shall not be located nearer than ten (10) feet to the alley line.

C.    Accessory buildings on through lots shall not be nearer to either street than a distance equal to the required front yard of such lot. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2102). Formerly 17.104.020)


17.104.040 Additional yard and unbuilt lot area regulations.

A.    Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed, except as enumerated in the following:

1.    Projections of window sills, cornices, eaves and other ornamental features may project a distance not exceeding two (2) feet into any required yard, except that in the case of accessory buildings in the required rear yard this projection shall not exceed one (1) foot beyond the walls of such accessory buildings.

2.    Chimneys may project a distance not exceeding two (2) feet into any required yard.

3.    Fire escapes may project a distance not exceeding five (5) feet into any required yard provided such projection shall be distant at least two (2) feet from any lot line or setback line.

4.    Bay windows and balconies may project a distance not exceeding three (3) feet into the required front or rear yard; provided, that such features shall not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third (1/3) of the length of the wall of the building on which they are located.

5.    Uncovered stairs and necessary landings may project a distance not exceeding six (6) feet into the required front or rear yard; provided, that such stairs and landings shall not extend above the entrance floor of the building except for a railing not to exceed three (3) feet in height.

6.    Terraces, patios, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more than three (3) feet above grade may project into any required yard, provided such features shall be at least two (2) feet from any lot line or setback line.

B.    Where an unbuilt lot area is more than fifty (50%) percent surrounded by a building which is two (2) stories or more in height, the minimum width of the unbuilt lot area shall not be less than thirty (30) feet.

C.    Where forty (40%) percent or more of the frontage on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have not observed a required front yard, or where buildings on such street have observed, with a variation of more than five (5) feet, a front yard greater in depth than that required, then where a building is to be erected within one hundred (100) feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required front yard shall be a line drawn between the two (2) closest front corners of the adjacent buildings on the two (2) sides; or where a building is to be erected within one hundred (100) feet of an existing building on one (1) side only, such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 99-167 § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2106). Formerly 17.104.060)


17.104.050 Additional height regulations.

A.    Public buildings may be erected to a height not exceeding forty (40) feet, if the building is set back from each lot line at least one (1) foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the building is located.

B.    Church steeples, fire towers, ornamental towers or spires may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet, if such structure is set back from each lot line at least one (1) foot for each foot of additional height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the structure is located. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2107). Formerly 17.104.070)


17.104.060 Setback lines.

The following setback lines are established:

A.    Major Streets, Section Line Roads, State and Federal Highways.

1.    Fifty-five (55) feet from and on both sides of the centerline of all existing or proposed major streets, section line roads, state and federal highways, where service roads are not required.

B.    Collector Streets and Mid-Section Line Roads. Forty (40) feet from and on both sides of the centerline of all existing or proposed collector streets and mid-section line roads.

C.    Local Streets. Twenty-five (25) feet from and on both sides of the centerline of all existing or proposed local streets, except that this requirement shall be increased to thirty (30) feet for local streets abutting properties in multiple-family residential and commercial zoning districts. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2108). Formerly 17.104.080)


17.104.070 Parking regulations.

A.    Definitions.

1.    "Daytime uses" means uses that operate predominantly during weekdays (Monday through Friday, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) and require the most parking spaces during weekdays. Examples of these uses are: banks, office buildings, and schools.

2.    "Nighttime/weekend uses" means uses that predominantly operate during nights (6:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.) and weekends (Saturday and Sunday) and require the most parking spaces during nights and/or weekends.

B.    Applicability.

1.    New Developments. Parking regulations shall apply to any new building or new building addition constructed or any new use established in commercial or residential districts.

2.    Expansions and Alterations. If a business expands, it shall, in addition to the parking spaces in existence prior to such expansion, be required to provide the number of additional parking spaces necessitated by the expansion.

3.    Change of Use. Parking regulations shall apply to any change of use when the new use will be required to provide a higher number of parking spaces than the original use.

4.    If a building or business is destroyed, and if it is allowed to be reconstructed subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.112, Nonconforming Uses, it shall be required to provide only the number of parking spaces which existed prior to the damage.

C.    Minimum Parking Requirements.

1.    Parking for Residences. For each single, two (2), or multiple-family residence hereafter erected, or for any building converted to such use or occupancy, there shall be provided the following number of parking spaces for each dwelling unit in the building:

TABLE 1 – Parking for Residences 

	Use	Minimum Number of Spaces Per Dwelling Unit

	One (1) or two (2) family residences	2

	Multiple-Family Dwelling Units

	Efficiency units	1.2

	One (1) bedroom units	1.5

	Two (2) bedroom units	1.7

	Three (3) or more bedroom units	2

2.    Parking for all churches, theaters, auditoriums, arenas, indoor and outdoor stadiums shall provide one (1) parking space for every five (5) persons for which seating is provided.

3.    Parking for private clubs, fraternal organizations, community buildings and other places of public assembly shall provide one (1) parking space for every five (5) persons for which seating is provided; or one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in the building, excluding areas designed for restrooms, storage or for other nonpublic purpose, whichever is greater.

4.    Parking for hotels or similar uses shall provide one and two-tenths (1.2) parking spaces for each guest room or suite of rooms in the buildings.

5.    Parking for hospitals, hospices, or similar uses shall provide one (1) parking space for every five (5) beds in the building, and one (1) parking space for every four (4) employees, and one (1) parking space for each staff physician.

6.    Parking for schools and other similar educational institutions shall provide one (1) parking space for every three (3) employees including teachers, directors, and building maintenance personnel, and one (1) parking space for every five (5) high school, college or university students predicated upon the designed capacity.

7.    Parking for manufactured home parks shall provide one and one-half (1-1/2) spaces for each manufactured home space or recreational vehicle space in such a park.

8.    Parking for recreational vehicle parks shall provide one and two-tenths (1.2) parking spaces for each mobile space or recreational vehicle space in such park.

9.    Parking for office buildings and banks shall provide one (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in the ground level floor of the building and one (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in other than the ground level floor of the building, excluding areas for restrooms and storage areas.

10.    Parking for restaurants, nightclubs, bars and dance halls shall provide one (1) parking space for each sixty (60) square feet of floor area (including patios), or fraction thereof, in the building excluding areas for kitchens, restrooms and storage areas.

11.    Parking for furniture and appliance stores shall provide one (1) parking space for each seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in the building, excluding areas for restrooms and storage areas.

12.    Parking for other commercial buildings shall provide one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in the ground level floor of the building and one (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in other than the ground level of the building, excluding areas for restrooms and storage areas.

13.    Parking for manufacturing and heavy commercial buildings shall provide one (1) parking space for each three (3) employees on the largest working shift, or one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in the building, whichever is greater.

D.    Mixed Uses. The required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the required parking spaces for the various uses computed separately.

E.    Shared Parking. In the case that a daytime use and a nighttime/weekend use share a common parking lot, the developer and/or property owner may use shared parking as a means of satisfying off-street parking requirements. Shared parking would allow a site with multiple uses that have different operating hours or different peak business periods to share a parking lot that has less total parking spaces than would be required if each use had a separate parking lot.

1.    To be eligible for shared parking, the developer/property owner must prepare a written shared parking study that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking. At a minimum, the study must address the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces. This study must be distributed to all property owners within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the proposed shared parking, and these property owners shall be notified of public meetings at which action on the shared parking proposal will be taken.

2.    Based on the findings in the study, the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Director may reduce the number of parking spaces required for the site, may require additional study by the developer, or may commission its own study to help make a determination.

3.    The absolute maximum reduction in parking spaces for shared parking shall correlate to the total number of spaces required for the daytime and nighttime/weekend uses. The various uses shall be classified (by the definitions above or by the Director) as daytime uses, nighttime/weekend uses or neither. The minimum parking requirements for each use shall be calculated separately, as per the chart below.

TABLE 2 – Reductions in Shared Parking Requirements 

	 	Use	Required Spaces per Use	Totals for Daytime/ Nighttime	Maximum Reduction in Required Parking Spaces	Minimum Requirement for Site

	Nighttime/Weekend Uses	3,600-Square-Foot Restaurant	60	60 + 40 = 100	= one-half the smaller requirement...= (1/2) of 50...= 25	100 + 50 + 30 = 180...Minus shared parking reduction... 180 - 25 = 155

	Commercial	40

	Daytime Uses	10,000-Square-Foot Office (First Floor)	40	40 + 10 = 50

	 	3,000-Square-Foot Office (Second Floor)	10

	Other Uses	6,000-Square-Foot Retail Store	30	30

F.    Maximum Parking Allowed. For all commercial uses, the amount of parking spaces shall be restricted to the following maximum parking regulations, unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Director during site plan review:

TABLE 3 – Maximum Parking Allowed 

	Minimum parking spaces required	Maximum parking spaces allowed

	0 – 20 parking spaces	20% over minimum

	21 – 50 parking spaces	15% over minimum

	51 or more parking spaces	10% over minimum

G.    Fractional Measurements Involving Parking Spaces. After computation of the number of parking spaces required, round up to the nearest whole number.

H.    Location of Required Parking Spaces. The required parking spaces shall be located as follows:

1.    On the same lot as the building or use they are intended to serve; or

2.    Within four hundred (400) feet of the premises they are intended to serve, if a signed joint parking agreement is reached between the owner of the parking and the owner of the facility which the parking will serve; and the agreement is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. All such agreements shall include the term of the agreement, the number of parking spaces which will be shared, and notice to the Town in the event that the parking spaces become unavailable or cannot be used, or the agreement is suspended or terminated. Whenever a joint parking agreement is proposed, the parking lots shall be designed in a manner that will connect the parking lots which are a part of the joint parking agreement.

I.    Maintenance of Parking Areas.

1.    All parking areas shall be maintained to provide a surface free from cracks, holes, and pavement deterioration and kept clean and free of solid waste as defined in Chapter 13.04. All required pavement marking shall remain visible. Failure to properly maintain a parking area may result in a civil violation per Section 1.20.060, civil violations.

2.    Every parking lot shall have at least one (1) trash receptacle for every fifty (50) parking spaces. Trash receptacles shall be a minimum twenty (20) gallon size and a maximum fifty (50) gallon size. Trash containers, receptacles and dumpsters shall be provided and maintained by the owner of the property. In addition, owners shall keep parking lots and parking areas free of snow, excess water and other things which negatively impact the safety of motorists and pedestrians.

J.    Dimensions of Parking Spaces. Any proposed parking plan, for which a site plan review is required, shall show designated and dimensioned parking spaces (a single or detailed space shall be shown to indicate a typical space). The minimum size for all parking spaces shall be no less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet. The minimum width shall be no less than nine (9) feet. The parking spaces shall be arranged in such a manner as to provide a cleared back-up zone of at least twenty-four (24) feet.

K.    ADA Compliant Spaces. ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) compliant spaces shall provide an access aisle next to the space with a minimum width of five (5) feet. See Table 4 below for the amount of required ADA compliant parking spaces for each parking lot. 

TABLE 4 – ADA Compliant Spaces 

	Total Parking in Lot	Required Number of ADA Compliant Spaces

	1 – 25	1

	26 – 50	2

	51 – 75	3

	76 – 100	4

	101 – 150	5

	151 – 200	6

	201 – 300	7

	301 – 400	8

(Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-319 § 1; Ord. 05-243; Ord. 04-232 § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2109). Formerly 17.104.090)


17.104.080 Temporary buildings and uses.

Temporary buildings and uses are permitted as follows:

A.    Temporary structures used in conjunction with construction work only during the period of such construction, subject to securing a temporary use permit and the following:

1.    Any temporary use permit approved for such temporary structure shall be limited to a period of time not to exceed one (1) year from the date of such approval, but said permit may be renewed for like periods thereafter upon the property owner submitting to the Community Development Director satisfactory evidence indicating that the need for such temporary structure continues to exist.

2.    Unless such temporary use permit is renewed, such temporary structure shall be removed from the property upon the expiration of the previously approved use permit or within ten (10) days after completion of the construction work, whichever first occurs.

B.    A temporary use permit shall be obtained from the Director.

C.    Temporary real estate offices require a conditional use permit and the following:

1.    Such office shall be located on the property being subdivided for sale as individual lots and its use shall be limited to the sale of these lots.

2.    Such office shall be subject to the height, yard, intensity of use and parking regulations for zoning district in which it is located.

3.    The permit shall not exceed two (2) years from the date of such approval, but may be renewed.

4.    Unless such conditional use permit is renewed, such office shall be removed from the property within ten (10) days.

D.    A fee shall not be charged for a temporary use permit. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2112). Formerly 17.104.110)


17.104.090 Location and storage of manufactured homes or any other type of trailer.

Unless permitted under the regulations set forth in this section, or unless permitted by the use regulations for a specific zoning district, the location or storage of any trailer shall be subject to the following:

A.    At no time shall the travel trailer, aircraft, boat, camping trailer, truck camper or motor home be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.

B.    Any trailer located or stored outside of a garage or carport shall be placed in the rear or side yard of the lot, except that placement in other than the rear yard for loading and unloading purposes may be permitted for a period of time not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2113). Formerly 17.104.120)


17.104.100 Outdoor light control.

A.    Purpose. This section is intended to restrict the permitted use of outdoor artificial illuminating devices emitting undesirable rays into the night sky, which have a detrimental effect on astronomical observations.

B.    Conformance with Applicable Code Provisions. All outdoor artificial illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, any other applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town and any building ordinances of the Town, which may hereafter be enacted, as applicable.

1.    Where any provisions of any of the Arizona Revised Statutes or of the federal law, or any companion ordinance, comparatively conflicts with the requirements of this section the most restrictive shall govern.

C.    Approved Material and Methods of Installation. The provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of installation not specifically prescribed by this section, provided any such alternate has been approved in writing by the Director upon a finding that the proposed design, material or method:

1.    Provides approximate equivalence to the applicable requirements of this section; or

2.    Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this section.

D.    Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following definitions:

"Fossil fuel light" means light produced directly or indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels.

"Fully shielded" means the fixture shall be shielded so that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.

"Individual" means any private individual, tenant, lessee, owner or any commercial entity including, but not limited to, companies, partnerships, joint ventures or corporation.

"Installed" means an initial installation of outdoor light fixtures on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

"Outdoor light fixtures" means outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to, search, spot or flood lights for:

1.    Buildings and structures;

2.    Recreational areas;

3.    Parking lot lighting;

4.    Landscape lighting;

5.    Advertising structures;

6.    Street lighting.

"Partially shielded" means the fixture shall be shielded so that the bottom edge of the shield is below the plane centerline of the light source (lamp), minimizing the emission of light above the horizontal plane.

E.    General Requirements.

1.    Shielding and Filtration.

a.    All outdoor light fixtures, except those exempt from this section and those regulated by subsection F of this section, shall be fully or partially shielded as required in subsection (E)(2) of this section.

b.    It is recommended that existing mercury vapor fixtures either be replaced or be equipped with a filter whose transmission is less than ten (10%) percent total emergent flux at wave lengths less than four thousand four hundred (4,400) angstroms. "Total emergent flux" is defined as that between three thousand (3,000) and seven thousand (7,000) angstrom units.

c.    Low pressure sodium lamps are the preferred lamp for minimizing adverse effects on astronomical observations.

2.    Requirements for Shielding. The requirements for shielding light emissions from outdoor light fixtures and recommendations for filtration are as set forth in the following table:

	Requirements for Shielding/Filtration Recommendations 

	Fixture Lamp Type	Must Be Shielded	Filtering Recommended

	Low pressure sodium	Partially	None

	High pressure sodium	Fully	None

	Metal halide	Fully	Yes

	Fluorescent	Fully	Yes

	Quartz	Fully	None

	Incandescent greater than 150w	Fully	None

	Incandescent 150w or less	None	None

	Mercury vapor	Fully	Yes

	Fossil fuel	None	None

	Glass tubes filled with neon, argon and krypton	None	None

	Other sources	As approved by the Director

Footnotes:

1.    This is the preferred light source to minimize undesirable light into the night sky affecting astronomical observations.

2.    Warm white and natural lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental effects.

3.    For the purposes of this section, quartz lamps shall not be considered an incandescent light source.

4.    Most glass, acrylic or translucent enclosures satisfy the filter recommendation.

5.    Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within do not require shielding.

6.    Metal halide lamps shall be in enclosed luminaries. See also subsection (F)(6) of this section.

7.    Recommended for existing fixtures.

F.    Prohibitions.

1.    Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited.

2.    Recreational Facilities. No outdoor recreational facility, public or private, shall be illuminated by nonconforming means after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a specific recreation, sporting or other activity in progress prior to 11:00 p.m.

3.    Outdoor Building or Landscaping Illumination. The unshielded outdoor illumination of any building, landscaping, signing or other purpose is prohibited except with incandescent fixtures less than one hundred fifty (150) watts. All illumination shall be so arranged as not to shine upon or reflect onto adjoining properties.

4.    Mercury Vapor. The installation of mercury vapor fixtures is prohibited without shielding as required in subsection E of this section. This prohibition is effective ninety (90) days after adoption of the ordinance codified in this section.

5.    Signage. All outdoor signage, with its lighting, shall conform to subsection E of this section and shall be of such size and color as not to interfere with traffic or limit visibility of adjoining property. Illumination on any sign not wholly illuminated from within must conform to subsection E of this section and be directed towards the ground. Signs shall not have intermittent illumination or flashing lights (see Section 17.108.130(A)(2)).

6.    Metal Halide Lamps. Metal halide display lighting shall not be used for security lighting after 11:00 p.m. (or after closing hours if before 11:00 p.m.) unless fully shielded.

G.    Permanent and Temporary Exemptions.

1.    Nonconforming Fixtures. All outdoor light fixtures existing and fully installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section are nonconforming indefinitely; provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration after abandonment of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this section.

2.    Federal and State Facilities. Those facilities and lands owned, operated or protected by the U.S. Federal Government, the State of Arizona or Navajo County are exempted from all requirements of this section. Voluntary compliance with the intent of this section at those facilities is urged.

3.    Special Exemption. The Director may grant a special exemption from the requirements of subsection E of this section only upon a written finding that there are extreme geographic or geometric conditions warranting the exemption and that there are no conforming fixtures that would suffice.

4.    Temporary Exemptions.

a.    Request. Any individual may submit a written request (in form approved by the Director) for a temporary exemption to the requirements of this section, such exemption to be valid for thirty (30) days, renewable at the discretion of the Director.

b.    The request for temporary exemption shall contain at least the following information:

i.    Specific exemption(s) requested;

ii.    Type and use of outdoor light fixture for which exemption is sought;

iii.    Duration of the requested exemption;

iv.    Type of lamp(s) and calculated lumens;

v.    Total wattage of lamp(s);

vi.    Proposed location;

vii.    Previous temporary exemptions, if any;

viii.    Physical size of outdoor light fixture and type of shielding to be provided.

In addition to the above data, the Director may request any additional information which would assist his or her evaluation of the request.

5.    Utility Exemptions. Utility companies entering into a duly approved agreement with the Town in which they agree to comply with the provisions of these regulations shall be exempt from applying for and obtaining a permit for the installation of outdoor light fixtures, including residential security lighting.

H.    Procedures for Compliance.

1.    Application.

a.    Any individual applying for a building or use permit under the Zoning Ordinance of the Town intending to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall, as a part of said application, submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with this section.

b.    All other individuals intending to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit an application to the Director providing evidence that the proposed work will comply with this section.

2.    Contents of Application. The application shall contain, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following, all or part of which may be part of or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town:

a.    Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, etc.

b.    Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, etc. This description may include, but is not limited to, manufacturer’s catalog cuts, and drawings (including sections where required).

The above required plans and descriptions shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Director to readily determine compliance with the requirements of this section. If such plans and descriptions do not readily enable this determination, the applicant shall submit evidence of compliance by certified test reports as performed by a recognized testing lab.

3.    Issuance of Permit. Upon compliance with the requirements of this section, the Director shall issue a permit for installation of the outdoor lighting fixtures, to be installed per the approved application. In the event the application is part of another application under this title, the privilege applied for will be granted if the applicant is in compliance with this section as well as the other requirements for the privilege applied for under this title.

4.    Amendment to Permit. Should the applicant desire to use different outdoor light fixtures or lamps after a permit has been issued, the applicant must submit all changes to the Director for approval, with adequate information to allow determination of compliance with this section.

I.    Appeals.

1.    Requests for Temporary Exemptions. The Director, within five (5) days from the date of submission of a complete request for temporary exemption, shall approve or reject the request in writing. If rejected, the individual making the request shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Adjustment for review pursuant to the procedures applicable to appeals of decisions of the Director under Section 17.120.060.

2.    Other Applications. The Director, within seven (7) calendar days from the date of submission of a complete application for permit under subsection (H)(2) of this section, shall approve or deny the application in writing. In the event of rejection, then appeal procedures for appeal of decisions of the Director shall apply (see Section 17.120.060). (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-264; Ord. 91-88 § 1; Ord. 91-84 § 1; Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2117). Formerly 17.104.140)


17.104.110 Equine regulations.

A.    Purpose. This section is intended to regulate the keeping of horses and all other members of the equine family within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside.

1.    The keeping of horses is permitted by administrative review by the Director on any property greater than one (1) acre. All other properties one (1) acre or less are permitted by conditional use permit (see Chapter 17.80) in all zoning districts, except C-2, heavy commercial zoning district.

2.    All applications for keeping of horses must comply with the requirements under subsections B and C of this section. Applications requiring a for conditional use permit made under this section shall also conform to the requirements of Chapter 17.80, Conditional Use Permits.

a.    The minimum lot size required for the keeping of horses shall be one-half (1/2) acre. The number of horses permitted shall be as follows:

i.    One-half (1/2) to 0.99 acre: up to two (2) horses;

ii.    One (1) to 1.49 acres: up to four (4) horses;

iii.    One and one-half (1-1/2) to 1.99 acres: up to six (6) horses.

b.    Horse corrals (excluding barns and shelters) shall be a minimum one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet per horse without exception.

B.    Site Plan. Prior to approval of a conditional use permit under this section the applicant must provide a detailed site plan showing the following information:

1.    Location of all dwellings and commercial structures within two hundred (200) feet of any portion of the proposed facility.

2.    The location and design of drainage facilities demonstrating: (a) protection of wellheads, springs, lakes, streams and other water features; (b) prevention of soil erosion; and (c) measures to prevent discharge of contaminated surface flows onto adjoining properties.

3.    Location and design of all fencing.

C.    Design Standards, Guidelines, and Best Management Practices (BMPs). All horse facilities proposed within the Town shall be designed to provide a safe, healthy, and secure environment for horses, owners, adjacent property owners, and residents. Design of horse facilities shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director that all facilities will conform to current BMPs for the protection of ground water, control of runoff, pests and manure, and design and construction of enclosures, fencing, and shelters; and shall conform to water resource protection regulations established by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. Design Standards and BMPs promulgated in the American Youth Horse Council’s Horse Industry Handbook are hereby adopted by reference and shall guide review of all facilities proposed under this section. 

Minimum Requirements.

1.    Setbacks. Structures, including barns, storage sheds, shelters, etc., shall conform to the setback requirements in Section 17.104.060. Horse enclosure fences shall maintain a minimum five (5) foot height with a four (4) foot setback from all property lines; provided, however, that horse enclosure fences may abut the property boundary provided the fence maintains a minimum height of six (6) feet.

2.    Wellhead Protection. No portion of any horse facility shall be located within one hundred (100) feet from any well, spring, lake or stream used for drinking water supply. Site conditions may require additional separation and/or preventive measures to ensure protection of drinking water supplies.

3.    Ground Water Protection. No portion of any horse facility shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any lake, stream, or spring, unless adequate provision for the prevention of erosion and/or contamination is demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence to allow a less restrictive minimum distance. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-264. Formerly 17.104.150)


17.104.120 Residential care facilities.*

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment and operation of residential care facilities in the Town, to help protect the health and welfare of the residents of such facilities, and to help protect the health, welfare and character of the neighbors and the neighborhoods in which they operate.

B.    Administrative Review. Such home shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director, or designee, for building code and land use compliance prior to the use commencing.

C.    Application. All residential care facilities shall apply for and meet all requirements and maintain a current business license issued by the Town. If the residential care facility is subject to a license, certificate, permit or registration issued by the state or other government agency, the applicant shall produce on demand such license, certificate, permit or registration from the State of Arizona or other licensing government agency.

D.    Zoning Requirements. Residential care facilities are permitted in all zoning districts within the Town.

E.    Separation Requirements. Residential care facilities shall be separated from other residential care facilities and health care facilities by a distance of not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet.

F.    Occupancy. Federal and state laws which limit the number of residents in a residential care facility, set minimum square footage requirements or otherwise regulate residential care facilities shall apply to residential care facilities within the Town. In addition, the following requirements shall apply:

1.    There shall be a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet of living space for each resident in all residential care facilities in any zoning district.

2.    The occupancy of any residential care facility in any residential zoning district shall be six (6) to ten (10) residents. Occupancies of eleven (11) or more residents shall be allowed in C-1 and C-2 zoning districts only.

3.    There shall be one (1) parking space off the street for each staff member that is employed by, resides in, uses or occupies the residential care facility.

4.    Shall comply with all building code requirements for R-3 residential occupancies.

G.    Licensing. All health care facilities, which provide medical care, health care services, counseling, or other similar medical services, shall be licensed by the State of Arizona Department of Health Services or other applicable governmental agency. A copy of the current state or other license shall be delivered to the Town within ten (10) days of any request by the Town. In the event that the state or other government licensing agency takes any action related to such license including but not limited to probation, suspension or revocation of such license, the owner/operator of the health care facility shall immediately (within ten (10) days) notify the Town of such action, and a copy of any letter or other document evidencing such action shall be delivered to the Town within ten (10) days of its receipt by the health care facility.

H.    Reasonable Accommodation. Reasonable accommodation will be made by the Town to qualified individuals with disabilities who request reasonable accommodation seeking relief from the requirements of this chapter to the Town Manager. Requests for relief from the requirements of this chapter shall be made by the individual with a disability or another person acting on their behalf orally or in writing to the Town Manager certifying that the applicant is a qualified individual with a disability, setting forth the section(s) of this chapter that the applicant seeks relief from, and setting forth the accommodation, modification or adjustment that will enable the qualified individual to enjoy equal benefits and privileges of the residential care facility. The Town Manager will review the application, hold a hearing when necessary, and issue a written response or ruling within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the application. A case-by-case determination will be made by the Town Manager about what constitutes a reasonable accommodation. All reasonable accommodation proceedings shall be private and confidential, except that the Town Manager may consult with attorneys to help ensure that reasonable accommodation is available to qualified individuals.

I.    Enforcement, Penalties. Enforcement and penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.132. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-391 § 1: Ord. 07-292. Formerly 17.104.160)

*    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 15-393 amended this section without taking into account the amendments of Ord. 15-391. Those amendments have been retained.


17.104.130 Home occupations.

A.    Home Occupations. A "home occupation" is an activity or pursuit in which the owner or possessor of a home or a resident member of that person’s family is engaged and which is a permitted secondary or accessory use in residential districts conducted in accordance with this section. All home occupations shall be conducted in such a manner that they are compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood. A home occupation shall not interfere with the peace, quiet, and dignity of the neighboring property owners. For purposes of this section, "neighboring property owners" means all persons who live nearby and who can see, hear, smell, or are otherwise impacted to the slightest degree by the home occupation.

B.    Restrictions. Home occupations shall be subject to the following limitations and restrictions:

1.    A valid Town business license, and other required licenses and certificates.

2.    Home occupations shall be conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance of a business.

3.    Home occupations shall be clearly secondary and subordinate to the use of the property.

4.    The home occupation shall be conducted entirely from within the principal residence, garage, or other accessory building.

5.    A home occupation shall not create any nuisance, hazard, or other offensive condition.

6.    Goods related to the home occupation shall not be visible from beyond the property lines.

7.    Outdoor storage of goods, materials, or equipment related to the home occupation shall not be permitted.

8.    Visitors shall not block neighborhood traffic circulation.

9.    No hazardous material as defined by Arizona Revised Statutes Title 26, Chapter 2, Article 1 shall be used, created or stored on site. Materials considered hazardous such as common household cleaning agents or paint may be stored in amounts that are customary and usual for residential use.

C.    Home Occupation Uses. Home offices and businesses are acceptable as home occupations, provided the use complies in all respects with the regulations in this section. A conditional use permit may be required for any home occupation if the Director determines that the nature or intensity of the intended use, the concerns of neighbors or other objective reasons require a conditional use permit. Appeals from decisions of the Director may be made to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Chapter 17.120.

D.    Conditional use permit is required for the following uses within the Town:

1.    Home day care.

2.    Bed and breakfast establishments.

3.    Other uses which because of the nature or intensity of use, complaints by neighbors, or other reasons cause the Director to require a conditional use permit. Appeals from decisions of the Director may be made to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Chapter 17.120.

4.    Other similar home occupations which the Director determines a conditional use permit should be required. Appeals from decisions of the Director may be made to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Chapter 17.120.

E.    Permitted Signs. One (1) sign not larger than eight (8) square feet in area shall be allowed. Unless allowed by conditional use permit, the sign shall be placed only on the primary structure. Signs shall also conform to the Town sign regulations, Chapter 17.108.

F.    Reporting Complaints or Violations. All complaints or violations of this section shall be directed to the Director or to the Code Enforcement Officer. Appeals from decisions of the Director may be made to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Chapter 17.120.

G.    Termination of Home Occupation.

1.    The Director or his designee shall investigate any complaint or violation of this section, and if there appears to be a violation contact with the alleged violator shall be made to mitigate the problem or complaint or to cease and desist the violation. If the problem is resolved, a written notation of the complaint, violation and action taken shall be placed in the business license file for the business or activity.

2.    A violation of any requirement of this section may be cause for termination by the Director or his designee of the home occupation use.

3.    If the complaint or violation cannot be resolved informally, a civil citation may be issued and civil penalties levied in accordance with Sections 1.20.070 and 1.20.080. In addition to any civil penalty levied by the court, the court may order other appropriate restrictions on the home occupation use up to and including termination of the home occupation use, and forfeiture of the business license. (Ord. 19-419 § 1 (Exh. A)(part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 07-301 § 1. Formerly 17.104.170)


Chapter 17.106 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES

Sections:

17.106.010    Purpose.

17.106.020    Permitting.

17.106.030    General requirements.

17.106.040    Site size and setbacks.

17.106.050    Height.

17.106.060    Small wireless facility.

17.106.070    Applications and procedure.

17.106.080    Removal of wireless communication facilities.


17.106.010 Purpose.

This chapter is intended to accommodate the communications needs of residents and businesses in the Town while protecting public health, safety, and welfare by:

A.    Minimizing adverse visual effects of wireless communication facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, height limitations, innovative camouflage techniques, and protection of viewshed corridors;

B.    Locating wireless communication facilities away from residential neighborhoods and historical sites whenever feasible. (Ord. 18-412 § 1 (part))


17.106.020 Permitting.

A.    Uses Permitted in Right-of-Way.

1.    All small wireless facilities (SWF) located in the Town’s rights-of-way must obtain an administrative small wireless facility permit. Multiple SWF installations can be grouped on one (1) permit.

B.    Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit.

1.    All new wireless communication facilities and replacement antenna-supporting structures not located in the Town’s right-of-way and intended for commercial and emergency services or public facility use shall obtain a conditional use permit in compliance with Chapter 17.80, Conditional Use Permits, prior to submittal for building permit approval and the initiation of construction. (Ord. 18-412 § 1 (part))


17.106.030 General requirements.

A.    Wireless communication facilities shall be maintained in compliance with applicable building and technical codes, including the EIA/TIA 222-F Standards, as published by the Electronic Industries Association and amended from time to time. Structural integrity shall be ensured through the approval of the applicable building permit.

B.    All wireless communication facilities must comply with the regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, and any other agency of the state or federal government with authority to regulate wireless communication facilities.

C.    All wireless communication facilities shall have appropriate security, as determined by the Community Development Director, including solid fencing.

D.    No artificial lighting of wireless communication facilities is permitted unless such artificial lighting is:

1.    Required by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, or another state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction; or

2.    Necessary for security.

3.    Such lighting shall comply with the lighting regulations found in Section 17.104.100, Outdoor light control.

E.    No advertising is permitted on wireless communication facilities.

F.    Wireless communication facilities shall be sited and constructed to preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and vegetation.

1.    All wireless communication facilities shall be painted a neutral nonreflective color, or be painted and/or textured to match adjoining structures or vegetation so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness, unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other competent state or federal regulatory agency. Special attention shall be paid to camouflaging, to the maximum extent feasible, all portions of a wireless communication facility.

2.    To the maximum extent feasible, wireless communication facilities shall be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging.

3.    An equipment shelter or cabinet that supports wireless communication facilities shall be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of surrounding structures. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet shall be regularly maintained.

4.    Camouflaged sites may be required by the Community Development Director and will be subject to the following minimum standards:

a.    Simulated pine branches must be located from a point that is twenty-five (25%) percent the height of the tower measured from finished grade to the top of the tower.

b.    A density of 2.3 simulated branches per one (1) lineal foot of the tower is required. Branches shall be installed on the tower in a random organic pattern.

c.    The minimum length for the lower level simulated branches is ten (10) feet long. Simulated branches must taper toward the top of the tower to give the appearance of a natural conically shaped evergreen tree.

d.    The tower shall be painted to emulate a natural tree trunk, while the bottom twenty-five (25%) percent of the height of the trunk shall be covered with a simulated tree bark product.

e.    Antennas shall be fitted with a cover or otherwise camouflaged, and shall not extend beyond the tree branches located immediately adjacent to the antennas.

Figure 1: Standards for Camouflaged Sites
[IMAGE]


f.    Landscaping shall be used to mitigate the visual impact of wireless communication facilities and ancillary structures. Evergreen plant material of a minimum height of five (5) feet shall be planted adjacent to the exterior of any wall or fence a minimum of every ten (10) feet on center. The Community Development Director or the Planning and Zoning Commission may waive or reduce these landscaping requirements if it is determined that the landscaping is unnecessary or it is impractical to provide necessary screening.

g.    The site of a wireless communication facility shall have sufficient room for maintenance vehicles and other equipment used for maintenance to maneuver on the property. Vehicles and other equipment not used in direct support of a wireless communication facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of a wireless communication facility. Unmanned sites shall provide a gravel area for parking of maintenance vehicles. (Ord. 18-412 § 1 (part))


17.106.040 Site size and setbacks.

A.    The site of a wireless communication facility shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide adequate landscape screening as required in this code.

1.    For rooftop antennas, a 1:1.2 setback ratio shall be maintained as a fall zone (for example, a ten (10) foot tall antenna shall require a twelve (12) foot setback from the edge of the building’s roof). (Ord. 18-412 § 1 (part))


17.106.050 Height.

A.    Height of a tower shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground surface below the center of the base of said tower to the top of the tower itself or, if higher, to the tip of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto. In the case of building mounted towers, the height of the tower includes the height of the portion of the building on which it is mounted.

1.    A wireless communication facility located on a preferred site, as defined in subsection (B)(1) of this section, shall not exceed a height of one hundred (100) feet.

2.    A wireless communication facility located on a neutral site, as defined in subsection (B)(2) of this section, shall not exceed a height that is the greater of:

a.    Seventy-five (75) feet; or

b.    Five (5) feet above the average maximum height of the foliage within two hundred (200) feet of the wireless communication facility, but in no case greater than ninety-five (95) feet.

3.    A wireless communication facility located on a disfavored site, as defined in subsection (B)(3) of this section, shall not exceed a height that is the greater of:

a.    Sixty (60) feet; or

b.    Five (5) feet above the average maximum height of the foliage within two hundred (200) feet of the wireless communication facility, but in no case greater than eighty (80) feet.

B.    Preferred, Neutral and Disfavored Sites.

1.    Preferred Sites.

a.    Community Structures. Any police or fire station, library, community center, civic center, courthouse, utility structure, water tower, light pole, church steeple or other similar structure is a preferred site.

b.    Collocation. Any existing lawful wireless communication facility shall be a preferred site. Any existing building where the antenna can be mounted directly to the side of the building or parapet is a preferred site.

c.    Industrial Zones and Public Land. Any site zoned C-2 is a preferred site.

d.    Power Line Corridors. An existing tower structure that supports high voltage power lines in a power line corridor is a preferred site.

2.    Neutral Sites. Any site zoned C-1, PUD or RLOW is a neutral site; provided, that such site is not a site described in subsection (B)(3) of this section.

3.    Disfavored Sites.

a.    Residential Neighborhoods. Any site in a zone not specified in subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a disfavored site, unless such site has a General Plan designation or current governmental use of industrial or commercial, which may reclassify the site as preferred or neutral, respectively. (Ord. 18-412 § 1 (part))


17.106.060 Small wireless facility.

A.    A "small wireless facility" (SWF) as defined by A.R.S. § 9-592 is established by the installation of an antenna on a support structure other than a tower such as a building, sign, light pole, utility pole, water tower, church steeple, or other freestanding structure.

B.    Where the small wireless communication facility is installed on the rooftop of a building and either (1) the antenna can be seen from street view or (2) the building is adjacent to property that contains existing residences, is zoned for residential use, or is designated residential in an adopted area plan, then the following restrictions shall apply:

1.    Only one (1) type of antenna (i.e., panel, whip or dish) shall be installed on any single side of a building.

2.    The height of an antenna above the rooftop shall be restricted as follows:

a.    Six (6) feet measured to the top of a panel antenna above the roof proper of the existing building at the point of attachment.

b.    Fifteen (15) feet measured to the tip of a whip antenna above the roof proper of the existing building at the point of attachment.

c.    Six (6) feet measured to the top of a parabolic dish above the roof proper of the existing building at the point of attachment.

3.    The total number of rooftop antennas shall be as follows:

a.    No more than four (4) panel antennas.

b.    No more than three (3) whip antennas.

c.    No more than one (1) parabolic antenna.

C.    Where the small wireless communication facility is installed on a structure other than the rooftop of a building (such as another portion of a building, or on a sign, light pole, utility pole, water tower, or other freestanding structure) and is within the Town’s right-of-way and (1) can be seen from street view or (2) the structure is adjacent to property that contains existing residences, is zoned for residential use, or is designated residential in an adopted area plan, then the antenna shall be architecturally compatible, visually unobtrusive, and designed to be an integral part of the support structure.

D.    Replacement of an Existing Pole within the Town’s Right-of-Way with a Tower Support for a Small Wireless Communication Facility. For any commercial or residential zoning district, where a wireless communication facility is established by the replacement of a pole (such as any light pole, utility pole, ballfield light pole) that has been erected and in continuous use for its originally intended purpose for at least two (2) years with a monopole that, in addition to providing the support structure for an antenna, also serves the function otherwise provided by the replaced pole, then the facility is permitted by right; provided, that the height of the facility, including tower, antenna and attachments, is not more than twenty-five (25) feet greater than the height of the original pole structure that was replaced, and does not exceed seventy (70) feet in total height, as measured from grade of the site.

1.    Where the tower supports the collocation of two (2) or more service providers, the maximum height of the facility shall not exceed eighty-five (85) feet in total height.

2.    Notwithstanding any other requirement in this section, where the replacement is of a ballfield light pole:

a.    The tower shall be of substantially the same diameter as the pole being replaced;

b.    The total height of the facility shall not exceed seventy (70) feet or the same height as the pole being replaced, whichever is greater; and

c.    No more than two (2) ballfield light poles serving a single ballfield may be used as wireless communication facilities.

E.    Small wireless communication facilities located in the Town’s right-of-way shall be subject to an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per small wireless communication facility. (Ord. 18-412 § 1 (part))


17.106.070 Applications and procedure.

A.    An application for a conditional use permit for a wireless communication facility shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the Town. The application shall include the information and materials specified in the checklist for applications for a wireless communication facility; additional submittal requirements are also listed below.

1.    Engineering Report. Each application shall include a report from a structural engineer licensed in the State of Arizona documenting the following:

a.    Wireless communication facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design;

b.    Total anticipated capacity of the wireless communication facility, including, in the case of a tower, the number and types of antennas that can be accommodated;

c.    Evidence of structural integrity; and

d.    Structural failure characteristics of the wireless communication facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are adequate to contain debris.

2.    Each application shall include a five (5) year facilities plan and site inventory addressing the following:

a.    A description of the type of technology (cellular, PCS, radio, television, etc.) that will be provided using the wireless communication facility over the next five (5) years, including the radio frequencies to be used for each technology and the types of consumer services (voice, video, data transmission) to be offered;

b.    A list of all of the applicant’s existing wireless communication facility sites within the Town, and a map showing location of these sites and service boundaries of other facilities operated by the applicant/provider in the area.

B.    Whenever an applicant proposes to construct a wireless communication facility on a site that is not a preferred site, as defined in Section 17.106.050(B)(1), the applicant shall provide the following additional information:

1.    A map showing the area in which the proposed wireless communication facility could be sited to provide the needed coverage, and all preferred sites in that area; and

2.    A justification as to why the applicant is not proposing a preferred site, including the best efforts made to secure each of the preferred sites, why such efforts were unsuccessful, and why each of the preferred sites is not technically or legally feasible.

3.    The applicant must explain why existing towers and other supporting structures cannot accommodate the proposed wireless communication facility. The applicant should describe in detail its best efforts made to obtain the use of such facilities, including, where applicable, the names and phone numbers of property owners contacted, summaries of meetings held with property owners, and written documentation from property owners denying use of their property;

4.    The applicant must state whether additional antennas can be collocated on the new tower and, if not, explain why the tower is not being constructed to accommodate future collocation; and

5.    The applicant must prepare a site review plan.

C.    The Community Development Director is authorized to employ on behalf of the Town an independent technical expert to review any technical material submitted under this section. The applicant shall pay all costs of said review, including any administrative costs incurred by the Town. Any proprietary information disclosed to the Town or the expert hired shall remain confidential and shall not be disclosed to any third party.

D.    Applications for a conditional use permit for a wireless communication facility shall be subject to the general procedural requirements found in Chapter 17.80, Conditional Use Permits. Any decision to deny an application for a conditional use permit for a wireless communication facility, including on appeal to the Council, shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence in the written record.

1.    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not issue a conditional use permit for a wireless communication facility, until:

a.    The applicant has submitted an application in the form set forth in subsection A of this section;

b.    The Planning and Zoning Commission has determined that the requirements set forth in subsection C of this section have been met.

c.    In addition, the following findings shall be required, where applicable:

2.    Applications for a conditional use permit for a wireless communication facility on a site other than a preferred site, as defined in Section 17.106.050(B)(1), shall not be granted unless the applicant has shown that it made its best efforts to locate the wireless communication facility on a preferred site and that it is not technically or legally feasible or aesthetically desirable to locate the wireless communication facility on a preferred site.

3.    Applications for a conditional use permit for a tower shall not be granted unless the applicant has shown that:

a.    Existing towers cannot accommodate the proposed wireless communication facility;

b.    The new tower will have room to collocate additional facilities or it is not technically or legally feasible or aesthetically desirable to construct a tower with such collocation capacity; and

c.    Construction of the tower will not disrupt existing utilities.

4.    Applications for a conditional use permit for a wireless communication facility on a disfavored site shall not be granted unless the applicant has shown that:

a.    It has made its best efforts to locate the wireless communication facility on a site that is not a disfavored site;

b.    It is not technically or legally feasible or it is aesthetically undesirable to locate the wireless communication facility on a site that is not a disfavored site; and

c.    Denial of the conditional use permit would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(i).

5.    The Planning and Zoning Commission may require the applicant to submit additional information or provide further justification if the Commission believes it is necessary or appropriate.

6.    The Community Development Director may waive the requirements for a conditional use permit for wireless communication facilities that meet all the criteria of this code, if the new facility or equipment is collocated on or adjoining an existing wireless communication facility. (Ord. 18-412 § 1 (part))


17.106.080 Removal of wireless communication facilities.

A.    All wireless communication facilities shall be maintained in compliance with the standards contained in applicable building and technical codes, including the EIA/TIA 222-F Standards, as published by the Electronic Industries Association and amended from time to time, so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities.

B.    If upon inspection by the Community Development Director any such wireless communication facility is determined not to comply with the code standards referenced in this code or that constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the wireless communication facility and the owner of the site of the wireless communication facility, such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring the wireless communication facility into compliance. The following measures will be followed if the wireless communication facility remains noncompliant based on this subsection:

1.    If such wireless communication facility is not brought into compliance within thirty (30) days, the Town may provide notice to the owners requiring the wireless communication facility to be removed and the site restored to its natural condition.

2.    If such wireless communication facility is not removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice and the site restored to its natural condition, the Town may remove such wireless communication facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal and restoration.

3.    Delays by the Town in taking action shall not in any way waive the Town’s right to take action.

4.    The Town may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that wireless communication facilities not in compliance with code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed.

5.    The time periods for repair, removal and restoration set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section may be shortened if the Community Development Director determines that a wireless communication facility poses an immediate danger to persons or property.

C.    Abandoned Wireless Communication Facilities.

1.    Any wireless communication facility that is not operated for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The following persons have a duty to remove an abandoned wireless communication facility and restore the site to its natural condition:

a.    The owner of the abandoned wireless communication facility.

b.    The former operator of the abandoned wireless communication facility.

c.    The owner of the site upon which the abandoned wireless communication facility is located.

d.    Any lessee or sub-lessee of the site.

e.    Any wireless communication service provider that, by ceasing to utilize the wireless communication facility, caused the wireless communication facility to be abandoned.

f.    Any person to whom there has been transferred or assigned any license issued by the Federal Communications Commission under which the communications facility was operated.

g.    Any successor of any of the foregoing persons by asset sale or merger.

h.    Any parent, subsidiary, or affiliate of any of the foregoing persons.

i.    Any managing partner of any of the foregoing that is a limited partnership.

j.    Any general partner of any of the foregoing that is a general partnership.

2.    If such wireless communication facility is not removed and the site is not restored to its natural condition within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the Town notifying the owner of such abandonment, the Town may remove such wireless communication facility and restore such site to its natural condition and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal.

3.    A new conditional use permit must be granted before an abandoned wireless communication facility is brought back into use, and the applicant must meet all of the conditions of this section as if the abandoned wireless communication facility were a new wireless communication facility.

D.    Coordination with Federal Law.

1.    A conditional use permit may be granted despite noncompliance with the provisions of this section whenever denial of conditional use permit would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(i).

2.    In evaluating an application for a conditional use permit, no consideration shall be given to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions are in compliance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, as provided in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(iv).

3.    If any portion of this section is found invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision of this section, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section.

E.    The following shall be exempt from this section:

1.    Any tower and antenna under sixty (60) feet in total height above the ground that is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; and

2.    Any receive-only consumer device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multi-channel multi-point distribution service, or direct broadcast satellite service. (Ord. 18-412 § 1 (part))


Chapter 17.108 SIGN REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.108.010    Purpose.

17.108.020    Definitions.

17.108.030    Application for a sign permit.

17.108.040    Flags.

17.108.050    Signs not requiring a permit.

17.108.060    General standards for all signs.

17.108.070    Dangerous and deteriorated signs.

17.108.080    Legal nonconforming signs.

17.108.090    Off-site Town directory signs.

17.108.100    Signs in residential zoning districts.

17.108.110    Signs in commercial zoning districts.

17.108.120    Temporary sign regulations.

17.108.130    Prohibited signs.

17.108.140    Penalties.

17.108.150    Fees.


17.108.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating existing and proposed signs in the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside. The following standards are intended to promote a desirable aesthetic character for the Town, and to regulate the proliferation of signs in order to protect the economic and scenic value of the Town. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.020 Definitions.

A.    The following definitions apply to this chapter:

1.    "Banner" means a fabric or fabric-like material on which an advertising message is printed or otherwise affixed.

2.    "Community event signs" means temporary signs on any property for events of a general Town-wide civic or public benefit, community events, or Town-sponsored events.

3.    "Copy" means any words, letters, numbers, figures, design, or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign.

4.    "Field" means the background that sign copy is placed upon.

5.    "Flag" means a piece of cloth, usually rectangular, of distinctive color and design, used as a symbol, standard, signal, or emblem. For the purposes of this chapter, flags not associated with an official government jurisdiction shall be considered a banner.

6.    "Grand opening or special event" means a temporary on-site activity that may include the use of banners, portable signs, pennants, balloons or "live remote broadcasts" to advertise the opening, reopening, a promotion or anniversary sale of a commercial establishment. The maximum time period for a grand opening or special event is fourteen (14) days. Any business shall be limited to no more than four (4) events per year. Any business issued a special event permit will be allowed two (2) temporary signs for use during such special event period.

7.    "Height" means the distance from the base to the top of a sign, measured from the grade of the property on which the sign is located. If such location is below the grade of the adjacent sidewalk or edge of roadway, the height limitation shall be measured from the existing grade of the adjacent sidewalk or edge of roadway.

8.    "Portable sign" means any small self-supported sign that is placed upon the ground and can be easily transported or moved. This definition shall include signs commonly known as "A-frames," "sandwich boards," and signs held or worn by an employee otherwise known as a "sign walker."

9.    "Sign" means any identification, description, illustration, or device, which is affixed directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land, which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, or business and which is visible from the right-of-way of a public street or highway. A flag with symbols, insignias, or corporate logos is considered a sign and the entire flag surface will be used to determine the sign area.

10.    "Sign area measurement" means the surface area of the sign shall be determined by measuring the perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the display surface(s) of the sign, including all graphic elements and borders, but excluding the sign’s structure or bracing unless those elements are part of the message or face of the sign.

a.    Where there are two (2) sign faces back to back and placed at less than or equal to ninety (90) degree angles to one another, the total area of the largest single face shall determine the area of the sign.

b.    Where two (2) faces are placed at greater than ninety (90) degree angles to one another, the sign area shall mean the total area of both faces.

11.    "Right-of-way" means the public right-of-way, including sidewalks. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.030 Application for a sign permit.

A.    It shall be unlawful to erect, place, construct, reconstruct, or locate a sign without first obtaining a sign permit, except where a sign is exempt from permit requirements. A new business name on an existing sign shall also require a sign permit.

B.    A completed application and nonrefundable filing fee shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The review and approval process will be completed within twenty-four (24) hours for an existing sign when only sign faces or copy is being changed.

C.    When a new commercial development includes signs, the review and approval of those signs may be scheduled to coincide with site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission.

D.    In addition to a sign permit, a separate electrical inspection permit shall be obtained for all illuminated signs. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.040 Flags.

A.    Regulations Concerning Display of Flags.

1.    Official government flags from any city, county, state, national or international jurisdiction are considered flags under this chapter.

2.    A business may display unlimited official government jurisdiction flags without a permit.

3.    Flags bearing corporate logos or other graphics having no affiliation with an official government jurisdiction shall be considered banner signs and will require a permit.

4.    United States flags shall be displayed according to federal U.S. flag regulations. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.050 Signs not requiring a permit.

A.    No sign permit shall be required for the following types of signs:

1.    Governmental Signs. Signs required by law or signs of a duly constituted governmental body.

2.    Public Utility Signs. Signs placed by a public utility for the safety, welfare, or convenience of the public, such as signs identifying high voltage, public telephone, or underground cables.

3.    Vehicle Signs. Signs painted or otherwise applied on operable, privately owned vehicles. Vehicle signs do not include signs of any kind that extend beyond the standard manufactured contours of the vehicle and which have no function other than advertisement.

4.    Holiday decorations not referring to or specifically advertising a business.

5.    Emergency signs.

6.    On-Site Directional Signs. Parking lot and other directional signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area per sign. Such signs shall be limited to the guidance of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic within the premises on which they are located and shall not display any other advertising.

7.    Window Signs. Decals, paint, illuminated signs or other applications on the interior window glass of a commercial business.

8.    Political Signs. Political signs of not more than sixteen (16) square feet on residential lots and thirty-two (32) square feet on nonresidential properties are permitted during an election campaign; provided, that campaign signs are not posted more than sixty (60) days preceding the election and are removed within fifteen (15) days following the election. Political signs may be freestanding or wall-mounted to a building, or fence-mounted. Roof-mounted signs are not permitted. Political signs may not be affixed to utility poles or traffic signs and shall not in any way present a traffic hazard or vision obstruction.

9.    Real Estate Signs. Temporary signs indicating that the property on which the sign is located is for sale, rent or lease. Only one (1) sign is permitted to face on each street adjacent to the property. Such signs shall be a maximum aggregate area of sixteen (16) square feet on residential lots and a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet on nonresidential property for each street frontage. No more than three (3) off-site open house signs up to six (6) square feet each are permitted per property being offered for viewing. These signs may be placed on the property, or on other private properties with the permission of owners. They may not be placed in any public right-of-way.

10.    Construction Signs. Two (2) signs with a total aggregate area of thirty-two (32) square feet not exceeding eight (8) feet in height, identifying parties involved in construction on the premises and future activities for which the construction is intended. Signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days following completion, termination, or greater than a thirty (30) day suspension of construction.

11.    Yard Sale Signs. No more than three (3) off-site temporary signs up to six (6) square feet each per yard sale. These signs may be placed on the property, or on other private properties with the permission of the owners. They may not be placed in any public right-of-way. Yard sale signs must be removed within one (1) day after the sale. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.060 General standards for all signs.

A.    All monument signs shall conform to the design review standards defined by the Town and colors shall be consistent with those found on the Design Guidelines Poster.

B.    All signs, including real estate, construction, banners, and portable signs, shall be manufactured to a professional quality. All signs must be kept in good repair and aesthetically maintained. All sign structures must comply with the provisions of the International Building Code, the National Electrical Code (see Article 600 for illuminated signs) and other applicable sections of the Town Code.

C.    Illuminated signs must be in conformance with the following restrictions:

1.    Signs illuminated from an exterior light source shall be allowed; provided, that no light source in excess of twenty-five (25) watts or three hundred (300) lumens shall be directly visible to any motor vehicle located in a public right-of-way or street or from any residential area within a distance of three hundred (300) feet measured from the light source.

2.    Signs illuminated from an interior light source shall be allowed; provided, that the wattage or lumens do not exceed the following requirements:

a.    Five (5) foot high output lamp at seventy-five (75) watts or nine hundred (900) lumens.

b.    Six (6) foot high output lamp at eighty-five (85) watts or one thousand twenty (1,020) lumens.

c.    Eight (8) foot high output lamp at ninety-five (95) watts or one thousand one hundred forty (1,140) lumens.

3.    Signs may be approved with time/temperature or electronic message center capability which can be animate or inanimate.

4.    None of the foregoing requirements shall be construed to allow sign illumination that constitutes a traffic hazard.

D.    Community event signs as defined in Section 17.108.020 shall meet the following requirements:

1.    Prior to placing the signs, a temporary sign application shall be submitted to and approved by the Community Development Department;

2.    The total sign area for all signs used shall not exceed seventy-two (72) square feet unless a larger amount of signage is allowed by the Community Development Director;

3.    The sign(s) do not block or impede roadways, sidewalks or any other right-of-way designated for travel by the public or create a traffic hazard; and

4.    The signs are removed within three (3) days after the event. (Ord. 17-406 § 3; Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.070 Dangerous and deteriorated signs.

If any outdoor sign becomes a danger to the public, or becomes deteriorated or is abandoned, the property owner or the owner of the sign shall be notified to remove or repair the sign. If he or she does not comply within thirty (30) days, the Director shall have the sign removed and the cost assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is located. Any sign that presents an imminent danger to the public or is a current hazard shall be removed immediately by the property owner. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.080 Legal nonconforming signs.

A.    A "legal nonconforming sign" is defined as the lawful use of any sign existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any amendments thereto, become effective, which does not conform to this chapter.

B.    Any legally nonconforming sign may remain subject to the terms and conditions of Chapter 17.112.

C.    Copy on legal nonconforming signs may be changed or altered with the exception of the following:

1.    Use of any legal nonconforming sign shall cease in case of a change in use of the principal business to which the sign refers.

2.    Use of any legal nonconforming sign shall immediately cease in case of discontinued use for a period of six (6) consecutive months or in case of destruction as described in Section 17.112.020. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.090 Off-site Town directory signs.

A.    Approval, Location and Removal. The Town, for location within any Town right-of-way, may permit off-site Town directory signs at intersections where three (3) or more businesses exist off of White Mountain Boulevard. Such signs shall be designed and placed at specific locations as approved by the Town Council.

B.    Design Standards. The Town shall maintain control of Town directory signs, including the periodic amendment of the design standards. The Town, or a contracted entity, shall be responsible for the collection of annual subscription fees from the user(s).

C.    Fees. Annual subscription fees for users of off-site Town directory signs shall be set by resolution of the Town. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.100 Signs in residential zoning districts.

A.    Nameplates. One (1) nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area indicating the names of the occupants shall be allowed for each dwelling unit.

B.    Street Numbers. Each residence shall display street numbers assigned by the Town that are visible from the street as set forth in Section 15.16.060.

C.    Home-based occupations, bed and breakfast establishments and any other use permitted as a conditional use may have one (1) sign not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area. The sign may not exceed four (4) feet in height. External illumination is permitted provided the lighting source is shielded and it does not exceed sixty (60) watts.

D.    Single-Family Residential Subdivisions and Multi-Family Developments. Residential single-family and multi-family developments of less than fifty (50) acres are permitted one (1) freestanding sign or landscape wall sign per development at each major vehicular entrance, twenty-four (24) square feet in area, and four (4) feet in height. Multi-family buildings shall be permitted one (1) attached sign at a maximum area of four (4) square feet.

E.    Planned Unit Developments and Residential Subdivisions Equal or Greater Than Fifty (50) Acres. Permanent signs are permitted as follows: one (1) freestanding or landscape wall sign is permitted for each major vehicular entrance to the development located on an arterial street. The sign may consist of foundation and surrounding structure approved through design review. Such sign shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in sign area, and the entire structure shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.110 Signs in commercial zoning districts.

A.    Single Commercial Business. The following standards shall apply to a single commercial business in a freestanding building:

1.    Street Numbers. Each business shall display street numbers assigned by the Town that are visible from the street as set forth in Section 15.16.060.

2.    Number. A single commercial business shall be allowed a total of two (2) signs, one (1) of which may be freestanding. Additional signs may be permitted as a menu board, no larger than forty (40) square feet in area for businesses where drive-up service is available.

3.    Size and Location. A single commercial business will be allowed one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building frontage. The total maximum sign area for any single-tenant building shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet. Up to fifty (50) square feet of the total sign area may be used for a freestanding sign. Where a building has multiple street frontages, the longer street frontage will be used to compute the total sign area for that building. See Figure 1 to determine sign area.

4.    Freestanding Sign Height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height above the existing grade at the location where the sign is placed; provided, that if such location is below the level of the adjacent sidewalk or edge of roadway, the ten (10) foot height shall be measured from the existing grade or adjacent edge of sidewalk or roadway.

5.    Sign Setbacks. The minimum setback for any sign shall be two (2) feet from the nearest public right-of-way as measured to the nearest edge of the sign structure.


[IMAGE]


Figure 1

B.    Commercial Plazas. The following standards shall apply to commercial plazas with two (2) to six (6) individual tenants located within one (1) or more commercial buildings on a lot:

1.    Number. Each tenant within a commercial plaza shall be allowed two (2) signs, one (1) of which may be space on a freestanding sign.

2.    Size. A freestanding sign at a commercial plaza shall have a maximum sign area of eighty (80) square feet and a maximum height of fourteen (14) feet. Each tenant will be allowed up to one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of tenant frontage.

C.    Commercial Shopping Centers. The following standards shall apply to commercial shopping centers that include seven (7) or more individual tenants located within one (1) or more commercial buildings:

1.    Monument Sign Size and Location.

a.    Shopping centers with continuous lineal frontage of less than two hundred fifty (250) feet along a major highway shall be allowed one (1) monument sign with an area not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet.

b.    Shopping centers with lineal frontage of two hundred fifty (250) feet or greater along a major highway shall be allowed one (1) monument sign with an area of one hundred eighty (180) square feet to identify the shopping center and/or individual shops.

c.    Shopping centers with a continuous linear frontage of five hundred (500) feet or greater may, in lieu of one (1) monument sign according to subsection (C)(1)(a) of this section, erect two (2) monument signs, which when combined do not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area nor exceed sixteen (16) feet in height each. In addition, a shopping center monument sign shall identify the street address with numbers no less than ten (10) inches in height.

PERMITTED COMMERCIAL SIGNS AND CHARACTERISTICS  

	Business Category	Sign Type Permitted	Max Number of Signs	Max Sign Area Permitted	Max Height of Freestanding Sign	Max Sign Area Per Building

	Single Commercial Business	Freestanding	1	50 sq. ft.	10'	150 sq. ft.

	Attached	1 or 2*	1-1/2 sq. ft. per foot of frontage

	Commercial Plaza	Freestanding	1 space per tenant	(1) 80-sq. ft. sign per center	14'	Max 150 sq. ft. per tenant

	Tenant	Attached	1 or 2*	1-1/2 sq. ft. per foot of frontage

	Commercial Shopping Center

 

 	Freestanding	1 space per tenant	(1) 180-sq. ft. sign per center with 250' or greater of lineal frontage	18'	Max 150 sq. ft. per tenant

	Freestanding	1 space per tenant	(2) 100-sq. ft. signs per center with 500' or greater of lineal frontage**

(1) 100-sq. ft. sign per center with less than 250' of lineal frontage	16'

	Tenant	Attached	1 or 2*	1-1/2 sq. ft. per foot of frontage

*    Two (2) attached signs are permitted if sign area is not used on a freestanding sign.

**    See subsection C of this section.

(Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): table amended by city 3/21/13; Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.120 Temporary sign regulations.

A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assist businesses to identify themselves using temporary signs in such a way that avoids signage clutter, protects the scenic image of the community, and which takes into consideration the welfare and convenience of the public. Temporary signs for the purpose of this section are portable signs and banners.

B.    Application for Temporary Sign Permit.

1.    An application for a temporary sign shall be submitted as follows:

a.    A completed application and fee shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The business owner is responsible to hand deliver, fax, or mail a temporary sign application at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance. The application must be accompanied by a drawing or diagram that describes the dimensions, shape, and color of the proposed sign.

b.    A temporary sign that has been displayed without a permit is subject to removal by the Town.

C.    Requirements.

1.    Portable Signs.

a.    Portable signs must be located out of the right-of-way, and signs shall not be displayed on sidewalks.

b.    Portable signs must be placed on the ground and may not be displayed on building rooftops, motor vehicles, or trailers.

c.    If in a commercial plaza or shopping center, portable signs must maintain a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet from other portable signs that are being displayed by businesses in the same plaza.

d.    Portable signs are limited to C-1 and C-2 zoning districts or at White Mountain Boulevard intersections, when commercial zoning does not exist with permission of the property owner.

e.    All portable signs shall display a temporary sign permit number and year of issuance decal.

f.    Off-site portable signs may be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of a White Mountain Boulevard intersection and are required to have permission of the property owner.

2.    Banners.

a.    Banners must be securely mounted and be free from flapping or ripping in high winds.

b.    A single banner can be displayed for thirty (30) consecutive days with a permit.

c.    Banner signs are limited to C-1 and C-2 zoning districts.

d.    "Coming Soon" banner can be displayed for thirty (30) consecutive days with a permit.

e.    Banners may be permitted on permanent sign structures so long as they do not cover another business’s sign and fit within the confines of the structure.

PERMITTED TEMPORARY SIGNS AND SIGN CHARACTERISTICS  

	Business Category	Sign Type Permitted	Max Number of Signs	Max Sign Area	Location of Sign	Permitted Display Hours

	Single Commercial Business	Banner	 	Per lineal foot of building frontage	On the building, fence or on the same lot, out of the right-of-way* with Town approval	No limit

	1	0 to 25 ft. – 16 sq. ft.

	2	26 to 50 ft. – 32 sq. ft.

	3	51 ft. and above – 50 sq. ft. 

	Portable	1	12 sq. ft.	During operating hours only

	Commercial Plaza or Shopping Center Tenant	Banner	 	Per lineal foot of store frontage	No limit

	1	0 to 25 ft. – 16 sq. ft.

	2	26 to 50 ft. – 32 sq. ft.

	3	51 ft. and above – 50 sq. ft.

	Portable	1	12 sq. ft.	During operating hours only

*    One (1) off-site portable directional sign may be allowed for a business not located on White Mountain Boulevard with property owner permission, within one hundred (100) feet of the intersection.

D.    Temporary Sign Design Standards. These standards shall apply to both portable and banner-type signs.

1.    All portable signs are subject to design review.

2.    All temporary signs shall be preapproved for design and manufactured to a professional quality.

3.    Temporary signs may not be illuminated.

E.    Violations and Loss of Temporary Sign Privilege.

1.    If a sign is found to be in violation of these regulations, the Code Enforcement Officer will notify the owner of the sign orally or by written notice. The owner will have twenty-four (24) hours to comply after notification, or the sign may be confiscated and brought to the Town storage yard.

2.    Once a second violation has occurred, the Town reserves the right to immediately confiscate the sign, revoke the permit, and/or cite the violator for failure to comply with the code. In order to receive another temporary sign permit, the applicant may be required to post another temporary sign permit fee.

3.    A third violation of these regulations by any business within one (1) year may render that business ineligible for temporary sign permits for the remainder of the calendar year. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.130 Prohibited signs.

A.    The following signs are prohibited in all districts:

1.    Hot or cold air balloons, or inflatables, except as specially allowed as a part of a grand opening or special event provided they present no hazard to persons or property.

2.    Any sign, which flashes, blinks, or uses chaser lights.

3.    Signs with audible devices.

4.    Roof signs or other signs extending above the roof or eave line.

5.    Signs painted on or attached to rock outcroppings, trees or utility poles.

6.    Wind signs, including pennants, spinners, streamers, and other wind-activated devices, except as allowed as part of a grand opening or special event.

7.    Signs which impair highway safety.

8.    Signs identifying businesses no longer in existence. The sign structure may remain; provided, that all sign copy is removed or concealed in a manner consistent with the overall sign design. Facing on metal framed internally illuminated signs shall be either inverted or replaced with a blank durable plastic facing. Sign copy must be removed within thirty (30) days of business closure by the property owner.

9.    Signs in public rights-of-way including sidewalks.

10.    Signs on inoperable motor vehicles. (Ord. 17-406 § 4; Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.140 Penalties.

Failure to comply with the standards of this chapter shall be considered a violation of the Town Code and subject to code enforcement action under Chapter 17.132. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.108.150 Fees.

The Town Council shall establish a schedule of fees for all signs from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 16-396 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-370 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 17.110 AIRCRAFT REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.110.010    Purpose.

17.110.020    Definitions.

17.110.030    Aircraft operations prohibited – Exceptions.

17.110.040    Regulations.


17.110.010 Purpose.

The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and visitors of the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside, and to preserve the quiet, mountain environment of the Town. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-315 § 1)


17.110.020 Definitions.

A.    "Aircraft" means manned or unmanned airplanes including helicopters, amphibious airplanes, or any other craft used for navigation through the air, but excludes radio-controlled aircraft weighing less than two hundred fifty (250) pounds.

B.    "Operation(s)" means a takeoff, a landing, or helicopter hover testing. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-315 § 1)


17.110.030 Aircraft operations prohibited – Exceptions.

Aircraft operations are prohibited within the Town limits, except:

A.    In the case of a declared emergency landing as defined in the Federal Aviation Regulations; or

B.    As part of the emergency response of a medical, wildfire, or law enforcement aircraft, or aircraft owned and operated by the state or a political subdivision of the state for that emergency purpose; or

C.    In the case of special events allowing the use of aircraft for educational or charity events and fundraisers, if the use is approved in advance by special event permit expressly authorizing the use of aircraft with any special conditions imposed by the Director; or

D.    Aircraft operations for construction activities, if the use is approved in advance by special event permit expressly authorizing the use of aircraft with any special conditions imposed by the Director. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-315 § 1)


17.110.040 Regulations.

A.    Purpose. As a matter of health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and visitors to the Town, this section is intended to regulate the takeoff, landing, and other aircraft operations which currently operate within the Town of Pinetop-Lakeside as legal nonconforming uses or otherwise legally on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is effective.

B.    Regulations in C-2 Zoning Areas.

1.    The minimum parcel size for a helicopter takeoff/landing area in a C-2 zoning district shall be one (1) acre.

2.    The minimum setbacks for a takeoff/landing area in a C-2 zoning area shall be a minimum of ninety (90) feet from the center of the helicopter landing pad to any property line.

3.    The hours of operation for helicopter takeoffs, landings, or hover operations in a C-2 zoning district shall be Monday through Friday only, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.

4.    The maximum number of aircraft operations (which shall not include helicopter hover testing and engine testing) in a C-2 zoning district shall be six (6) operations per day.

5.    The number of aircraft operations (which shall not include helicopter hover testing and engine testing) in a C-2 zoning district shall not exceed fifteen (15) per week or fifty (50) per month.

6.    Approaches and departures shall be carried out over areas that will have a minimum impact or interference with persons and property on the ground, and all helicopter operations including takeoffs and landings shall be performed in compliance with applicable Federal Aviation Regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-315 § 1)


Chapter 17.112 NONCONFORMING USES

Sections:

17.112.010    Continuing existing uses.

17.112.020    Discontinuance of nonconforming uses.

17.112.030    Expansion of a nonconforming use.

17.112.040    Change of nonconforming use.


17.112.010 Continuing existing uses.

Any use of land, building or structure, lawfully established and lawfully existing at the time these regulations or amendments thereto become effective, may be continued, even though such use does not conform with these regulations or amendments thereto for the zoning district in which it is located. Uses in violation of the Navajo County Zoning Ordinance governing land use prior to incorporation of the Town are not a lawfully existing use and shall not qualify as a nonconforming use under these regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2201))


17.112.020 Discontinuance of nonconforming uses.

A.    In the event that a nonconforming use of land, building or structure is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, any future use thereof shall be in conformity with these regulations.

B.    In the event that a nonconforming use of land, building or structure is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of the public enemy to the extent that seventy-five (75%) percent of its value, according to the appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, then and without further actions by the Town Council the future use thereof shall from and after the date of such destruction be subject to all these regulations or amendments thereto for the zoning district in which such future use is located. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2202))


17.112.030 Expansion of a nonconforming use.

A nonconforming use of land, building or structure shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration, and further use of such property conform with these regulations, for the zoning district in which such property is located. Nothing in this section shall prohibit reasonable repairs to a nonconforming use of land, building or structure. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2203))


17.112.040 Change of nonconforming use.

A nonconforming use shall not change to another nonconforming use unless the proposed use conforms to the zoning district in which such proposed use is located. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2204))


Chapter 17.116 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE

Sections:

17.116.010    Establishment – Composition – Terms of members – Vacancies – Compensation of members.

17.116.020    Procedure for appointments to the Planning and Zoning Commission.

17.116.030    Powers and duties.

17.116.040    Selection of officers.

17.116.050    Regular meetings.

17.116.060    Work sessions.

17.116.070    Field trips.

17.116.080    Executive sessions.

17.116.090    Commission packet preparation.

17.116.100    Public notice – Agendas – Posting.

17.116.110    Minutes.

17.116.120    Call to order.

17.116.130    Attendance by teleconference.

17.116.140    Quorum.

17.116.150    Order of business.

17.116.160    Public hearings.

17.116.170    Rules of debate.

17.116.180    Addressing the Commission.

17.116.190    Manner of addressing the Commission – Time limit.

17.116.200    Voting.

17.116.210    Conflicts of interest.

17.116.220    Decorum at meetings.

17.116.230    Enforcement of decorum.

17.116.240    Adjournment.


17.116.010 Establishment – Composition – Terms of members – Vacancies – Compensation of members.*

A.    There is established a Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town to consist of seven (7) members, four (4) of whom shall be residents of the incorporated boundaries of the Town and up to three (3) of whom may reside within the unincorporated areas of the Town as defined by the boundaries of the Blue Ridge School District No. 32, but not residing in another incorporated municipality, each of whom shall be appointed by the Town Council. The members of the Commission shall serve three (3) years except as hereinafter provided. The members of the first Commission appointed hereunder shall serve for the following terms: two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year; two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years; three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. In the event of a death, resignation, or removal from the Commission, the vacancy shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term. Members of the Commission may, after public hearing, be removed by the Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The Council shall file a written statement of the reasons for removal.

B.    Because the participation of all Planning and Zoning Commissioners is necessary and helpful to carry out the duties of the Commission in the best interest of the citizens of the Town, consistent attendance by Commissioners is of the utmost importance. For this reason, the following attendance guidelines are applicable to the Commissioners:

1.    Inadequate attendance is three (3) consecutive meetings or a total of six (6) meetings in one (1) year, calculating a year from the date of appointment and each anniversary date thereof.

2.    If the above-described absences occur without notification to the Commission or staff, such absences will be deemed to be a resignation from the Commission and the Town Council will be notified of the vacancy.

3.    If the above-described absences occur with notification to the Commission or staff, the Commissioner in violation of the attendance policy may meet with the rest of the Commissioners to discuss the problem in a regular agendaed meeting. If it is then agreed that such absences are not likely to reoccur and that the absences have not caused undue hardship to the Commission’s duties, the Commissioner may remain on the Commission to fulfill his or her term. If the Commission determines to the contrary, the Town Council shall be notified of the vacancy.

C.    All Commission members shall serve without pay; however, members of the Commission may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties upon authorization and approval of such expenditures by the Town Manager. A budget for the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be approved by the Town Council. Any out-of-state travel shall be approved by the Town Manager. (Ord. 16-401 § 4; Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-389 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))

*    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 15-393 amended this section without taking into account the amendments of Ord. 15-389. Those amendments have been retained.


17.116.020 Procedure for appointments to the Planning and Zoning Commission.

Any individual interested in serving on the Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit a letter of interest addressed to the Town Council. Such letter shall include a statement of qualifications and any personal information the individual wishes to provide. The Town Council shall select and appoint individuals to the Planning and Zoning Commission by resolution. In filling vacancies to unexpired terms or expired terms, the established Planning and Zoning Commission shall act as the screening committee for the Town Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review submittals for membership to the Commission and may recommend a ranking of applicants to the Town Council for their consideration and appointment by resolution. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.030 Powers and duties.

A.    Purpose. The Planning and Zoning Commission is established to advise the Town Council on the adoption of long-range plans, policies, specific plans, and regulations that affect development and the use of land and buildings for any purpose. 

B.    Duties. It shall be the duty of the Commission to:

1.    Hold public hearings when necessary.

2.    Make recommendations to the Town Council on all matters concerning or related to zoning districts, the boundaries thereof, the appropriate regulations to be enforced therein and amendments of this title, the official Town Zoning Map for Pinetop-Lakeside, and the General Plan.

3.    Other duties prescribed by Arizona law; to carry out the specific duties as prescribed by the ordinance; and to undertake all activities usually associated therewith (see Arizona Revised Statutes Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6, Municipal Planning, and Article 6.1, Municipal Zoning, as they may be amended).

4.    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also sit as the Design Review Board as established and set forth in Chapter 17.88 until such time as the Town Council appoints a separate Design Review Board. 

C.    Powers. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to:

1.    Grant conditional use permits in accordance with Chapter 17.80 (see Section 17.80.070 regarding appeals). 

2.    Grant site plan approvals in accordance with Chapter 17.84. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-366 § 1: Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.040 Selection of officers.

The Commission will elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman at the first meeting held after July 31st each year from among its own members who shall serve for one (1) year and until their successors are elected and qualified. The presiding officer of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be the Chair or Chairperson, who shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The Chair shall have the power to administer oaths, to compel attendance of witnesses and to take evidence. The Chair shall have the right to vote on all matters before the Commission, and shall also have the right to make or second motions in the absence of a motion, or a second, made by a member. The Vice Chairman shall perform the duties of the Chairman in the event of absence or disability of the Chairman. In the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair, the senior member, based upon years of membership, shall act as Chair. The Chair or Vice Chair may be removed from office at any time by a three-fourths (3/4) majority vote of the full Commission members. Vacancies in the Chair or Vice Chair created by any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by a new election. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.050 Regular meetings.*

A.    All regular meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public in accordance with Arizona law.

B.    Regular meetings of the Commission should be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each month if there is business to be conducted, with the regular meeting commencing at 6:00 p.m. at the Town Council Chambers, located at 1360 N. Niels Hansen Lane, Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona. The Planning and Zoning Commission may hold regular and special meetings at other times and places with proper legal notice.

C.    Any meeting of the Commission may be adjourned to a later date and time in accordance with Arizona law.

D.    Agendas for all meetings of the Commission shall be prepared and posted in accordance with Arizona law. Notice that a regular meeting will not be held will be given to the Commission as soon as possible and posted by the Town Clerk as a canceled meeting no later than notice of a regular meeting would have been posted. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 15-389 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-366 § 2; Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))

*    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 15-393 amended this section without taking into account the amendments of Ord. 15-389. Those amendments have been retained.


17.116.060 Work sessions.

A.    The Commission may meet informally in work sessions which shall be open to the general public, at the call of the Chair or of any three (3) members of the Commission or by staff giving notice to all members by phone or personal delivery, or by verbal comment during a regular meeting, to review forthcoming programs of the Town, receive progress reports on current programs or projects, review items on the same or upcoming agendas, hear the Director staff reports, or receive other similar information from the Director; provided, that no Commission action may be taken and that all discussions and conclusions thereon shall be informal.

B.    Work sessions may only be held after proper legal notice has been given and posted.

C.    Work sessions shall not continue past one (1) hour of their starting time unless the majority of those Commission members present choose to continue. No call to the public shall be scheduled during work sessions unless ordered by majority vote of the Commission and placed on the agenda.

D.    Agendas for all work sessions of the Commission shall be prepared and posted in accordance with Arizona law. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.070 Field trips.

The Commission may take field trips to view property or for other purposes relevant to a public hearing or other matter under consideration. All Commission field trips shall be taken as part of a regular or special meeting, and all interested persons shall be afforded the opportunity to be present to view the property and hear any reports or comments. A record of the field trips shall be entered into the minutes, so that the record shall indicate that the field trip was taken into consideration as evidence. Nothing herein shall prevent less than a quorum of the Commission, or Commission members individually at their own convenience and expense, from taking field trips to view property which is the subject of an application or other matter being considered. Agendas for all field trips of the Commission shall be prepared and posted in accordance with Arizona law. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.080 Executive sessions.

Executive sessions or closed meetings may be held in accordance with the provisions of Arizona’s Open Meeting Law. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.090 Commission packet preparation.

In order to provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with information packets for adequate review prior to Commission meetings, it is required that any item being requested to be placed on the Commission agenda, including the supporting information, be submitted to the Community Development Department by 5:00 p.m. eight (8) calendar days prior to the Commission meeting. The Community Development Department will prepare the agenda and packets with the information provided. The packets will be available for pick-up by the Commission members by 12:00 p.m.; if not picked up, the Town will attempt to deliver the packets to the Commission members by 5:00 p.m. on the last work day of the week preceding the Commission meeting. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.100 Public notice – Agendas – Posting.

A.    Public notice of all meetings, work sessions, field trips, and other gatherings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be accomplished by posting an agenda of the matters to be discussed or decided at the meeting, in accordance with Arizona’s Open Meeting Law.

B.    Community Development staff will develop and review all agendas with the Chairman or in his/her absence the Vice Chairman.

C.    The agenda will list the time and place for each meeting, and shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of each Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. The agenda will be posted on the bulletin board in the public hallway at the Town Offices, 1360 N. Niels Hansen Lane, Pinetop-Lakeside, Arizona, in the kiosk outside the Town Offices, and at both the Pinetop Post Office and the Lakeside Post Office. The agendas shall be posted on the Town’s Internet website and shall give additional public notice, as is reasonable and practicable, as to all meetings (see Section 17.116.150, Order of business). (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.110 Minutes.

Minutes for all meetings of the Commission shall be kept in accordance with Arizona law. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.120 Call to order.

A.    The Chair or Vice Chair, in the Chair’s absence, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall call the Commission to order.

B.    In the absence of the Chair or Vice Chair, the senior member, based upon years of membership, shall act as Chair, and shall call the Commission to order.

C.    Upon the arrival of the Chair or Vice Chair, the temporary Chair shall relinquish the position of presiding officer upon the conclusion of the agenda item or business immediately before the Commission. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.130 Attendance by teleconference.

The Commission may permit members to attend by teleconference in accordance with A.R.S. § 38-431 which permits attendance by technological devices, when such members are outside Navajo County, Arizona, on the date and time of the meeting. However, attendance by teleconference shall only be permitted when each and every Commission member is able to hear all of the other members of the Commission, and all of the other information presented by Town staff or the public. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.140 Quorum.

A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum and be necessary for the transaction of business. If a quorum is not present, those in attendance shall be named and shall adjourn to a later time. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.150 Order of business.

Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the Commission shall take their regular stations in the Commission Chambers, and the business of the Commission shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order:

A.    Ascertainment of quorum.

B.    Pledge of allegiance.

C.    Call to the public.

D.    Business before the Commission.

E.    Staff and Commission report.

F.    Future agenda items.

G.    Adjournment. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 13-366 § 3: Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.160 Public hearings.

A.    Generally public hearings shall be conducted in the following order:

1.    The Chair will announce the agenda item as a public hearing, and ask staff to provide a short summary of the matter.

2.    The Chair will then ask the applicant to speak on its/their application if they so desire.

3.    At the conclusion of the staff report and/or presentation by the applicant, the Chair may allow comments from the public on nonpublic hearing items, and will hear comments from the public on all "public hearing" items. Name and physical address shall be stated by the speaker.

4.    After public comments are heard, the Chair may allow staff or the applicant to respond to the comments.

5.    The Chair may then close the public hearing and call for a motion and second (if applicable) and ask if the Commission wishes to discuss the issue. The Commission may discuss the matter before or after a motion has been made as allowed by the Chair.

6.    Upon conclusion of the Commission discussion, the Chair will call for action on the motion.

B.    Questions or comments from the public shall be limited to the subject under consideration. Depending upon the extent of the agenda, and the number of persons desiring to speak on an issue, the Chair may, at the beginning of the hearing, limit testimony to not more than five (5) minutes per individual. Upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission, persons may be allowed to speak longer than five (5) minutes. Commission members may ask the individual speaker questions, and the speaker may respond.

C.    Exhibits, letters, petitions, and other documentary items presented or shown to the Planning and Zoning Commission at a public hearing item become part of the record of the public hearing. Fifteen (15) collated sets of written or graphic materials should be provided by the speaker twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of the hearing to allow for distribution to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town staff, and a copy for the Secretary to include in the public record of the hearing. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.170 Rules of debate.

A.    The Chair, or other presiding member, may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Commission member by reason of acting as the presiding officer.

B.    Every member desiring to speak shall address the Chair, and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the agenda item or question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.

C.    A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to be called to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, be called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed.

D.    A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Commission may be made only at the meeting such action was taken. Such motion must be made by one (1) of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any member, and may be made at any time and have precedence over all other motions or while a member has the floor; it shall be debatable. This shall not be construed to prevent the Commission from amending or changing action on a similar item or topic at a subsequent meeting of the Commission. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.180 Addressing the Commission.

Any person desiring to address the Commission by oral communication shall fill out a Request to Address the Commission Form and be recognized and called upon to speak by the Chair. The purpose of all public comments is to provide information and the speaker’s views for Commission consideration. It is not appropriate for the speakers to question directly, or debate the matter under consideration, with staff, other speakers, the audience, or members of the Commission. The Commission may question the speakers, any applicant’s representatives, or Town staff. Except when answering a direct question from a Commission member, all remarks will be addressed to the Chair and Commission as a body, and not to individual members of the Commission. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.190 Manner of addressing the Commission – Time limit.

A.    Each person addressing the Commission shall step up to the microphone at the podium, shall give his/her name and place of residence in an audible tone of voice for the record, and unless further time is granted by the Chair shall limit his/her address to three (3) minutes for call to the public matters and five (5) minutes for business items on the agenda.

B.    All remarks shall be addressed to the Chair and Commission as a body and not to any member thereof.

C.    No person, other than the Commission and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Commission, without the permission of the Chair.

D.    No question shall be asked of a Commission member except through the Chair.

E.    Time limits may be waived or extended by majority of the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.200 Voting.

A.    After all evidence has been submitted to the Commission, each matter shall be heard, considered, and acted upon in public meeting.

B.    In taking action on any application or other matter, the Commission may grant approval, grant approval with conditions, modify the request so as to make more restrictions, or deny the item altogether. In these actions, the provisions of the Town General Plan and elements thereof, the Planning and Zoning Regulations, Subdivision Code, and other development standards and policies shall guide the Commission and area plans as adopted by the Town.

C.    The Commission may defer action by majority vote on any matter when it concludes that additional time for further study or input is necessary. If tabled or continued, any public hearing shall be continued to a date certain. If the Commission takes no action or requests that more information be provided or more work be done, matters requiring notice by publication or posting shall be readvertised and renoticed before Commission action at another meeting.

D.    A majority vote of those Commission members present and voting shall be required to take official action. When a motion on any matter fails to receive an affirmative majority vote, or when there is a tie vote, it shall be entered into the minutes as a vote to deny the motion. If there is no motion on an agenda item or matter before the Commission, or if the motion dies for lack of a second, it shall be entered into the minutes that the matter was denied because the Commission took no action. Commission members may make motions on agenda items until the Chair or other presiding officer calls the next item on the agenda.

E.    Each member attending shall be entitled to one (1) vote. The minutes of the proceedings shall indicate the vote of each member on every matter acted upon, and shall indicate an absence or failure to vote. No member shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the consideration of their own official conduct, or a conflict of interest in the case under consideration.

F.    A motion to adopt approval of staff recommendations or simply to approve the action under consideration shall, unless otherwise particularly specified, be deemed to include adoption of all proposed findings and execution of all actions recommended in the staff report on file in the matter.

G.    Commission members shall have the right to have the reasons for his/her "no" vote or dissent from any action of the Commission entered in the minutes during the discussion and vote of any agenda item. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.210 Conflicts of interest.

A.    Commissioners shall disqualify themselves and abstain from voting whenever they may have a conflict of interest in a matter under consideration, as described and provided for by Arizona law and this Town Code. Arizona statute requires the conflict to be stated in writing on a form provided by the Town Clerk and then filed with the Clerk.

B.    Commissioners may consult with the Town Attorney on matters concerning conflicts of interest. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.220 Decorum at meetings.

A.    The Chair will maintain decorum at all meetings of the Commission. Proper decorum must be observed by speakers in providing testimony and remarks. In the event of any delay, interruption, or interference, the Chair may have the disruptive person(s) removed from the Council Chambers.

B.    During a Commission meeting, no person shall engage in conduct by conversation, laughter, applause, stamping of feet, or other conduct which delays, interrupts, or otherwise interferes with the proceedings or the peace of the Commission. In the event of any such delay, interruption, or interference, the Chair may have the disruptive person(s) removed from the Council Chambers.

C.    Any member of the public desiring to address the Commission shall proceed to the podium after having been recognized by the Chair. Once at the podium, the speaker shall clearly state his or her name for the record, and shall remain at the podium unless excused or given permission by the Chair to leave the podium. An accommodation will be made for those individuals whose physical limitations prohibit them from accessing the podium area. Any handouts the speaker wishes to present to the Planning and Zoning Commission which have not been provided in advance of the meeting shall be given to the Community Development staff for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission at a later time unless otherwise directed by the Chair. Fifteen (15) collated sets of written or graphic materials should be provided by the speaker prior to the commencement of the hearing to allow for distribution to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town staff, and a copy for staff to include in the public record of the hearing.

D.    The Chair shall keep control of the meeting, and require that the speakers refrain from abusive or profane remarks, disruptive outbursts, protests, or other conduct which disrupts or interferes with the orderly conduct of the business of the meeting.

E.    Personal attacks on the Planning and Zoning Commission, Town staff or members of the public shall not be allowed. Oral communications during the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting may not be used to lodge charges or complaints against any employee of the Town, regardless of whether such employee is identified in the presentation by name or by other reference which tends to identify the employee. Any such charges or complaints against employees shall be submitted during normal business hours to the Town Manager for appropriate action.

F.    It is inappropriate to use comment time for any agenda item for the purpose of making political speeches or threats of political action.

G.    After a motion has been made, or after a public hearing has been closed, no member of the public shall address the Commission unless permission is granted by the Chair. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.230 Enforcement of decorum.

A.    The Chief of Police or his/her designee, or such other person designated by the Chair if no police officer be present, shall be Sergeant-at-Arms of the Commission meetings. He, or they, shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the Chair for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Commission meeting.

B.    Upon instructions of the Chair, it shall be the duty of the Sergeant-at-Arms to remove any person ordered to be removed by the Chair, and when ordered by the Chair to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him to be prosecuted under the provisions of Chapter 1.20, the complaint to be signed by the Chair. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.116.240 Adjournment.

Unless the Commission votes to adjourn a meeting, the Commission meeting will be adjourned by the Chair when the business of the Planning and Zoning Commission has been completed. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-353 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 17.120 THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, THE APPEALS PROCEDURE, VARIANCES

Sections:

17.120.010    Creation and membership.

17.120.020    Powers and duties.

17.120.030    Meetings and rules.

17.120.040    Application for variance.

17.120.050    Expiration of variance.

17.120.060    Appeals.

17.120.070    Public hearings.

17.120.080    Appeal of a decision made by a Board of Adjustment.

17.120.090    Fees.


17.120.010 Creation and membership.

The Town Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment and shall perform all functions and duties of a Board of Adjustment as provided in A.R.S. § 9-462.06, until such time as the Town Council appoints a separate Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2501))


17.120.020 Powers and duties.

A.    A Board of Adjustment shall:

1.    Hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made by the Director in the enforcement of the zoning regulations, as described in Section 17.132.020.

2.    Hear and decide requests for variances from the terms of the zoning regulations only if, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning regulations will deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other property of the same classification in the same zoning district. Any variance granted is subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is located.

3.    Reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement or decision of the Director appealed from, and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as necessary.

B.    A Board of Adjustment may not:

1.    Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of the zoning regulations provided the restriction in this subsection shall not affect the authority to grant variances.

2.    Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the property are self-imposed by the property owner. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2502))


17.120.030 Meetings and rules.

Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson at such times as are deemed necessary for the transaction of business. All such meetings shall be open to the public. The Chairperson, or in his absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such facts, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every variation and every order, requirement decision, or determination of the Board of Adjustment shall be filed in the Office of the Director. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt its own rules or procedure and elect its own officers. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2503))


17.120.040 Application for variance.

Application for any variance to these regulations shall be made to the Board of Adjustment. A completed application, nonrefundable filing fee and an advertising fee shall be submitted to the Community Development Department, and shall be accompanied by:

A.    Accurate plot plans and description of the property involved, description of the proposed use, preliminary floor plans and elevations of all proposed buildings, and an estimate of the valuation of the proposed construction.

B.    Evidence satisfactory to the Board of Adjustment of the ability and intention of the applicant to proceed with actual construction work in accordance with said plans within six (6) months after allowing any variance. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2505))


17.120.050 Expiration of variance.

Any variance granted pursuant to these regulations shall expire if construction is not substantially complete within one (1) year from the date of granting said variance. If judicial proceedings are instituted to review the Board of Adjustment’s decision, the variance shall expire one (1) year from the date of entry of the final order in such proceedings, including all appeals. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2321))


17.120.060 Appeals.

An appeal to the Board of Adjustment concerning interpretation or administration of these regulations may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or agency of the Town affected by any decision of the Director. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days or such lesser period as may be provided by the rule of the Board of Adjustment, by filing with the Director and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Director shall forthwith transmit to said Board of Adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed from unless the Director from which the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment that by reason of the fact stayed in the certificate, the stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed, except by a restraining order granted by said Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice to the Director from whom the appeal is taken. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a time for hearing the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties in interest and the public as set forth herein. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2504))


17.120.070 Public hearings.

A.    Variance. Upon receipt in proper form of an application for any variance to the requirements of these regulations the Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing thereon after giving public notice thereof, as described in A.R.S. § 9-462.06(F). 

B.    Appeals. Upon receipt in proper form of appeals concerning the Director’s interpretation of these regulations, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing thereon after giving public notice thereof, as described in A.R.S. § 9-462.06(F), as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2506))


17.120.080 Appeal of a decision made by a Board of Adjustment.

A person aggrieved by a decision of a Board of Adjustment may at any time within thirty (30) days of such decision file a civil complaint or a special action in the Navajo County Superior Court for review of such decision. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2507))


17.120.090 Fees.

A.    The Town Council shall establish a schedule of fees for variances and appeals from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 06-283; Ord. 06-262)

 


Chapter 17.124 PERMIT LIMITATIONS AND FEES

Sections:

17.124.010    Limitations.

17.124.020    Fees.


17.124.010 Limitations.

Any variance granted under the terms of these regulations shall expire by limitation if substantial construction, in accordance with the plans for which such variance was granted, has not been completed within one (1) year from the date of granting said variance, or, if judicial proceedings to review the Board of Adjustment’s decision shall be instituted, one (1) year from the date of entry of the final order in such proceedings, including all appeals. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2321))


17.124.020 Fees.

A.    Appeals. There shall be no fee charged for filing an appeal concerning the interpretation or administration of these regulations. An advertising fee, in an amount to be established by the Director, shall be charged.

B.    Application for Variance. There shall be a nonrefundable fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), plus an advertising fee in an amount to be established by the Director, charged for filing an application for any variance to these regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 90-82 § (1)(2322))


Chapter 17.128 ZONING MAP AND ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:

17.128.010    Purpose.

17.128.020    Authority to make application.

17.128.030    Application for zoning map amendment.

17.128.040    Zoning map amendment criteria.

17.128.050    Zoning regulations text amendments.

17.128.060    Public hearing required.

17.128.070    Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation.

17.128.080    Town Council action.

17.128.090    Fees.


17.128.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to allow amendments (i.e., rezoning or zone changes) to the official zoning map and to the text of these regulations. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to relieve particular hardships nor confer special privileges for property owners. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-358 § 1: Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.128.020 Authority to make application.

A.    Zoning Map Amendments. A zoning map amendment may be initiated by:

1.    The owner(s) of the property described in the application.

2.    An agent, authorized in writing, to act on behalf of the owner(s) of the described property.

3.    The Town, by the Town Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Director.

B.    Zoning Text Amendments. A zoning text amendment may be initiated only by the Town through its Town Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Director. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.128.030 Application for zoning map amendment.

A.    For requests that conform to the General Plan, an application, nonrefundable filing fee and an advertising fee shall be submitted to the Community Development Department, and will contain the following information:

1.    The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the affected property.

2.    A statement of the reasons for the request.

3.    If the applicant is a person other than the owner(s) of the affected property, written consent signed by all of the owners of the affected property authorizing the filing of the application and authorizing the zoning change requested.

4.    An accurate legal description for the affected property.

5.    That portion of the official Assessor’s map maintained by the Navajo County Tax Assessor reflecting the actual boundaries of the property affected, or a certified survey. Maps must be legible and reasonably useful for the purposes herein intended.

6.    A map showing the affected property as well as the surrounding property located within a distance of three hundred (300) feet. A portion of the official Assessor’s map maintained by the Navajo County Tax Assessor will suffice.

7.    A description of the intended uses, the proposed zoning classification and other entitlements which the Planning and Zoning Commission should be made aware of.

8.    Facilities and services impact analyses, including traffic/access, water system, sewer system, electric, power, or other public or private facilities/services analyses as requested by the Director.

B.    For requests not in conformance with the General Plan, the following information will be provided:

1.    All application materials listed in subsection A of this section.

2.    A narrative of the applicable criteria listed in Section 17.128.040.

3.    Major amendments will be evaluated on an annual basis per Section 17.128.060, Public hearing required.

C.    The Community Development Director has the authority to present any application request to the Planning and Zoning Commission for comment prior to finalizing the application for consideration by the Commission. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-358 § 2: Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.128.040 Zoning map amendment criteria.

A narrative of the zoning map amendment criteria required by Section 17.128.030(B) shall be made available and submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration based on the following:

A.    Proposed Zone Change and Proposed Uses. Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning? Are there other adequate sites in the Town for the proposed use in zoning districts already permitting such use?

B.    Compatibility with the Surrounding Land Uses and Zoning Patterns. List the surrounding land uses and zoning designations (i.e., north, south, east, and west of the property). Does the proposal create a transition between incompatible land uses?

C.    Statement of how the proposal varies from the General Plan or other adopted plans.

D.    Proposed style and siting of structure(s), and relationship to surrounding properties. Does the proposal comply with the Town’s design guidelines (i.e., building height, architectural theme, and color palette)?

E.    Access and traffic; pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation. Will the proposed change create traffic congestion, traffic safety, or other public safety issues?

F.    Dedication and development of streets adjoining the property. Will the proposed change have any effect on the improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations?

G.    Noise, vibration, lighting, visual, and other considerations. What effect will the proposed change have on living conditions in the surrounding neighborhood?

H.    Landscaping and screening provision. What type of landscaping will be installed and will there be any walls or fencing?

I.    Unbuilt lot area provisions. Does the proposal meet unbuilt lot area requirements relative to the size and scale of the project? Explain.

J.    Drainage improvements. Will the proposed change create a water drainage problem? Are there any floodplain or topographical issues that need to be addressed?

K.    Signage and outdoor lighting. Does the proposed signage and outdoor lighting comply with the Town’s requirements?

L.    Impacts on historical, cultural, wildlife or natural resources.

M.    Impacts on public and private utilities or services. List all utility providers. What effect will the proposed change have on all public facilities and services, including but not limited to schools, parks, utilities, streets, access, fire prevention, police protection, etc.? Will the proposed change create fire suppression or fire safety problems?

N.    Requests for a planned unit development containing fifty (50) or more dwelling units: an applicant should evaluate the following additional questions:

1.    Public Participation. How has the applicant engaged the public? Has the applicant considered or held a neighborhood meeting?

2.    Has the applicant completed a market study for the proposed project?

3.    Is the proposed amendment necessary or advisable in light of current or future conditions?

4.    What effect will the proposed change have on population density?

5.    Will the proposed change adversely affect property values in the neighborhood?

6.    Will the proposed change constitute a grant of special privilege to an individual owner?

7.    Is the requested change consistent with the needs of the neighborhood and the Town?

8.    Are there other relevant circumstances which exist? Please specify. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-358 § 3: Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.128.050 Zoning regulations text amendments.

Applications for amendments to the text of these zoning regulations shall be accompanied by a proposed form of the ordinance adopting the amendment, and shall be submitted to the Community Development Department, and shall contain the following information:

A.    The reasons for the requested amendment.

B.    A discussion of the relationship of the amendment to the current zoning regulations, the General Plan, the Subdivision Code, or any other applicable ordinances, codes, rules, or regulations. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.128.060 Public hearing required.

A.    No zoning map amendment or zoning text amendment will be granted without the public hearing(s) and notice(s) required by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.1.

B.    A major amendment is defined in the currently approved General Plan. A major amendment shall address the applicable criteria listed in Section 17.128.040. All major amendments to the General Plan shall be presented at a single public hearing during the calendar year. All amendments other than major amendments can be heard at any properly scheduled public hearing. A zoning map amendment request may go to a public hearing concurrently with any amendments to the General Plan, if in compliance with state statutes.

C.    In addition to the notice requirements set forth in subsection A of this section, notice of the public hearing for the requested zoning map amendment shall be posted on the Town Hall bulletin board, up to two (2) U.S. Post Offices within Town boundaries, and at such other places as may be required or provided by statute or Town ordinance. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 11-358 § 4: Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.128.070 Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation.

After public hearing and consideration of the application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit its recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application to amend the official zoning map or text of these zoning regulations to the Town Council. The recommendation shall include the Planning and Zoning Commission’s evaluation of the criteria listed in Sections 17.128.040 and 17.128.050 for proposed amendments to the zoning map or text. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.128.080 Town Council action.

Amendments to the official zoning map or to the text of these zoning regulations shall be accomplished by ordinance of the Town Council, which ordinances shall be adopted as required by Arizona Revised Statutes. Ordinances authorizing amendments to the official zoning map shall clearly state the new zoning designation for the real property along with any additional conditions or restrictions required by the Town Council as a condition of the zoning change. These conditions or restrictions may include time restrictions for construction and development, density restrictions, agreements between the owner/developer and the Town, or other lawful conditions or restrictions imposed by the Town Council. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


17.128.090 Fees.

The Town Council shall establish a schedule of fees for a zoning map amendment from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 09-329 § 2 (Exh. A)(part))


Chapter 17.132 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Sections:

17.132.010    Administration.

17.132.020    Enforcement.

17.132.030    Criminal penalties.

17.132.040    Civil penalties.


17.132.010 Administration.

A.    The Town uses an application and permit system to help the Town review development, building and construction, businesses and economic development, and other property uses within the Town.

B.    All applications required by these zoning regulations for mountainside development, zoning or rezoning, conditional use permits, site plan or plot plan review, design review, building permits, sign permits, business licenses, tree removal permits, and most other permits required by the Town shall be filed with the Community Development Department on forms developed by the Director.

C.    Inspections. Inspections which are necessary or required by these zoning regulations shall be made by the Director or his/her designee.

D.    Rules. The Director may adopt rules for administration or enforcement of these zoning regulations which rules shall be subject to approval by the Town Council.

E.    Records. The Director shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. The Director or his/her designee shall retain on file copies of all papers in connection with building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. All such records shall be open to public inspection at reasonable hours but shall not be removed from the Department. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-309 § 2 (part))


17.132.020 Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the Director, the Town Code Enforcement Officer(s), the Police Department of the Town, the Town Attorney, and all officers of said Town otherwise charged with the enforcement of the law to enforce the provisions of these regulations. The Director or his/her designee shall examine the premises for which applications have been received, and for which permits have been issued, and shall make necessary inspections to assure compliance with the provisions of these zoning regulations. The Director shall make inspections and investigations in connection with matters which are the subject of these zoning regulations and shall prepare reports when requested by the Town Council. For the purpose of enforcing compliance with these zoning regulations, the Director shall issue notices, orders, or criminal or civil citations as may be necessary. Any building structure erected, reconstructed, altered, repaired or maintained or any use of property in violation of this title shall be prevented, restrained, or penalized through appropriate action instituted by the Town in accordance with A.R.S. Title 9, especially A.R.S. § 9-462.05. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 08-309 § 2 (part))


17.132.030 Criminal penalties.

A.    Criminal citations, hearings and penalties as prescribed by Chapter 1.20 shall be used for violations for Chapters 17.04, Mountainside Development Regulations; 17.08, General Provisions; 17.12, Definitions; 17.16, Zoning Districts; 17.20, (R-Low 1 Acre) Rural Zoning District – One (1) Acre Per Dwelling Unit; 17.24, (R1-2) Single-Family Residential Zoning District – Twenty Thousand (20,000) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit; 17.28, (R1-4) Single-Family Residential Zoning District – Ten Thousand (10,000) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit; 17.32, (R1-6) Single-Family Residential Zoning District – Six Thousand Six Hundred (6,600) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit; 17.36, (R-2) Multiple-Family Residential Zoning District – Twelve (12) Dwelling Units Per Acre; 17.40, (R-3) Multiple-Family Residential Zoning District; 17.44, (MH-4) Manufactured Home Neighborhood Zoning District – Ten Thousand (10,000) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit; 17.48, (MH-6) Manufactured Home Neighborhood Zoning District – Six Thousand Six Hundred (6,600) Square Feet Per Dwelling Unit; 17.52, (MHP) Manufactured Home Park Zoning District; 17.56, (RVP) Recreational Vehicle Park Zoning District; 17.60, (C-R) Commercial Recreational Zoning District; 17.64, (C-1) Light Commercial Zoning District; 17.68, (C-2) Heavy Commercial Zoning District; 17.72, (PUD) Planned Unit Development Zoning District; 17.76, (OS) Open Space/Park Zoning District; 17.80, Conditional Use Permits; 17.84, Site Plan and Plot Plan Review and Approval; 17.92, Landscaping Regulations; 17.96, Forest Health and Fire Protection; 17.100, Property Maintenance; 17.104, Supplemental Provisions; 17.110, Aircraft Regulations; and 17.112, Nonconforming Uses.

B.    The court or Hearing Officer may order a person adjudged guilty to perform community service, and the court may also order abatement of any violation or nuisance, forfeiture of personal property in accordance with Arizona law after a forfeiture hearing, and such other remedies allowed by law and fashioned by the court to fit the violation, crime, or infraction. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-341 § 1: Ord. 08-309 § 2 (part))


17.132.040 Civil penalties.

A.    Civil citations, hearings and penalties as prescribed by Chapter 1.20 shall be used for violations for Chapters 17.88, Design Review; 17.92, Landscaping Regulations; 17.100, Property Maintenance; and 17.108, Sign Regulations.

B.    The court or Hearing Officer may order a person adjudged responsible to perform community service, pay applicable fines and/or the court may also order abatement of any violation or nuisance, forfeiture of personal property in accordance with Arizona law after a forfeiture hearing, and such other remedies allowed by law and fashioned by the court to fit the violation or infraction. (Ord. 15-393 § 1 (part): Ord. 10-341 § 2: Ord. 08-309 § 2 (part))



-----------------------------

The Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code is current through Ordinance 19-422, passed April 4, 2019.

Disclaimer: The Town Clerk's Office has the official version of the Pinetop-Lakeside Town Code. Users should contact the Town Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

Town Website: http://www.pinetoplakesideaz.gov/ Town Telephone: (928) 368-8696

Code Publishing Company