TOWN CODE
OF THE
TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK, ARIZONA
1
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL
ARTICLE 1-1 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be
designated "The Code of the Town of Queen Creek, Arizona," and may be so cited. Such code
may also be cited as the "Queen Creek Town Code."
ARTICLE 1-2 CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES
The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in the construction of this
code and the ordinances of the town unless such construction would be inconsistent with either
the manifest intent of the council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the town.
ARTICLE 1-3 DEFINITIONS
1-3-1 General Rule Regarding Definitions
1-3-2 Acts by Agents
1-3-3 Code
1-3-4 Council
1-3-5 Day
1-3-6 Daytime, Nighttime
1-3-7 Department, Board, Commission, Office, Officer or Employee
1-3-8 Gender; Singular and Plural
1-3-9 In the Town
1-3-10 Joint Authority
1-3-11 Month
1-3-12 Oath
1-3-13 Or, And
1-3-14 Person
1-3-15 Personal Property
1-3-16 Preceding, Following
1-3-17 Property
1-3-18 Real Property
1-3-19 Shall, May
1-3-20 Shall Have Been
1-3-21 Signature or Subscription by Mark
1-3-22 State
1-3-23 Tenant or Occupant
1-3-24 Tenses
1-3-25 Time--Computation
1-3-26 Time--Reasonable
1-3-27 Town
1-3-28 Week
1-3-29 Writing
1-3-30 Year
2
Section 1-3-1 General Rule Regarding Definitions
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and
approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
Section 1-3-2 Acts by Agents
When this code or an ordinance requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done
by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts
when done by an authorized agent.
Section 1-3-3 Code
The words "the code" or "this code" shall mean "The Code of the Town of Queen Creek,
Arizona," unless the context indicates otherwise.
Section 1-3-4 Council
Whenever the word "council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the common council of the
Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
Section 1-3-5 Day
A "day" is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
Section 1-3-6 Daytime, Nighttime
"Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time
between sunset and sunrise.
Section 1-3-7 Department, Board, Commission, Office, Officer, or Employee
Whenever any "department, board, commission, office, officer or employee" is referred to, it
shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the town unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
Section 1-3-8 Gender; Singular and Plural
Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the singular number include the
plural and words in the plural number include the singular.
GENERAL
3
Section 1-3-9 In the Town
The words "in the town" or "within the town" shall mean and include all territory over which the
town now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or
other regulatory powers.
Section 1-3-10 Joint Authority
All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more town officers or other persons shall
be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it
shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
Section 1-3-11 Month
The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Section 1-3-12 Oath
"Oath" includes affirmation or declaration.
Section 1-3-13 Or, And
"Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it.
Section 1-3-14 Person
The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations or voluntary associations,
as well as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.
Section 1-3-15 Personal Property
"Personal property" includes every species of property, except real property as defined in this
article.
Section 1-3-16 Preceding, Following
The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.
Section 1-3-17 Property
The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
GENERAL
4
Section 1-3-18 Real Property
"Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Section 1-3-19 Shall, May
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
Section 1-3-20 Shall Have Been
The words "shall have been" include past and future cases.
Section 1-3-21 Signature or Subscription by Mark
"Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer cannot write, such signer's or
subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the
signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or
can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign
their own names thereto.
Section 1-3-22 State
The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Arizona.
Section 1-3-23 Tenant or Occupant
The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person holding a
written or an oral lease or who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone
or with others.
Section 1-3-24 Tenses
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.
Section 1-3-25 Time--Computation
The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or in any order issued
pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first
day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be
excluded; and when such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or a
holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
GENERAL
5
Section 1-3-26 Time--Reasonable
In all cases where any section of this code shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time
or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such
time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance with
such notice.
Section 1-3-27
Whenever the word "town" is used, it shall be construed to mean the Town of Queen Creek,
Arizona.
Section 1-3-28 Week
A "week" consists of seven consecutive days.
Section 1-3-29 Writing
"Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual
means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this
code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided
otherwise.
Section 1-3-30 Year
The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
ARTICLE 1-4 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
1-4-1 Additional Rules of Construction
1-4-2 References to this Code
1-4-3 Conflicting Provisions--Different Chapters
1-4-4 Conflicting Provisions--Same Chapter
Section 1-4-1 Additional Rules of Construction
In addition to the rules of construction specified in Articles 1-2 and 1-3, the rules set forth in this
article shall be observed in the construction of this code.
Section 1-4-2 References to this Code
All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this
GENERAL
6
code unless otherwise specified.
Section 1-4-3 Conflicting Provisions--Different Chapters
If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or contravene each other, the
provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the
subject matter of such chapter.
Section 1-4-4 Conflicting Provisions--Same Chapter
If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the
section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction is inconsistent with
the meaning of such chapter.
ARTICLE 1-5 SECTION HEADINGS
Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a convenience to indicate the
contents of the section and do not constitute part of the law, except to the extent necessary for
construction or interpretation of the section.
ARTICLE 1-6 EFFECT OF REPEAL
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed,
such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless
it shall be expressly so provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at
the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
ARTICLE 1-7 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this code shall be severable, and, if any provision of this code is held
unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.
ARTICLE 1-8 PENALTY1
A. Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this code, except as otherwise
provided in this code, shall be guilty of a Class one misdemeanor. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.
B. Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by Chapter
11, Article 11-3 of this Code shall be penalized as provided in paragraph “A” of this
Article 1-8. Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required
by any other article of Chapter 11 of this Code constitutes a civil traffic violation.
Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 5,
Articles 3 and 4, and amendments thereto.
GENERAL
7
1Ordinance 404-07
ARTICLE 1-9 REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES
1-9-1 Effective Date of Repeal
1-9-2 Ordinances Exempt from Repeal
Section 1-9-1 Effective Date of Repeal
All ordinances of the town except those specially exempted in this article, now in force and
effect are hereby repealed effective at twelve o'clock noon on the thirtieth day of June, 1990, but
all rights, duties and obligations created by said ordinances shall continue and exist in all
respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.
Section 1-9-2 Ordinances Exempt from Repeal
The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or in any way to
modify or affect:
A. Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations, dedications or
zoning.
B. Any ordinance making an appropriation.
C. Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been
authorized.
D. The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this code becomes effective.
E. The continued existence and operation of any department, agency, commission or office
heretofore legally established or held.
F. Any bond of any public officer.
G. Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed.
H. Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or accepting any compact or
contract with any other municipality, the State of Arizona or any county or subdivision
thereof, or with the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
ARTICLE 1-10 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE
Each and every section of this code as herein contained and hereby enacted shall take effect
and be in force on and after twelve o'clock noon on the thirtieth day of June, 1990, except that
GENERAL
8
where a later effective date is provided it shall prevail.
September 2007
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
CHAPTER 2 MAYOR AND COUNCIL
ARTICLE 2-1 COUNCIL
2-1-1 Elected Officers
2-1-2 Corporate Powers
2-1-3 Duties of Office
2-1-4 Vacancies in Council
2-1-5 Compensation
2-1-6 Oath of Office
2-1-7 Bond
2-1-8 Financial Disclosure Statement
Section 2-1-1 Elected Officers1
A. The elected officers of the town shall be a mayor and six council members. The mayor
and council members shall constitute the common council and shall continue in office until
assumption of duties of office by their duly qualified successors.
B. The mayor shall be directly elected every four years for a term of four years.
C. Council members shall serve four-year, overlapping terms.
Section 2-1-2 Corporate Powers
The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the council and shall be exercised only as
directed or authorized by law. All powers of the council shall be exercised by ordinance,
resolution, order or motion.
Section 2-1-3 Duties of Office
The mayor and members of the council shall assume the duties of their office at the first
regularly scheduled council meeting in January following the election at which elected and as
provided for in A.R.S. §16-642.
Section 2-1-4 Vacancies in Council
A. Vacancies will be filled as provided for in State Law.
Section 2-1-5 Compensation
The compensation of elective officers of the town shall be fixed from time to time by resolution
of the council.
1Ordinance 39-93
Ordinance 411-07 and voter approval March 11, 2008
Ordinance 538-13
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
Section 2-1-6 Oath of Office
Prior to assumption of the duties of office, the Mayor and each Council Member shall take and
subscribe to the oath of office as provided for in A.R.S.§38-232 and acknowledge the receipt of
the Council Policies and Procedures Handbook.
A. If appointed, at or before commencement of the term of office.
B. If elected, at any time after receiving the Officer’s Certificate of Election, and at or before
commencement of the term of office.
Section 2-1-7 Bond
Prior to taking office, each member of the council shall execute and file an official bond,
enforceable against the principal and his sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful
performance of his official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the
town or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of such
officer in his official capacity. Bonds shall be in such sum as shall be provided by resolution and
the premium for such bonds shall be paid by the town. Nothing in this section shall preclude the
town from obtaining a blanket bond as allowed or required by state law.
Section 2-1-8 Financial Disclosure Statement
Each member of the council shall file a financial disclosure statement at such times, in such
form and with such information as provided by resolution of the council and pursuant to state
law.
Ordinance 507-11
Ordinance 538-13
ARTICLE 2-2 MAYOR
2-2-1 Selection of Mayor
2-2-2 Vice Mayor
2-2-3 Acting Mayor
2-2-4 Powers and Duties of the Mayor
2-2-5 Absence of Mayor
2-2-6 Failure to Sign Documents
Section 2-2-1 Selection of Mayor
The Mayor shall be directly elected by the qualified electors of the city. The regular term of
office for the Mayor shall be four years.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
Section 2-2-2 Vice Mayor
Effective January 2017 at a meeting in January of each year, the Mayor shall nominate from
among the members a Council Member to serve a one-year term as Vice-Mayor. The
nomination shall be voted upon by the Mayor and Council.
The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during any absence or disability of the
Mayor.
The Vice Mayor shall assist the Mayor in the management of the council meeting agenda items.
Section 2-2-3 Acting Mayor
In the absence or disability of both the mayor and vice mayor, the council may designate
another of its members to serve as acting mayor who shall have all the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the mayor during such absence or disability.
Section 2-2-4 Powers and Duties of the Mayor
The powers and duties of the mayor shall include the following:
A. He shall be the chief executive officer of the town.
B. He shall be the chairman of the council and preside over its meetings. He may make and
second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings.
C. He shall enforce the provisions of this code.
D. He shall execute and authenticate by his signature such instruments as the council or any
statutes, ordinances or this code shall require.
E. He shall make such recommendations and suggestions to the council as he may consider
proper.
F. He may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due to fire, conflagration,
flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing or any other natural or man-made calamity or
disaster or in the event of the threat or occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of
civil disobedience which endanger life or property within the town. After declaration of
such emergency, the mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary
regulations to preserve the peace and order of the town, including but not limited to:
l. Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the town.
2. Ordering the closing of any business.
3. Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place.
4. Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within
or without the political subdivision for assistance.
G. He shall perform such other duties required by state statute and this code as well as those
duties required as chief executive officer of the town.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
Section 2-2-5 Absence of Mayor
The mayor shall not absent himself from the town for a greater period than fifteen consecutive
days without the consent of the council.
Section 2-2-6 Failure to Sign Documents
If the mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or
other document or instrument requiring his signature for five days consecutively, a majority of
the members of the council may, at any regular or special meeting, authorize the vice mayor or,
in his absence, an acting mayor to sign such ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand
or other document or instrument which when so signed shall have the same force and effect as
if signed by the mayor.
ARTICLE 2-3 ELECTIONS
2-3-1 Consolidated Election Dates
2-3-2 Primary Election
2-3-3 Non-Partisan Ballot
2-3-4 General Election Nomination
2-3-5 Election to Office
2-3-6 Candidate Financial Disclosure
2-3-7 Qualified Elector; Definition
2-3-8 Petition Circulators
Section 2-3-1 Consolidated Election Dates
All elections shall be held pursuant to A.R.S. §16-204, as amended.
Section 2-3-2 Primary Election
Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of all the votes cast shall be
declared to be elected to the office for which he is a candidate effective as of the date of the
general election, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate; provided that if more
candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled, those equal in number to the
offices to be filled receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. A majority of
votes cast shall be determined as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-821.01.
Section 2-3-3 Non-Partisan Ballot
Elections shall be non-partisan and nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the
support of a candidate. Candidate’s names shall appear on the ballot pursuant to the procedure
set forth in A.R.S. §16-464, as amended.
Section 2-3-4 General Election Nomination
If at any primary election held as above provided there be any office for which no candidate is
elected, then as to such office the primary election shall be considered to be a primary election
for nomination of candidates for such office, and the general municipal election shall be held to
vote for candidates to fill such office. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the general
municipal election shall be (A) those not elected at the primary election who received the
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
highest number of votes, and (B) equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any
given office or less than that number if there be less than that number named on the primary
election ballot. Persons who receive the highest number of votes for the respective offices at
such first election shall be the only candidates at such second election, provided that if there be
any person who, under the provisions of this article, would have been entitled to become a
candidate for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number
of votes therefore, all such persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become
candidates for such office.
Section 2-3-5 Election to Office
The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the highest number of
votes at the general election shall be declared elected.
Section 2-3-6 Candidate Financial Disclosure
Each candidate for the office of mayor or councilmember shall file a financial disclosure
statement when such candidate files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain such
information as required by resolution of the council and pursuant to state law.
Section 2-3-7 Qualified Elector; Definition1
A. Every resident of the town is qualified to register and vote in town elections if he or she:
1. Is a citizen of the United States;
2. Will be eighteen years of age or more on or before the date of the next town election
following registration;
3. Will have been a resident of the town and registered to vote prior to midnight of the
twenty-ninth day preceding the date of the next town election;
4. Is able to write his or her name, or make a mark, unless prevented from doing so by
physical disability;
5. Has not been convicted of treason or a felony, unless restored to civil rights; and
6. Has not been adjudicated an incapacitated person as defined by A.R.S. § 14-5101,
or its successor statute.
B. For the purposes of this article, “resident” means an individual who has actual physical
presence in the town, combined with an intent to remain. A temporary absence shall not
result in a loss of residence if the individual has an intent to return following his or her
absence. An individual has only one residence for purposes of this article.
Section 2-3-8 Petition Circulators
All circulators of nomination petitions for mayor or council member and all circulators of
recall, referendum or initiative petitions or petitions for other measures, shall be qualified
to register to vote in this state. Pursuant to A.R.S.§16-315, as amended, if the petition
1 Amended by Ordinance 312-05
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
circulator is not a resident of the state, the petition circulator shall register as a circulator
with the Secretary of State before circulating the petition.
ARTICLE 2-4 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
2-4-1 Power Reserved; Time of Election2
2-4-2 Number of Signatures
2-4-3 Time of Filing
2-4-4 Sample Ballots and Publicity Pamphlets
2-4-5 Petition Circulators
Section 2-4-1 Power Reserved; Time of Election2
A. There is reserved to the qualified electors of the town the power of initiative and the
referendum as prescribed by the state constitution, Arizona Revised Statutes and this
code.
B. Any proper initiative matter shall be voted on by all qualified electors at the next ensuing
town primary or general election pursuant to subsection A of Section 2-6-3.
2 Amended by Ordinance 313-05
C. That upon presentation of a certificate to the council by the town clerk that all steps
required by the Arizona constitution and the state statutes concerning referendum have
been complied with, the council may call a special election on the matter referred on any
future consolidated election date as set forth in A.R.S. § 16-204 (B) as it exists now or as
it may be amended. The special election must comply with all other provisions of law
regarding elections.
D. The call of a special election for referendum matters shall be valid only upon the
affirmative vote of four members of the council voting on said request and call. Should the
required number of votes to call the special election not be obtained, then the referendum
matter shall appear on the ballot at the next regular town primary or general election.
E. If a special election on a referendum matter is called for by the council pursuant to
subsection D of this section, then in addition to all other notices required by law, the Town
Clerk shall notify the person or organization that requested the referendum petition of the
council decision by first class mail, postage prepaid at the address shown upon the
request for referendum petition number.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
Section 2-4-2 Number of Signatures1
A. The total number of electors qualified to vote at the last town election, whether regular or
special, immediately preceding the date upon which any initiative petition is filed, shall be the
basis for computing the number of signatures of qualified electors of the town required to file an
initiative petition.
B. The basis for computing the number of signatures of qualified electors of the town required to
file a referendum petition shall be determined by state law.
Section 2-4-3 Time of Filing1
A. Initiative petitions shall be filed at least one hundred twenty days (120) prior to the election
at which they are to be voted upon.
B. Referendum petitions shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the adoption of the ordinance
or resolution to be referred. If the town clerk is unable to provide petitioners with a copy of
the ordinance or resolution at the time of application for an official number or on the same
business day of the application, the thirty day period shall be calculated from the date
such ordinance or resolution is available.
Section 2-4-4 Sample Ballots and Publicity Pamphlets1
The following procedures relating to sample ballots and publicity pamphlets are hereby adopted
for conducting elections at which an initiative or referendum is to be voted on:
A. A publicity pamphlet, containing the entire text of the official ballot, shall be mailed by the
town clerk to each household within the town in which a registered voter resides before
the earliest date for receipt by registered voters of any requested early ballot for the
election at which the measure(s) are to be voted on but not less than 10 days before the
election subject to State Law.
B. The pamphlet shall contain the proposition as it will appear on the ballot together with a
summary of each proposition. Each summary shall be followed by any arguments
supporting the proposition followed by any arguments opposing the proposition.
Arguments submitted by the person filing the initiative or referendum shall appear first.
The remaining arguments shall be placed in the order in which they were filed.
C. Arguments supporting and opposing propositions appearing on the ballot shall be filed
with the office of the town clerk by 5:00 p.m. not less than ninety (90) days prior to the
election at which the propositions are to be voted upon. If time does not permit
compliance with the ninety (90) day deadline, the town clerk may establish a separate
deadline for filing referendum ballot arguments. Arguments supporting or opposing
propositions appearing on the ballot shall meet the following requirements:
1. Arguments must relate to the propositions proposed by initiative or referred by
referendum which will appear on the ballot.
2. Arguments must identify the proposition to which they refer and indicate whether the
argument is in support of or opposition to the proposition.
3. Arguments may not exceed three hundred words in length.
1 Amended by Ordinance 313-05
Ordinance 508-11
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
4. Arguments must contain the original notarized signature of each person sponsoring
it. Arguments submitted by organizations shall be signed by two executive officers of
the organization, or if the argument is sponsored by a political committee, it must be
signed by the committee’s chairman or treasurer. All persons signing documents
shall indicate their residence or post office address and a telephone number, which
information shall not appear in the publicity pamphlet.
5. No person or organization shall submit more than one argument for each proposition
to be voted on.
6. Each argument shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of $200.00 to offset
proportional costs of printing. This requirement shall not be waived on any account.
SECTION 2-4-5 PETITION CIRCULATORS
All circulators of nomination petitions for mayor or council member and all circulators of
recall, referendum or initiative petitions or petitions for other measures, shall be qualified
to register to vote in this state pursuant to A.R.S.§16-315, as amended, if the petition
circulator is not a resident of the state, the petition circulator shall register as a circulator
with the Secretary of State before circulating the petition.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
ARTICLE 2-5 COUNCIL PROCEDURE
2-5-1 Regular Meetings
2-5-2 Special Meetings
2-5-3 Meetings to Be Public
2-5-4 Quorum
2-5-5 Agenda
2-5-6 Consent Agenda
2-5-7 Order of Business; Proceedings of the Council
2-5-8 Committees and Commissions
2-5-9 Voting
2-5-10 Suspension of Rules
Section 2-5-1 Regular Meetings1
The council shall hold one regular meeting each month on the first Wednesday of each month at
the hour of 5:30 p.m. Should the first Wednesday of the month fall on a day designated by law
as a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on a day other than the legal
holiday as determined by the mayor. All regular meetings of the town council shall be held at
the Queen Creek Town Hall unless specifically designated in writing in all required public
notices.
Section 2-5-2 Special Meetings
The mayor, upon his own motion, or the clerk, upon the written request of two members, may
convene the council at any time by notifying the members of the date, hour and purpose of such
special meeting, and by giving such additional notice as required by state law.
Section 2-5-3 Meetings to Be Public
All proceedings of the council shall be open to the public, except that upon approval by a
majority vote of the council, the council may meet in a closed executive session pursuant to the
provisions of state law.
Section 2-5-4 Quorum
A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for transacting business, but a lesser number
may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members.
Section 2-5-5 Agenda
Prior to each council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the council for preparation and
distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier, the clerk shall collect all written reports,
communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the
council, prepare an agenda according to the order of business and furnish each councilmember,
the mayor and the attorney with a copy.
1 Amended by Ordinance 30-93; Ordinance 570-15
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
Section 2-5-6 Consent Agenda
A. When any item of business requires action by the council, but is of a routine and
noncontroversial nature, such item may be presented at a regular meeting of the council
as part of a consent agenda.
B. The consent agenda shall be introduced by a motion "To approve the Consent Agenda,"
and shall be considered by the council as a single item.
C. There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the council regarding any item
on the consent agenda, beyond asking questions for simple clarification.
D. All items on the consent agenda which require public hearings shall be open for hearing
simultaneously, and the mayor shall announce, or direct the town clerk to announce, the
titles of all such items.
E. Upon objection by any member of the council to inclusion of any item on the consent
agenda, that item shall be removed from the consent agenda forthwith. Such objections
may be recorded at any time prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve the
consent agenda. All such items shall be considered individually, in the order in which they
were objected to, immediately following consideration of the consent agenda.
F. Approval of the motion to approve the consent agenda shall be fully equivalent to
approval, adoption or enactment of each motion, resolution, ordinance or other item of
business thereon, exactly as if each had been acted upon individually.
Section 2-5-7 Order of Business; Proceedings of the Council
A. The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in an order
set forth by the council.
B. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order and conduct
the proceedings of the meetings in an orderly manner.
C. Petitions, remonstrances, communications and comments or suggestions from citizens
present at town council meetings shall be heard by the council. All such remarks shall be
addressed to the council as a whole, and not to any member thereof. Such remarks shall
be limited to three minutes, unless additional time is granted by the council. No person
other than the individual speaking shall enter into the discussion without the permission of
the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a councilmember except through the
presiding officer.
Section 2-5-8 Committees and Commissions
The council may create such committees and commissions, standing or special, as it deems
necessary. They shall consist of as many members and shall perform such duties as the
council may require and shall be governed by the standard form by-laws unless such committee
or commission is specifically exempt from those by-laws. All members of such boards,
committees and commissions shall serve at the pleasure of the council.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
Section 2-5-9 Voting
A. The mayor shall vote as a member of the council.
B. Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any question shall be taken
and entered in the minutes.
Section 2-5-10 Suspension of Rules
Any of the provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter
under consideration by a recorded vote of three-fourths of the members present, except that this
section shall not be construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.
ARTICLE 2-6 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS
2-6-1 Prior Approval
2-6-2 Introduction
2-6-3 Reading Required
2-6-4 Requirements for an Ordinance
2-6-5 Effective Date of Ordinances
2-6-6 Signatures Required
2-6-7 Publishing Required
2-6-8 Posting Required
Section 2-6-1 Prior Approval
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council,
have been reviewed as to form by the attorney and shall, when there are substantive matters of
administration involved, be referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the
matters. Such person shall have an opportunity to present his objections, if any, prior to the
passage of the ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the contract.
Section 2-6-2 Introduction
Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council shall be
introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the attorney or the clerk may
present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any
councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance, resolution,
matter or subject be adopted; otherwise, it shall not be considered.
Section 2-6-3 Reading Required
All ordinances shall be read by title only unless the council, by majority vote, requires reading in
full.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
Section 2-6-4 Requirements for an Ordinance
Each ordinance may have only one subject, the nature of which is clearly expressed in the title.
Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced as an amendment to this code or to an
existing ordinance, and, in such case, the title of the sections to be amended shall be included
in the ordinance.
Section 2-6-5 Effective Date of Ordinances
A. No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative until thirty days after its
passage by the council and signature by the mayor, except measures necessary for the
immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the town, but such an emergency
measure shall not become immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the
reason why it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is
approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the council.
B. In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, the clerk shall certify the
minutes of any council meeting at which an ordinance, resolution or franchise, except an
emergency measure is passed. The thirty day period specified in subsection A of this
section shall be calculated from the date of passage by the council and signature by the
mayor.
Section 2-6-6 Signatures Required
Every ordinance passed by the council shall, before it becomes effective, be signed by the
mayor and attested by the clerk.
Section 2-6-7 Publishing Required1
Only such ordinances, orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the council
shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly ordered by the council.
Ordinances shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation.
Section 2-6-8 Posting Required
Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment shall, after passage,
be posted by the clerk in three or more public places within the town and an affidavit of the
person who posted the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the clerk as proof of posting.
1Ordinance 98-97
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
ARTICLE 2-7 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION1
2-7-1 Creation
2-7-2 Membership
Section 2-7-1 Creation
There is hereby created, pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-461, a Planning and Zoning Commission
("Commission"), herein known as the Town of Queen Creek Planning and Zoning Commission.
Section 2-7-2 Membership
A. The commission shall consist of seven members. The members of the commission shall
be residents of the town. The members shall be appointed by the mayor and council and
shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council.
1Ordinance 24-92
B. All appointments or extension of terms shall be for a three year period and all terms shall
end on August 31st of the third year after appointment or extension.
C. Commission members shall serve without pay, except that they may be reimbursed for
actual expenses incurred in connection with the duties of their office upon authorization or
ratification by the council.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Rev. February 2016
ARTICLE 2-8 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT1
2-8-1 Creation
2-8-2 Membership
2-8-3 Terms
Section 2-8-1 Creation
There is hereby created, pursuant to the authority of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning Code, a
Queen Creek Board of Adjustment.
Section 2-8-2 Membership
The membership of the board of adjustment shall consist of five members who shall be
appointed by the mayor and council.
Section 2-8-3 Terms
All terms shall be for a period of three years.
ARTICLE 2-9 (RESERVED)2
1 Amended by Ordinance 25-92
2 Amended by Ordinance 312-05
Revised 12/2015
CHAPTER 3 ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 3-1 OFFICERS IN GENERAL
3-1-1 Officers
3-1-2 Additional Officers
3-1-3 Bond
3-1-4 Vacancies; Holding More Than One Office
3-1-5 Additional Powers and Duties
Section 3-1-1 Officers1
The regular appointed officers of the Town shall be the Town Manager, Town Clerk, Chief of
Police, Magistrate, Attorney and Engineer, who shall be appointed by the Council and who shall
serve at the pleasure of the Council, with the exception of the Town Magistrate who shall serve
a term of two years. The Council has directed that Town Engineer be appointed by the Town
Manager.
Section 3-1-2 Additional Officers
The Council may appoint and remove from time to time such other officers as it may deem
necessary and that are not provided for in this code or state statute.
Section 3-1-3 Bond
The Council shall require each officer of the Town to give bond for the due discharge of his
duties in such sums and with such security as it may direct and approve. The Town shall pay
the costs of such bond but is not required to do so.
Section 3-1-4 Vacancies; Holding More Than One Office
Any vacancy that shall occur in any town office shall be filled by appointment by the Council,
provided that one person may hold more than one office and that at the discretion of the
Council, the functions of a town official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or
another town official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office but employed at the
pleasure of the Council.
Section 3-1-5 Additional Powers and Duties
In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer shall have such further
powers, perform such further duties and hold such other office as may be provided by the
council through ordinance, resolution or order.
1Ordinance 76-96 as amended by Ordinances 365-06; 485-10
ADMINISTRATION
Revised 12/2015
ARTICLE 3-2 OFFICERS
3-2-1 Clerk
3-2-2 Chief of Police
3-2-3 Engineer
3-2-4 Attorney
3-2-5 Magistrate
3-2-6 Town Manager
Section 3-2-1 Clerk
A. Records. The clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business transacted by the
council and any other records that either pertain to the business of the town or that the
council directs. The clerk shall number, plainly label and file separately in a suitable
cabinet all resolutions, ordinances, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid
vouchers, inventories, letters, orders and other documents of whatever nature.
B. Public Inspection of Records. The clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all
public records and public documents under his control, as provided by state statute.
C. Minutes. The clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of council
proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.
D. Ordinances, Resolutions, Budgets and Notices. The clerk shall process, record, file,
publish and, if required by state statute, post all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and
notices that may be passed by the council.
E. Duties as Treasurer. The clerk shall hold the office of Treasurer and receive and safely
keep all monies that shall come to the Town and pay out the same when authorized by
the Council. He shall keep a separate record and account of each different fund provided
by the Council, apportion the monies received among the different funds as prescribed by
the Council, and keep a complete set of books showing every money transaction of the
Town, the state of each fund, from what source the money in each fund was derived and
for what purpose expended. He shall make monthly reports to the Council of all receipts
and disbursements and the balance in each fund. He shall countersign all warrants
issued by order of the Mayor and Council and signed by the Mayor, and shall disburse
monies of the Town upon demands duly approved by the Council.
F. Election Official. The Clerk shall be the Town Election Official and perform those duties
required by state statute.
G. Licenses. The clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses that may be prescribed
by state statute or this code.
H. Administrative Duties. The clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities and
duties that are conferred upon him by the Council in addition to those specified in this
code.
ADMINISTRATION
Revised 12/2015
Section 3-2-2 Chief of Police
The Chief of Police shall perform such duties as may be required of him by law and as the
Council may deem necessary.
Section 3-2-3 Engineer
The Engineer shall perform such duties as may be required of him by law and such other duties
as the Council may deem necessary.
Section 3-2-4 Attorney
The Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the Council and other officials and,
as such, shall give his opinion in writing when requested. He shall draft all deeds, contracts,
conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the council.
He shall return, within ten days, all ordinances and resolutions submitted to him for
consideration by the Council, with his approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together
with his reasons therefor. He shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions or causes where the
Town is a party, and shall report to the council, when required, the condition of any suit or action
to which the Town is a party.
Section 3-2-5 Magistrate
The Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the magistrate's court and shall be selected by
the Council for a two year term and shall perform those functions necessary to the maintenance
of the magistrate's court as provided by state statute.
Section 3-2-6 Town Manager1
A. Office Created. The office of the Town Manager is hereby created and established. The
Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of
accepted practice in respect to the duties of office as hereinafter set forth; and shall hold
office for and at the pleasure of the Council.
B. Eligibility. Residence in the Town at the time of appointment shall not be required as a
condition of the appointment.
C. Bond. The Town Manager shall secure a corporate surety bond to be approved by the
Council in such sum as may be determined by the Council. The bond shall be conditioned
on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the manager as prescribed in this
article. The bond fee shall be paid by the Town.
1Ordinance 49-94
ADMINISTRATION
Revised 12/2015
D. Removal. The Town Manager may be removed by the affirmative vote of four members of
the Town Council at a regular or special session. The removal does not require the
statement of any cause.
E. Resignation. The Manager shall give in writing a sixty days notice of intention to resign
before leaving the office of Town Manager.
F. Compensation. The Manager shall receive such compensation as the Council shall from
time to time determine, and said compensation shall be a proper charge against such
funds of the town as the council shall designate. The Town Manager shall be reimbursed
for all sums necessarily incurred or paid in the performance of duties, or incurred when
traveling on business pertaining to the town as approved by the Council; reimbursement
shall be made only when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for
which reimbursement is requested, has been presented and approved by the Council.
G. Powers and Duties. The Town Manager shall be the administrative officer of the town
government and shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all
affairs of the Town under the specific direction and control of the Council. In addition to
the general powers as the chief administrative officer and not as limitation thereon, it shall
be the manager’s responsibility and authority:
1. To see that all laws and ordinances of the Town are enforced and that all franchises
and privileges granted by the Town are faithfully observed.
2. To appoint and, when necessary, suspend or remove all employees of the Town
except those appointed by the Council. All appointments and removals shall be
based on merit and upon the qualifications and disqualifications of such an employee
without regard to any political belief or affiliation.
3. To coordinate the administrative functions and operation of the various departments,
boards, divisions and services of the town government, and on its behalf to carry out
policies, rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by it, relating to the
administration of the affairs of such departments, boards, divisions or services. Such
powers and duties to be subject to the following provisions:
a. That the organizational structure under which municipal services are
performed shall be specified in an organization chart approved by the Council.
b. That prior to any creation, combination, consolidation or deletion of any
positions of employment, written job descriptions or amendments thereto shall
have been approved by the Council.
4. To attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom and to attend, or
designate a representative to attend, all Board and Commission meetings.
5. To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as are
necessary.
6. To recommend to the Council at periodic intervals changes needed in the Town
Code.
ADMINISTRATION
Revised 12/2015
7. To prepare and to submit a summary of all contracts, agreements, etc. of which the
Town is a party for review by the Council before March 1st of each year.
8. To keep the Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs
of the Town. To provide whatever reports to the council as it may deem necessary.
9. To prepare and submit to the Council a proposed annual budget for the next fiscal
year and a financial plan for the subsequent four fiscal years.
10. To analyze the functions, duties, and activities of the various departments, boards
and services of the town government and for all employees thereof, and to make
such recommendations to the Council and with reference thereto, as in his/her own
judgment will result, if made effective, in the highest degree of efficiency in the
overall operation of the town government.
11. To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of
the Town, or its utilities or enterprises.
12. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other
public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the Council.
13. To devote as much time to the duties of the office of Town Manager and the interest
of the Town as necessary.
14. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated
from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
ARTICLE 3-3 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
3-3-1 Creation and Scope
3-3-2 Conditions of Employment
3-3-3 Rules and Regulations
3-3-4 Political Contributions
Section 3-3-1 Creation and Scope
The Council shall adopt a merit system for the employees of the Town, the provisions of which
shall apply to all employees of the Town except elected officials, officers of the Town appointed
by the Council, persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical
services, temporary employees and volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation
from the Town.
ADMINISTRATION
Revised 12/2015
Section 3-3-2 Conditions of Employment
The appointment, promotion and tenure of every employee shall be conditioned solely on merit
and fitness and the satisfactory performance of the duties and responsibilities assigned. No
employee or applicant for employment shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color,
religion, sex or political affiliation.
Section 3-3-3 Rules and Regulations
The Council may adopt by resolution rules, regulations and policies to give effect to this article,
which may be modified or changed from time to time, but such rules and regulations shall follow
the generally accepted principles of good personnel administration.
Section 3-3-4 Political Contributions
No officer, official or employee of the Town shall use any influence or pressure upon any
employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of money or time, either direct or indirect, for
any political campaign or personal gain.
ARTICLE 3-4 PURCHASING1
3-4-1 Scope of Article
3-4-2 Purchasing Director
3-4-3 Cooperative Purchasing
Section 3-4-1 Scope of Article
The Council shall adopt by resolution, rules, regulations and policies that give effect to this
article, which may be modified or changed from time to time, but such rules and regulations
shall follow principles of sound fiscal management.
Section 3-4-2 Purchasing Director
The Town Manager shall appoint one or more persons to serve as the purchasing director and
to administer the town’s purchasing policies as set forth in the council adopted rules and
regulations.
Section 3-4-3 Cooperative Purchasing
This Article shall not apply to purchases made by, through or with the State of Arizona or its
political subdivisions. The Town may make purchases or award contracts for services without a
formal bidding process whenever other governmental units have done so for the same item or
service if, in the opinion of the purchasing director, a separate bidding process is not likely to
result in a lower price for such items or services.
1Ordinance 251-03
1Ordinance 584-15 Revised 12/2015
ARTICLE 3-5 INDEMNIFICATION OF TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES1
3-5-1 Persons to be Indemnified
3-5-2 Notification of Manager
3-5-3 Expenses for Indemnification
3-5-4 Criminal Proceedings
3-5-5 Representation
3-5-6 No Presumption Created
3-5-7 Gross Negligence and Misconduct
3-5-8 No Impairment of Insurance
Section 3-5-1 Persons to be Indemnified
Any person made a party or threatened to be made a party to any proceeding based on
claims arising out of the performance of their duties as an officer, employee, councilmember, or
member of a board or commission of the Town (an “appointee”) shall be indemnified as set forth
in this Article 3-5.
Section 3-5-2 Notification of Manager
As a prerequisite to indemnification under this Article 3-5, a person shall notify the Town
Manager as soon as he is made a party or threatened to be made a party to any proceeding.
The Town Manager, in consultation with the Town Attorney, shall determine whether provisions
of this Article 3-5 apply to such claims. If the Town Manager is the person seeking
indemnification, the term “Town Manager” in this Section 3-5-2 shall refer to the Assistant
Town Manager.
Section 3-5-3 Expenses for indemnification
Indemnification shall include, without limitation, attorneys’ fees, expert witness fees, court
costs and fees, judgments and amounts paid in settlement of a claim, if approved by the town.
Section 3-5-4 Criminal Proceedings
If the proceeding is a criminal proceeding, the person shall be indemnified if he had no
reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful.
Section 3-5-5 Representation
If the Town is or may be joined with one or more employees, council members, or
appointees as defendants in a lawsuit, the Town and the individual(s) shall be jointly
represented by the same legal counsel, except that separate legal counsel shall be provided to
the employee at the Town’s expense when it is determined by the Town Attorney that joint
representation would be either ethically inappropriate or otherwise contrary to the interests of
the Town. Legal counsel shall be selected by Town or, as applicable, the Town’s insurer.
Revised 12/2015
An officer, employee, council member or appointee who is being defended and
indemnified pursuant to this Article 3-5 shall cooperate with the Town and, upon the Town’s
request, assist in conducting any contested proceeding and making settlements. The officer,
employee, council member or appointee shall, when requested by the Town attend depositions,
hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving evidence. The officer, employee, council
member or appointee shall not, except at his or her own cost, voluntarily make any payment,
assume any obligation or incur any expense in connection with the claim or contested
proceeding. If the officer, employee, council member or appointee fails to cooperate as required
by this subsection, then the Town shall have the right not to defend or indemnify the individual.
Section 3-5-6 No Presumption Created
With respect to indemnification, a termination of the proceeding by judgment, order,
settlement, conviction, or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent shall not by itself
create a presumption that the person acted, or failed to act, other than in good faith and in a
manner which he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the Town,
and with respect to any criminal proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his conduct
was unlawful.
Section 3-5-7 Gross Negligence and Misconduct.
No indemnification shall be made in respect of any claim, issue or matter as to which such
person shall be determined to be liable for gross negligence or intentional tortious misconduct in
the performance of his duty to the Town.
In the event that the Town incurs costs and expenses on behalf of a person pursuant to
this Article 3-5, and it is later determined that the person was not entitled to the benefits of this
Article because the individual was grossly negligent or committed intentional tortious
misconduct, then the Town shall be reimbursed by the person for all such costs and expenses,
including attorneys' fees.
Section 3-5-8 No Impairment of Insurance
Nothing in the indemnity provisions of this Article 3-5 is intended to limit or impair the
existence of any insurance, municipal risk pool coverage, or other similar protection provided to
the Town or to any person seeking indemnification. Any protection provided to an indemnified
person pursuant to this Article 3-5 shall be secondary and the coverage afforded by any such
third party insurance or other coverage or protection shall in all cases be primary.
CHAPTER 4 POLICE DEPARTMENT
ARTICLE 4-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT
4-1-1 Composition
4-1-2 Appointment of Officers
4-1-3 Compensation of Officers
4-1-4 Departmental Rules and Regulations
4-1-5 Duties of Police Department
4-1-6 Answering Calls Outside the Town
Section 4-1-1 Composition
There is hereby created a police department for the town which shall consist of a chief of police
and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the council for
the safety and good order of the town.
Section 4-1-2 Appointment of Officers
The chief of police shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at the pleasure of the
council. The chief of police, with the concurrence of the council, may appoint as many police
officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the
town, provided such positions have been approved in the budget.
Section 4-1-3 Compensation of Officers
The chief of police and the police officers of the town shall be compensated as determined by
the council and shall not receive any other compensation for services rendered while acting in
their official capacity.
Section 4-1-4 Departmental Rules and Regulations
The police department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental
rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the council.
Section 4-1-5 Duties of Police Department
It is the duty of the police department, under the direction of the chief of police, to:
A. Enforce this code and the statutes of the State of Arizona within jurisdictional limits as
conferred by law and to arrest and charge the violators thereof.
B. Render such account of the police department, its duties and receipts as may be required
by the council, and keep records of the office open to inspection by the council at any
time, except those records as may be exempted by state or federal law.
C. Enforce the traffic regulations and laws of the state within the limits of the town.
D. Direct traffic and insure the orderly flow thereof and investigate and make reports of
accidents.
E. Perform such additional duties as may be required by the council.
F. Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the town may stop and detain a person as is
reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of any provision of
this code, and to serve a copy of a complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation of
this code.
Section 4-1-6 Answering Calls Outside the Town
The members of the police department of the town are duly authorized to answer calls for aid
and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town pursuant to mutual aid agreements and
state statutes.
ARTICLE 4-2 CONTRACT FOR POLICE PROTECTION
In lieu of establishing a police department, the town may enter into an intergovernmental
agreement or contract for the provision of police protection.
Revised June 2015
CHAPTER 5 MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 5-1 MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION
There is hereby established in the town a municipal court which shall have jurisdiction of
all violations of this code, and jurisdiction concurrently with justices of the peace of
precincts in which the town is located of violation of laws of the state committed within
the limits of the town. The court shall be known as the Queen Creek Municipal Court
and may be located either within or without the corporate limits of the town.
ARTICLE 5-2 PRESIDING OFFICER
5-2-1 Judge
5-2-2 Powers and Duties of Presiding Judge
5-2-3 Hearing Officers
Section 5-2-1 Judge
The presiding officer of the municipal court shall be the presiding judge who shall be
appointed by the council for a two-year term. During such term, the magistrate may
only be removed for cause.
Section 5-2-2 Powers and Duties of Presiding Judge
The powers and duties of the presiding judge shall include:
A. The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon judges under the provisions of
the state constitution and statutes, this code and the ordinances and resolutions of
the town.
B. The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and the
proceedings of the court therein.
C. The fixing and receiving of all bonds and bails and receiving all fines, penalties,
fees and other monies as provided by law.
D. The payment of all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by the court to
the treasurer.
E. The submission of a periodic report to the council summarizing court activities for
specified period.
F. The preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not involving the death of a
person, listing a suggested bail for each violation.
Rev. June 2015
G. The designation of a deputy other than a law enforcement officer and a specific
location at which the deputy shall, during hours when the court is not open, set the
amount of bail in accordance with the foregoing schedule and collect such bail, or
accept proper bail bonds in lieu thereof, for and on behalf of the court.
H. The preparation of a schedule of civil traffic violations listing a specific deposit for
each violation. The presiding judge shall designate a person, a specific location
and the hours which such person will be at the location to accept proper deposits
for civil traffic violations for and on behalf of the court.
I. The provision of such associate or substitute judges to perform duties in the
absence of the presiding judge.
J. The magistrate shall serve as juvenile hearing officer if appointed by the presiding
judge of the juvenile court for Maricopa County.
Section 5-2-3 Hearing Officers
The town council may appoint one or more hearing officers to preside over civil traffic
violation cases when the appointment of such hearing officers is deemed necessary to
assure prompt disposition of civil traffic violation cases. Hearing officers may hear and
dispose of civil traffic violation cases under supervision of the presiding officer of the
Queen Creek Municipal Court which are appealable to the Superior Court pursuant to
the Arizona Revised Statutes.
ARTICLE 5-3 PROCEEDINGS OF COURT
A. The municipal court proceedings shall be commenced by complaint under oath
and in the name of the state setting forth the offense charged with and such
particulars of time, place person and property as to enable the defendant to
understand distinctly the character of the offense complained of and to answer the
complaint.
B. If the presiding judge is satisfied that the offense complained of has been
committed by the person charged, he shall issue a summons or a warrant of
arrest. Before issuing a summons or warrant of arrest on a complaint, the
presiding judge may subpoena and examine witnesses as to the truth of the
complaint.
MUNICIPAL COURT
Rev. June 2015
ARTICLE 5-4 COURT CLERK
The town council may by intergovernmental agreement provide for the use of an
existing court clerk who shall perform all of the duties of a court clerk subject to the
overall supervision of the presiding judge.
ARTICLE 5-5 TOWN PROSECUTOR
The town attorney shall serve as the town prosecutor and will represent the state or the
town in all contested matters and in all other matters where representation is requested
or required by the town council, the presiding judge or by law.
ARTICLE 5-6 CIVIL HEARING OFFICER1
A Civil Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Town Manager and may hear all civil
code infractions and make such orders as may be proper and necessary to dispose of
such cases. Such cases shall be heard without a jury. The Civil Hearing Officer shall
adopt such local rules of procedure as may be necessary to implement the hearing of
civil code infraction cases. The Civil Hearing Officer shall be the person with authority
to hear complaints related to violations and to issue penalties for violations of Chapter
10, Health and Sanitation and for violations of the Zoning Ordinance.
1 Ordinance 566-15
ARTICLE 5-7 CIVIL CODE INFRACTIONS
5-7-1 Commencement of Enforcement Action on Civil Code Infraction
5-7-2 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance
5-7-3 Remedies Not Exclusive
5-7-4 Compatibility With Other Regulations
Section 5-7-1 Commencement of Enforcement Action on Civil Code Infraction
A. A civil code infraction means all violations of the Town Code designated as
civil violations or such violations that are not designated as a petty offense,
misdemeanor or civil traffic violation.
B. An enforcement action on a civil code infraction shall be commenced by the
filing of a complaint with the Town Civil Hearing Officer, on a form approved by
the Town Attorney, or on a Uniform Arizona Traffic Ticket and Complaint, as
specified in the Arizona Rules of Procedure in civil traffic violation cases. The
complaint form shall be in at least triplicate, in dimensions of approximately 8-
1/2 inches by 11 inches, consisting of the original complaint, violator or
defendant copy, and enforcement copy. The complaint form shall contain a
notice of hearing specifying a location, date, and time at least ten (10) days
following issuance of the complaint, at which the defendant shall appear to
admit or deny the allegations contained therein. The complaint shall
MUNICIPAL COURT
Rev. June 2015
specifically identify the defendant, the date and time of the alleged civil code
infraction(s), the location of the alleged civil code infraction(s), and the civil
code infraction(s) alleged by the town code or ordinance section number and
description. The complaint shall be signed by the complainant or Enforcement
Officer, who shall certify, under penalty of perjury, that he or she has
reasonable grounds to believe that the named defendant committed the civil
code infractions described in the complaint and that a copy of the complaint
has been served on the defendant pursuant to this section.
C. The complaint and notice of hearing may be served upon the defendant and
will be deemed proper and complete by any of the following means:
1. By having the defendant(s) sign the complaint with an
acknowledgement of receipt of a copy thereof;
2. By hand delivery to the person or persons listed on the complaint;
3. By certified mail with return receipt, addressed to the person or persons
listed on the complaint; or
4. By any means authorized in the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
D. Where the defendant is a corporation, partnership, or association the words
Defendant or Person in subdivisions C(1), (2), (3) and (4) above shall mean a
partner, an officer, a managing organization agent, or any other agent of such
entity.
E. Any town official or employee with responsibility to enforce or administer the
particular area of the town code or a town ordinance for which the enforcement
action is brought, including the Town Attorney, Town Prosecutor or any peace
officer, may file an enforcement action on a civil code infraction and may serve
the complaint and notice of hearing in the manner set forth in subdivisions
C(1), (2), (3), or (4) above. The Civil Hearing Officer may enter an award in
favor of the town for the actual costs of service if a civil code infraction is
found, whether or not a civil penalty is assessed.
F. A person served with a notice of hearing for a civil code infraction shall appear
at the time and place set forth in the notice of hearing or may appear prior to
the time and upon the directions contained in the notice of hearing to admit or
deny the allegations of the complaint. Allegations not denied at the time of
appearance are deemed admitted.
G. If the allegations are admitted, the Civil Hearing Officer shall enter judgment
for the Town and may impose a civil sanction and costs of service against the
defendant. The Civil Hearing Officer shall also order the abatement of the civil
code infraction, unless it has been abated by the date of a finding of
responsibility therefore.
H. If the defendant(s) denies any allegations contained in the complaint, the Civil
MUNICIPAL COURT
Rev. June 2015
Hearing Officer shall set the matter for a civil code infraction hearing. Civil
code infraction hearings shall be informal and held without a jury, and the
Town is required to prove the violation charged by a preponderance of the
evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply in such hearings, except
for rules concerning relevancy and privileged communications. If the
defendant elects to be represented by counsel, the defendant shall so notify
the Civil Hearing Officer. The Town may also be represented by the Town
Attorney or Town Prosecutor. Hearings shall be electronically recorded by the
Civil Hearing Officer. If the Civil Hearing Officer finds in favor of the defendant,
the Civil Hearing Officer shall enter an order denying the complaint. If the Civil
Hearing Officer finds in favor of the Town, the Civil Hearing Officer shall enter
judgment for the Town and may impose a civil sanction and costs of service
against the defendant. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense punishable as herein provided. In addition to any monetary civil
sanction, the Civil Hearing Officer shall also order the abatement of the civil
code infraction, unless it has been abated by the date of entry of such
judgment. The Civil Hearing Officer shall have the authority, within his or her
discretion, to suspend the payment of any civil sanction imposed.
I. If a person served with a complaint and notice of hearing fails to appear on or
before the date and time directed in the notice of hearing, or at such other time
as may be directed by the Civil Hearing Officer, the allegations contained in
the complaint shall be deemed admitted, and the Civil Hearing Officer shall
enter judgment for the Town and may impose a civil sanction and costs of
service against the defendant.
J. In any case involving a civil code infraction relating to the occupancy or use of
land, any interest in such land shall be recordable as a lien upon such land
and shall run with the land. The Town, at its sole option, may record a notice
of civil sanction and abatement order with the Maricopa County Recorder or
Pinal County Recorder, as appropriate, and thereby cause compliance by any
person(s) or entity thereafter acquiring such property. When the property is
brought into compliance by the owner or responsible party, satisfaction of
notice of civil sanction and abatement order shall be filed at the request and
expense of the owner or responsible party. It shall be the property owner’s
responsibility to secure the satisfaction of notice of civil sanction and
abatement order from the Town.
K. Notwithstanding and other provision of this code, any person found to have
violated any provision of this code or amendments thereto, which pursuant to
this section is classified as a civil code infraction, and who has been twice
previously found to have violated such provision within the preceding twenty
four (24) months, shall, in addition to any penalty prescribed for such civil code
infraction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $2,500, by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months,
by a term of probation not to exceed three (3) years, or by an combination of
such fine, imprisonment, and probation.
MUNICIPAL COURT
Rev. June 2015
L. Any person against whom judgment is entered for a civil code infraction, or
against whom a civil sanction is imposed for such infraction, may seek judicial
review of such judgment or sanction by way of special action to the Maricopa
County Superior Court or Pinal County Superior Court, whichever is the proper
venue.
Section 5-7-2 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance
In addition to the enforcement process and penalties provided herein, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a
threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance,
and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil
action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be
taken.
Section 5-7-3 Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion
of the Town to seek cumulative remedies.
The Town may recover all attorneys’ fees, court costs and other expenses associated
with enforcement of this ordinance, including monitoring expenses.
Section 5-7-4 Compatibility with Other Regulations
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective
standards of human health or the environment shall control.
2Ordinance 422-08
1Ordinance 562-15 Rev. 3-2015
CHAPTER 6 ANIMALS
ARTICLE 6-1 GENERAL
6-1-1 Noises
6-1-2 Housing
Section 6-1-1 Noises
It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animals that disturb the peace by unreasonable odors or by
loud noises at any time of the day or night.
Section 6-1-2 Housing
It is unlawful to cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to
become unclean or unwholesome.
ARTICLE 6-2 RABIES/ANIMAL CONTROL LEASH LAW1
6-2-1 Definitions
6-2-2 Powers and Duties of the State Veterinarian and the
Livestock Board
6-2-3 Powers and Duties of State Department of Health Services
6-2-4 Powers and Duties of Enforcement Agent
6-2-5 License Fees for Dogs; Issuance of Dog Tags; Records; Penalties;
Classification
6-2-6 Kennel Permit; Fee; Violation; Classification
6-2-7 Anti-Rabies Vaccination; Vaccination and License Stations
6-2-8 Rabies Control Fund
6-2-9 Dogs Not Permitted at Large; Wearing License
6-2-10 Establishment of Pounds; Impounding and Disposing of Dogs and
Cats; Reclaiming Impounded Dogs and Cats; Pound Fees
6-2-11 Handling of Biting Animals; Responsibility for Reporting
Animal Bites; Petition for Determination of Vicious Animals; Authority to
Euthanize Animals
6-2-12 Criminal Complaints
6-2-13 Unlawful Interference with Enforcement Agent
6-2-14 Removing Impounded Animals
6-2-15 Unlawful Keeping of Dogs
6-2-16 Violation; Classification
6-2-17 Dogs; Liability
6-2-18 Confinement of Animals in Motor Vehicles
6-2-19 Sterilization of Impounded Dogs and Cats; Definition
6-2-20 Proper Care, Maintenance and Destruction of Impounded Animals
Rev. 3-2015
Section 6-2-1 Definitions
In this article unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Animal" means any animal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except man.
B. "At large" means on or off premises of the owner and not under control of the owner or
other person acting for the owner. Any dog in a suitable enclosure which actually confines
the dog shall not be considered to be running at large.
C. "Collar" means a band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the neck of a dog
to which a county license can be affixed.
D. "County animal shelter" means any establishment authorized for the confinement,
maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs and other animals that come into the
custody of the enforcement agent in the performance of his official duties.
E. "Department" means the state department of health services.
F. "Dog" means a member of the Canis Familiaris family.
G. "Enforcement agent" means that person in each county who is responsible for the
enforcement of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
H. "Humane officer" means the enforcement agent or the designated deputy.
I. "Impound" means the act of taking or receiving into custody by the enforcement agent any
dog or other animal for the purpose of confinement in an authorized county animal shelter
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
J. "Kennel" means an enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals, in which a
person keeps, harbors or maintains dogs under controlled conditions.
K. "Livestock" means neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules and asses.
L. "Owner" means any person keeping an animal other than livestock for more than six
consecutive days.
M. "Rabies quarantine area" means any area in which a state of emergency has been
declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent to this area.
N. "Rabies vaccination certificate" means a method of recording and duplicating rabies
information that is in compliance with the county enforcement agent's licensing system
and/or county enforcement agent's prescribed forms.
O. "Stray dog" means any dog running at large that is not wearing a valid license tag.
P. "Vaccination" means the administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to animals by a
veterinarian or in authorized county animal shelter by employees trained by a veterinarian.
Rev. 3-2015
Q. "Veterinarian", unless otherwise indicated, means any veterinarian licensed to practice in
this state or any veterinarian employed in this state by a governmental agency.
R. "Veterinary hospital" means any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed to
practice in this state that provides clinical facilities and houses animals or birds for dental,
medical or surgical treatment. A veterinary hospital may have adjacent to it or in
conjunction with it, or as an integral part of it, pens, stalls, cages or kennels for quarantine,
observation or boarding.
S. "Vicious animal" means any animal other than an animal used by law enforcement
agency, that:
1. has a propensity to bite, scratch or otherwise inflict injury on a human being without
provocation. One incident of causing injury may be sufficient to establish a
propensity; or
2. has a propensity to approach human beings without provocation in a menacing or
terrorizing manner so as to confine the movement of or instill fear in a reasonable
person and;
3. is declared vicious after a hearing before a justice of the peace or a town magistrate.
Section 6-2-2 Powers and Duties of the State Veterinarian and the Livestock Board
A. The state veterinarian shall designate the type or types of anti-rabies vaccines that may
be used for vaccination of animals, the period of time between vaccination and
revaccination and the dosage and method of administration of the vaccine.
B. The Arizona Livestock Board shall regulate the handling and disposition of animals
classed as livestock that have been bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal or are
showing symptoms suggestive of rabies.
Section 6-2-3 Powers and Duties of State Department of Health Services
A. The state department of health services shall regulate the handling and disposition of
animals other than livestock that have been bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal or
are showing symptoms suggestive of rabies.
B. The state department of health services may require the enforcement agent to submit a
record of all dog licenses issued and in addition any information deemed necessary to aid
in the control of rabies.
Rev. 3-2015
Section 6-2-4 Powers and Duties of Enforcement Agent
A. The enforcement agent:
1. Shall enforce the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
2. May issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this article and the
regulations promulgated thereunder. The procedure for the issuance of notices to
appear shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903, except that the
enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before issuing the notice.
3. Shall be responsible for declaring a rabies quarantine area within area of jurisdiction.
When a quarantine area has been declared, the enforcement agent shall meet with
the state veterinarian and representatives from the department of health services
and the game and fish department to implement an emergency program for the
control of rabies within the area. Any regulations restricting or involving movements
of livestock within the area shall be subject to approval by the state veterinarian.
B. The issuance of citations pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of
A.R.S. § 13-3899.
C. The enforcement agent may designate deputies.
Section 6-2-51 License Fees for Dogs; Issuance of Dog Tags; Records; Penalties;
Classification
A. The council shall set an annual license fee which shall be paid for each dog three months
of age or over that is kept, harbored or maintained within the boundaries of the town for at
least thirty consecutive days of each calendar year. License fees shall become payable at
the discretion of the council. The licensing period shall not exceed the period of time for
revaccination as designated by the state veterinarian. License fees shall be paid within
ninety days. A penalty fee of two dollars shall be paid if the license application is made
less than one year subsequent to the date on which the dog is required to be licensed
under this article. If the license application is made one year or later from the date on
which the dog is required to be licensed, an additional penalty fee of ten dollars shall be
paid for each subsequent year up to a maximum of twenty-two dollars. This penalty shall
not be assessed against applicants who furnish adequate proof that the dog to be
licensed has been in their possession less than thirty consecutive days.
B. Durable dog tags shall be provided. Each dog licensed under the terms of this article
shall receive, at the time of licensing, such a tag on which shall be inscribed the name of
the county, the number of the license and the date on which it expires. The tag shall be
attached to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the dog at all times while not in a
confined, secure area or as otherwise provided in this article. Whenever a dog tag is lost,
a duplicate tag shall be issued upon application by the owner and payment of a fee to the
enforcement agent.
1Amended by Ordinance 270-03
C. License fees may be lower for dogs permanently incapable of procreation. An applicant
Rev. 3-2015
for a license for a dog claimed to be incapable of procreation shall furnish adequate proof
satisfactory to the enforcement agent that such dog has been surgically altered to be
permanently incapable of procreation.
D. Any person who fails within fifteen days after written notification from the enforcement
agent to obtain a license for a dog required to be licensed, counterfeits or attempts to
counterfeit an official dog tag, or removes such tag from any dog for the purpose of willful
and malicious mischief or places a dog tag upon a dog unless the tag was issued for that
particular dog is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
Section 6-2-6 Kennel Permit; Fee; Violation; Classification
A. A person operating a kennel shall obtain a license issued by the county enforcement
agent of the county where the kennel is located except if each individual dog is licensed.
B. The kennel will be in compliance with the county and town health and zoning ordinances
and regulations before authorization is issued. The premises will be inspected by the
county enforcement agent.
C. Applicant must have written authorization from local authorities to have kennel in area
requested. This must accompany the application fee.
D. The annual fee for the kennel license is set by Maricopa County.
E. All dogs in the kennel four months and over shall be properly vaccinated for rabies by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in Arizona pursuant to this article.
F. A dog remaining within the kennel is not required to be licensed individually under A.R.S.
§ 24-367. A dog leaving the controlled kennel conditions shall be licensed under A.R.S. §
24-367, except if the dog is only being transported to another kennel which has a license
issued under this section.
G. A person who fails to obtain a kennel license under this section is subject to a penalty of
twenty-five dollars in addition to the annual fee.
H. A person who knowingly fails to obtain a kennel license within thirty days after written
notification from the county enforcement agent is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
I. The kennel will be constructed and maintained according to county health regulations.
Section 6-2-7 Anti-Rabies Vaccination; Vaccination and License Stations
A. Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present a vaccination certificate
signed by a veterinarian stating the owner's name and address and giving the dog's
description, date of vaccination, and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine
used, and date revaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate
issued shall be transmitted to the enforcement agent on or
Rev. 3-2015
before the tenth day of the month following the month during which the dog was
vaccinated. No dog shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with the
provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. A dog vaccinated in any other state prior to entry into Arizona may be licensed in Arizona
provided that, at the time of licensing, the owner of such dog presents a vaccination
certificate, signed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state or a veterinarian
employed by a governmental agency in that state, stating the owner's name and address
and giving the dog's description, date of vaccination, and type, manufacturer and serial
number of the vaccine used. The vaccination must be in conformity with the provisions of
this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
C. The enforcement agent shall make provisions for vaccination clinics as deemed
necessary. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian.
Section 6-2-8 Rabies Control Fund
A. The enforcement agent or his authorized representative shall place the monies collected
by him under the provisions of this article in a special fund to be known as the rabies
control fund to be used for the enforcement of the provisions of this article and the
regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. Any unencumbered balance remaining in the rabies control fund at the end of a fiscal year
shall be carried over into the following fiscal year.
Section 6-2-9 Dogs Not Permitted at Large; Wearing License1
A. No dogs shall be permitted at large. Each dog shall be confined within an enclosure on
the owner's property, or secured so that a dog is confined entirely to the owner's property,
or on a leash not to exceed six feet in length and directly under the owner's control when
not on the owner's property.
B. Any dog over the age of three months on or off the premises of the owner and not under
physical control of the owner or persons acting for the owner, or any dog not in a suitable
enclosure which actually confines the dog, shall wear a collar or harness to which is
attached a valid license tag. Any dog over the age of three months on the premises of the
owner and either confined or under physical control of the owner or persons acting for the
owner need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license tag attached provided that
they are properly vaccinated, licensed and in compliance with all sections of this
ordinance. Dogs used for control of livestock or while being used or trained for hunting, or
dogs while being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event, or dogs while engaged in
races approved by the Arizona Racing Commission, and such dogs while being
transported to and from such events, need not wear a collar or harness with a valid
license attached provided that they are properly vaccinated, licensed and controlled.
C. If any dog is at large on the public streets, public parks or public property, then said dog's
owner or custodian is in violation of this article.
1Amended by Ordinance 270-03
Rev. 3-2015
D. Any person whose dog is at large is in violation of this article. A dog is not at large if:
1. Said dog is restrained by a leash, chain, rope or cord of not more than six feet in
length and of sufficient strength to control action of said dog.
2. Said dog is used for control of livestock, or while being used or trained for hunting, or
being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event or while engaged in races approved
by the Arizona Racing Commission.
3. While said dog is actively engaged in dog obedience training, accompanied by and
under the control of his owner or trainer, provided that the person training said dog
has in his possession a dog leash of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient
strength to control said dog, and further, that said dog is actually enrolled in or has
graduated from a dog obedience training school.
4. Said dog whether on or off the premises of the owner, or person acting for the
owner, is controlled as provided in paragraph 1 of this subsection or is within a
suitable enclosure which actually confines the dog.
E. The owner or persons acting for the owner of a dog is responsible for the acts and
conduct of the dog at all times when the dog is in a public park. All dogs three months of
age or older in or upon the premises of a public park must be currently licensed and shall
wear a collar or harness to which is attached a valid license tag.
F. The owner or persons acting for the owner of a dog must restrain and control the dog at
all times when in a public park by securing the dog with a leash of not more than six feet
in length, except when the dog is in an enclosed area within the park, which has been
designated by the (county/municipality) as a dog exercise area.
G. At all times when a dog is off leash in a designated dog exercise area as provided in
subsection F of this section, the dog must be accompanied by and under control of the
owner or persons acting for the owner. Additionally, the owner or persons acting for the
owner must at all times, have a leash of not more than six feet in length in his or her
possession.
H. At all times when a dog is off leash and participating in a dog show, exhibition or
obedience class as provided in subsection D of this section:
1. the dog must be accompanied by and under control of it’s owner or persons acting
for the owner or trainer or handler, who must at all times have a leash in his or her
possession; and
2. the owner or persons acting for the owner or trainer or handler or authorized
representative of a club or organization to whom a permit has been issued, shall
have the permit on their person at all times and shall present the permit for
inspection upon request, to any police officer or authorized member of the public
parks staff or enforcement agent.
I. Any dog at large shall be apprehended and impounded by an enforcement agent.
1. Said agent shall have the right to enter upon private property when it is necessary to
do so in order to apprehend any dog that has been running at large. Such entrance
upon private property shall be in reasonable pursuit of such dog and shall not include
Rev. 3-2015
entry into a domicile or enclosure which confines a dog unless it be at the invitation
of the occupant.
2. Said agent may issue a citation to the dog owner when the dog is at large. The
procedure for the issuance of notice to appear shall be as provided for peace officers
in A.R.S. § 13-3903, except the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before
issuing the notice. The issuance of citations pursuant to this article shall be subject
to provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899. In lieu of issuing a citation, a report may be
submitted to the county attorney or town prosecutor.
3. In the judgment of the enforcement agent, if any dog at large or other animal that is
dangerous or fierce and a threat to human safety cannot be safely impounded, it
may be slain.
4. Any dog impounded under this section may be kept impounded until there is a final
disposition of any criminal complaint arising from the alleged violation of this section,
provided that the criminal compliant is filed within thirty days of the alleged violation.
J. Penalties
1. A violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
2. A second violation of this section within twenty-four months shall be punishable by
fine of not less than one hundred dollars.
3. A third or subsequent violation of this section within twenty-four months shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars.
4. Any violation of this section when the dog has previously been determined to be
vicious pursuant to this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five
hundred dollars and imprisonment for a term of not less than five days.
1Ordinance 562-15 Rev. 3-2015
5. In no case shall a person convicted of violating this section be eligible for suspension
or commutation of sentence unless such person is placed on probation with the
condition that the minimum fine be paid and term of imprisonment be served.
Section 6-2-10 Establishment of Pounds; Impounding and Disposing of Dogs and
Cats; Reclaiming Impounded Dogs and Cats; Pound Fees
A. Any stray dog shall be impounded. All dogs and cats impounded shall be given proper
care and maintenance.
B. Each stray dog or any cat impounded shall be kept and maintained at the county animal
shelter for a minimum of seventy-two hours unless claimed by its owner. Any person may
purchase such a dog or cat upon expiration of the impoundment period, provided such
person pays all fees and complies with the licensing and vaccination provisions of this
article. If the dog or cat is not claimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement
agent shall take possession and may place the dog or cat for sale or may dispose of the
dog or cat in a humane manner. The enforcement agent may destroy impounded sick or
injured dogs or cats whenever such destruction is necessary to prevent such dog or cat
from suffering or to prevent the spread of disease.
C. Any impounded licensed dog or any cat may be reclaimed by its owner or such owner's
agent, provided that the person reclaiming the dog or cat furnishes proof of right to do so
and pays all county animal shelter fees. If the dog or cat is not reclaimed within the
impoundment period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog
or cat for sale or may dispose of the dog or cat in a humane manner. Any person
purchasing such dog or cat shall pay all pound fees.
Section 6-2-11 Handling of Biting Animals; Responsibility for Reporting Animal
Bites; Petition for Determination of Vicious Animals; Authority to
Euthanize Animals1
A. An unlicensed or unvaccinated dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and
quarantined in a county animal shelter or, upon request of and at the expense of the
owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than seven days. A dog properly
licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this article that bites any person may be confined at
the home of the owner or wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with the consent
of and in a manner prescribed by an authorized Maricopa County Animal Control
Enforcement Agent (the “Enforcement Agenda”).
B. Any animal other than a dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and
quarantined in a county animal shelter or, upon the request of and at the expense of the
owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than fourteen days, provided that
livestock shall be confined and quarantined for the fourteen day period in a manner
regulated by the Arizona Livestock Board. If the animal is a caged rodent, it may be
confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or where it is harbored or maintained,
for the required period of time, with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the
Enforcement Agent.
Rev. 3-2015
C. Any wild animal which bites any person may be euthanized and submitted to the
enforcement agent or his deputies for transmission to an appropriate diagnostic
laboratory.
D. Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the Enforcement
Agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge.
E. If an Enforcement Agenda has investigated and determined that there is probable cause
to believe that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the aggrieved victim (or
guardian, if the victim is a minor or disabled person), Supervisor of Maricopa County
Animal Control, The Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office or their designee may file a petition
to have the animal declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The petition must be filed
with the Town of Gilbert Municipal Court in accordance with all established procedures
and policies. The petition shall be a form prescribed by the Town of Gilbert Municipal
Court.
F. The County Enforcement Agent may euthanize any animal confined and quarantined
pursuant to this article prior to the termination of the minimum confinement period for
laboratory examination for rabies if:
1. Such animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies.
2. The owner of such animal consents to its euthanization.
G. Any animal subject to licensing under this article found without a tag identifying its owner
shall be deemed unowned.
H. The County Enforcement Agent shall euthanize a vicious animal upon an order of a
Justice of the Peace or a Town of Queen Creek authorized Magistrate, or the Magistrate
of another jurisdiction serving as the Town of Queen Creek Magistrate, pursuant to an
Intergovernmental Agreement (the “Queen Creek Magistrate”). A Justice of the Peace or
Town of Queen Creek Magistrate may issue such an order after notice to the owner, if
any, and a hearing.
H. Any animal impounded under this section may be kept impounded until there is a final
disposition of any criminal complaint arising from the alleged violation of this section,
provided that the criminal complaint is filed within thirty days of the alleged violation.
Section 6-2-12 Criminal Complaints
Any animal impounded under this article may be kept impounded until there is a final disposition
of the criminal complaint arising from the alleged violation of this article provided that the
criminal complaint is filed within thirty days of the alleged violation.
1Ordinance 562-15 Rev. 3-2015
Section 6-2-13 Unlawful Interference with Enforcement Agent
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the enforcement agent in the performance of his
duties.
Section 6-2-14 Removing Impounded Animals
No person may remove or attempt to remove an animal which has been impounded or which is
in the possession of the enforcement agent except in accordance with the provisions of this
article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
Section 6-2-15 Unlawful Keeping of Dogs
It is unlawful for a person to keep, harbor or maintain a dog within the town except as provided
by the terms of this article.
Section 6-2-16 Violation; Classification
Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this article, or violates any of its
provisions, is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and may be subject to imprisonment for a
maximum period of six months or fined a maximum of $1000.00 or both.
Section 6-2-17 Dogs; Liability
Injury to any person or damage to any property by a dog while at large shall be the full
responsibility of the dog's owner or person or persons responsible for the dog when such
damages were inflicted.
Section 6-2-18 Confinement of Animals in Motor Vehicles
A. Confining Animals. No person having charge or custody of an animal, as owner or
otherwise, shall place or confine such animal or allow such animal to be placed or
confined or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such a period of time
as may endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to heat, lack of food or drink
or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability
or death.
B. Responsibility of Motor Vehicle Owner. No person having dominion or control over a
motor vehicle, as owner or otherwise, shall place or confine an animal or allow an animal
to be placed or confined or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such
a period of time as may endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to heat, lack
of food or drink or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause
suffering, disability or death.
Rev. 3-2015
C. Exceptions. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the transportation of
horses, cattle, sheep, poultry or other agricultural livestock in trailers or other vehicles
designed and constructed for such purpose.
D. Authority of Peace Officer or Humane Officer. A peace officer or a humane officer who
finds an animal in a motor vehicle in violation of this article may break and enter the motor
vehicle if necessary to remove the animal. The officer removing the animal shall take the
animal to an animal shelter or other place of safekeeping and shall in the event the person
having custody cannot be otherwise contacted, leave in a prominent place in the motor
vehicle a written notice bearing his name and office and the address where the animal
may be claimed by the owner thereof. The animal will be surrendered to the owner if the
owner claims the animal within ten days from the time the animal was removed from the
motor vehicle and pays all reasonable charges that have accrued for the maintenance of
the animal. The person or animal shelter having custody of the animal will make
reasonable efforts to contact the owner and give notice that the animal is in their custody
and may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of the reasonable maintenance
charges. In the event the owner cannot be contacted, or expresses no interest in
reclaiming the animal within three (3) days after contact or efforts to contact, the person or
animal shelter having custody of the animal may dispose of the animal in any reasonably
humane manner.
E. Dogs Riding in Motor Vehicles; Restrictions; Application; Exception.
1. A person driving a motor vehicle on a highway shall not allow a dog to ride in that
portion of the motor vehicle that is open in such a manner which would permit the
dog to jump out of the motor vehicle or to be thrown from the vehicle by acceleration
or stopping of the vehicle or in an accident involving the vehicle.
2. Paragraph 1 of this subsection applies to open areas of a motor vehicle including the
open bed of a truck, the interior of a convertible motor vehicle which has the top
down or removed, the rear storage portion of a station wagon or van with the tailgate
open or the trunk or hatchback portion of a motor vehicle with the trunk or hatchback
open, but paragraph 1 does not apply:
a. If the dog is confined to a cage of adequate construction and design to
prevent its escape from the motor vehicle;
b. to a portion of a motor vehicle which is fully enclosed except for open
windows;
c. to a motor vehicle with an installed means of preventing the dog from being
discharged;
d. if the dog is secured to the motor vehicle in a humane manner which will
prevent the dog from being thrown in the event of an accident or from
escaping from the motor vehicle.
Section 6-2-19 Sterilization of Impounded Dogs and Cats; Definition
A. A dog or cat shall not be released for adoption from a county or town shelter or from an
animal shelter unless either:
1. The dog or cat has been first surgically spayed or neutered.
Rev. 3-2015
2. The adopting party signs an agreement to have the dog or cat spayed or neutered
within thirty days or before sexual maturity and deposits with the pound or shelter an
amount sufficient to ensure that the dog or cat will be sterilized.
B. If the adoption fee includes the cost of spaying or neutering, then no deposit is required.
The amount of the deposit required by subsection A, paragraph 2 of this section shall be
determined by the pound or shelter to be comparable to the lowest fee charged by
veterinarians in the county. The pound or shelter shall refund to the adopting party any
monies deposited pursuant to the agreement if within the time provided in the agreement
there is presented written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that the adopted
dog or cat has been spayed or neutered.
Rev. 3-2015
C. Any deposit monies that are not refunded under subsection A, paragraph 2 of this section
shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Spaying or neutering dogs and cats.
2. Public education to prevent overpopulation of dogs and cats.
3. Costs of confirming that adopted dogs and cats are spayed or neutered.
D. This section does not apply to a county or incorporated town that adopts an ordinance or
resolution for dog and cat sterilization that exceeds the requirements of this section.
E. For purposes of this section, "animal shelter" means a facility that is used or designated
for use to house or contain any dog or cat and that is owned, operated or maintained by a
duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit corporate organization devoted to the welfare,
protection and humane treatment of animals.
Section 6-2-20 Proper Care, Maintenance and Destruction of Impounded Animals
A. Any animal impounded in a county or town shelter shall be given proper and humane care
and maintenance.
B. Any animal destroyed while impounded in a county or town shelter shall be destroyed only
by the use of one of the following:
1. Sodium pentobarbital or a derivative of sodium pentobarbital.
2. Nitrogen gas.
3. T-61 Euthanasia solution or its generic equivalent.
C. If an animal is destroyed by means specified in subsection B, paragraphs 1 or 3 of this
section, it shall be done by a licensed veterinarian or by personnel trained by a
veterinarian.
D. The governing body of any county or town which operates a shelter shall establish
procedures for the humane destruction of impounded animals by the methods described
in subsections B and C of this section.
Rev. 3-2015
ARTICLE 6-3 BEES AND BEE KEEPING1
6-3-1 Definitions
6-3-2 Permits
6-3-3 Requirements
6-3-4 Prohibited Acts
6-3-5 Exceptions
6-3-6 Penalty
6-3-7 Abandoned Hives, Colonies and Apiaries
Section 6-3-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Apiary" means one or more hives or colonies of bees at one location.
B. "Colony" means the inhabitance of the hive including the queen, drones, worker bees and
brood.
C. "Hives" means the domicile of bees including any receptacles or containers inhabited by
bees.
D. "Swarm" means a population of transient bees that have not permanently established
themselves.
Section 6-3-2 Permits
A. Prior to the keeping of any hive, colony or apiary within the limits of the town, all persons
shall be required to obtain a beekeeping license issued by the town clerk. The application
form for the license shall include the name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking the license as well as the name, address and telephone number of the property
owner. If the applicant is other than the property owner, then the application shall also
include written permission of the owner for the use of the property for keeping a hive,
colony or apiary. The form shall also include a drawing of the property indicating the
location for the keeping of the hive, colony or apiary and an acknowledgment that prior to
the placing of the hive, colony or apiary upon the property that an adequate supply of
water is available on the property in close proximity to the hive, colony or apiary.
B. An annual fee of ten dollars shall be charged and collected for the issuance of each
license and a separate license will be required for each separate location at which bee
keeping will occur.
1Ordinance 52-94
Section 6-3-3 Requirements
Rev. 3-2015
A. Any receptacle or container inhabited by bees shall be marked on the outside in such a
manner as to reflect the license number issued by the town.
B. A permanent and adequate water supply must be available on the property at all times
within thirty feet of the hive, colony or apiary.
C. In residential zones classified R-1-35 or smaller, all hives, colonies and apiaries must be
located no closer than thirty feet to any exterior property line. In residential zones
classified R-1-43 or greater and in commercial or industrial zones, the thirty foot limitation
shall only apply along the property line that abuts residential property zoned R-1-35 or
smaller.
Section 6-3-4 Prohibited Acts
The following are prohibited:
A. The keeping of bees whether or not for commercial purposes without first having obtained
a permit.
B. Failure to provide adequate water supply as set forth in Section 6-3-3.
C. Any act or omission the result of which is to allow bees to be kept in such a manner so
that they present a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents.
Section 6-3-5 Exceptions
The provisions of this Article do not apply to any property owner upon whose property a swarm
of transient bees are attempting to or have established a domicile.
Section 6-3-6 Penalty
Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this Article, the first offense shall be punished
as a petty offense and all subsequent convictions within a two year period shall be treated as
class I misdemeanors.
Section 6-3-7 Abandoned Hives, Colonies and Apiaries
Any hive, colony or apiary which does not contain the marking requirements of subsection A of
Section 6-3-3 and the water supply requirement of subsection B of Section 6-3-3 and for which
no permit required by Section 6-3-2 has been issued shall be presumed to be abandoned. The
town upon a complaint may take all action necessary to remove the abandoned hive, colony or
apiary from the property.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
CHAPTER 7 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION 7.1 - ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 7.1.1 - TITLE, SCOPE AND PURPOSE
7.1.1.1 Title. This section shall be known as the Queen Creek Building and Building
Regulations Administrative Code of the Town of Queen Creek, hereinafter referred to as
“This Code”. This Administrative section shall apply to all of the Technical Codes
referenced in 7.1.1.2, except as otherwise noted in this Section 7.1 and Section 7.2. If
there are conflicts between sections, the more restrictive requirement will apply.
7.1.1.2 Scope. The provisions of this Administration section shall serve as the
administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical
codes and other building regulations of the Town as to the prescribed extent of each
such reference. The provisions of “This Code” shall apply to the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings, structures or premises.
The technical codes shall include all of the following codes. The codes and standards
referenced in “This Code” shall be considered part of the requirements of the technical
codes to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
International Building Code, 2012 edition
International Residential Code, 2012 edition
International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition
National Electrical Code, 2011 edition
International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition
International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition,
International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition
International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition
International Urban-Wildland Interface Code, 2012 edition
International Fire Code, 2012 edition
7.1.1.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically adopted.
7.1.1.3 Intent. The purpose of “This Code” is to establish the minimum requirements to
safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength,
means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy
conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the
built environment and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders
during emergency operations.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
The purpose of the code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any
particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or
benefited by the terms of “This Code”. Although the Town’s Building Official or other
designated Town official is directed to obtain substantial compliance with the provisions
of “This Code”, a guarantee that all buildings, structures or utilities have been
constructed in accordance with all the provisions of the code or other ordinances of the
Town of Queen Creek is neither intended nor implied.
7.1.1.4 Technical codes. The technical codes listed in Section 7.1.1.2 and referenced
elsewhere in “This Code” shall be considered part of the requirements of “This Code” to
the prescribed extent of each such reference. Any references to codes other than listed
in 7.1.1.4.1 through 7.1.1.4.11 shall be deleted and the codes listed in 7.1.1.4.1 through
7.1.1.4.11 inserted in lieu thereof. (Example: ICC Electrical Code would be replaced
with National Electrical Code). Any reference to the International Zoning Code shall
mean the current Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance. Where references to
private swimming pools, spas or hot tubs are indicated in “This Code”, it shall be
amended and the requirements shall meet Appendix G of the 2012 International
Residential Code, as amended in Section 7.2.2.
7.1.1.4.1 Building Code. The provisions of the 2012 International Building Code
shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and
demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or
attached to such buildings, structures or premises.
7.1.1.4.2 Residential Code. The provisions of the 2012 International Residential
Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and
demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than
three stories above-grade in height with a separate means of egress and their
accessory structures. Such Dwellings and Townhouses shall be designated as R-3
occupancies.
7.1.1.4.3 Mechanical Code. The provisions of the 2012 International Mechanical
Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of
mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or
appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and
refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.
7.1.1.4.4 Electrical Code. The provisions of the 2011 National Electrical Code shall
apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs,
replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.
7.1.1.4.5 Plumbing Code. The provisions of the 2012 International Plumbing Code
shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing
systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas
system. Any references to a plumbing code or gas code within “This Code” shall
mean the International Plumbing Code or International Fuel gas Code.
7.1.1.4.6 Fuel Gas Code. The provisions of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code
shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances
and related accessories as covered in “This Code”. These requirements apply to gas
piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of
appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas
appliances and related accessories.
7.1.1.4.7 Existing Building Code. The provisions of the 2012 International Existing
Building Code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition
and relocation of existing buildings.
Exception:
Buildings not previously occupied. A building or portion of a building that has not
been previously occupied or used for its intended purpose in accordance with the
laws in existence at the time of its completion shall comply with the provisions of
the International Building Code or International Residential Code, as applicable,
for new construction or with any current permit for such occupancy.
7.1.1.4.8 Energy. The provisions of the 2012 International Energy Conservation
Code shall be applied to all matters governing the design and construction of
buildings for energy efficiency.
7.1.1.4.9 Property Maintenance Code. The provisions of the 2012 International
Property Maintenance Code shall apply to existing structures and premises;
equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire
safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy
of existing premises and structures.
7.1.1.4.10 Urban-Wildland Interface Code. The provisions of the 2012
International Urban-Wildland Interface Code shall apply to the construction,
alteration, movement, repair, maintenance and use of any building, structure or
premises within the wildland-urban interface areas in this jurisdiction.
7.1.1.4.11 Fire Code. The provisions of the 2012 International Fire Code shall apply
to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the
hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures,
materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in
the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension,
repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in
the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.1.5 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms
shall have the meaning as set forth in “This Code”. Definitions located in the technical
codes are hereby incorporated into “This Code”.
Building Official - The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of “This Code” and the technical codes, or duly
authorized representative. When the term or title administrative authority, Building
Official, chief inspector, code enforcement officer, code official, gas official, plumbing
official, mechanical official, responsible official, fire code official, or other similar
designation is used in “This Code” or in any of the technical codes, it shall be construed
to mean the Building Official.
Certificate of Compliance - A document issued by the Building Official indicating
satisfactory compliance of a building or portion of a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system. This certificate can apply to various Town ordinances
and the approved plans, and does not grant authority to occupy the building, structure
or portion thereof prior to the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or a
Certificate of Occupancy.
Certificate of Occupancy - A document issued by the Building Official upon completion
of all required inspections and approval of all requirements associated with the project
whether onsite or offsite. It is a control device employed to ensure that a building is not
used or inhabited until such time as the building official has deemed it safe to do so.
Existing Building or Structure – A building or structure erected prior to the date of
adoption of the code, or one for which a legal Certificate of Occupancy, or Town final
approval, if no Certificate of Occupancy is required, has been issued.
Name of Jurisdiction - Any reference to the Jurisdiction within “This Code” shall mean
the Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
Revisions - Revisions are documents or other data submitted by applicants seeking to
change the approved plans, for which a permit has been issued and remains in force,
such that the scope of the original permit.
R-3 (IRC) Occupancies - Detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not
more than three stories above grade in height with a separate means of egress and
their accessory structures regulated by the International Residential Code for One and
Two-family Dwellings.
R-3 (IBC) Occupancies - Detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses more
than three stories above grade in height with a separate means of egress and their
accessory structures regulated by the International Building Code.
Shell Building - A permitted building or portion of, that when completed, cannot qualify
for a Certificate of Occupancy.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Stand Alone Permits - Stand Alone Permits are those that involve separate plumbing,
mechanical, electrical, fire protection or other work not included in a combination Permit
for a building or structure. Stand Alone fees shall be as indicated in the currently
adopted fee schedule.
Standard Plans - Plans approved and to be used in construction on a repetitive basis.
Standard plans may include options allowing variations to the building design that may
alter the interior and exterior appearance.
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy - A Certificate that is intended to acknowledge that
some of the building features may not be completed even though the building is safe, or
that a portion of the building can be safely occupied while work continues in another
area. Temporary Certificates would be issued only when incidental construction
remains, such as site work that is not necessary for the safety of people, whether
employees or the general public. This Certificate precludes the occupancy of the
building or structure that does not contain all of the required fire protection systems and
means of egress.
SECTION 7.1.2 - APPLICABILITY
7.1.2.1 General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of “This Code” specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive
shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall apply.
7.1.2.2 Other laws. The provisions of “This Code” shall not be deemed to nullify any
provisions of local, state or federal law.
7.1.2.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to
provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such
chapter, section or provision of the specific code.
7.1.2.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
“This Code” shall be considered part of the requirements of “This Code” to the
prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions
of “This Code” and referenced codes and standards, the more restrictive code shall
apply.
7.1.2.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of “This Code” is held
to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the
other parts or provisions.
7.1.2.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy and any electrical, plumbing,
mechanical or fire system of any structure existing on the date of adoption of “This
Code” shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
“This Code”, the International Property Maintenance Code or the International Fire
Code, or as is deemed necessary by the Building Official for the general safety and
welfare of the occupants and the public.
It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupancy of any structure that will
subject the structure to any provision of “This Code” without approval of the Building
Official. The Building Official shall verify that such structure meets the intent of the
provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy and
that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety
or welfare.
7.1.2.7 Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations, renovations or
repairs to any mechanical, plumbing or electrical system shall conform to that required
for a new system without requiring the existing system to comply with all the
requirements of “This Code”. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing
system to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded.
Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing systems shall be
permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided that
such repairs or replacement are not hazardous and are approved by the Building
Official.
7.1.2.8 Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, premises,
system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by
“This Code” shall be determined by the Building Official.
SECTION 7.1.3 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
7.1.3.1 General. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of “This Code”. The Building Official shall have the authority to render
interpretations of “This Code” and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in
compliance with the intent and purpose of “This Code”. Such policies and procedures
shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in “This Code”.
7.1.3.2 Applications and permits. The Building Official shall receive applications,
review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, alteration, demolition
and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits
have been issued, and enforce compliance with the provisions of “This Code” and other
laws and ordinances of the jurisdiction.
7.1.3.3 Notices and orders. The Building Official shall issue all necessary notices or
orders to ensure compliance with “This Code” and other laws and ordinances of the
jurisdiction to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.3.4 Inspections. The Building Official shall make all of the required inspections, or
the Building Official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified
by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The
Building Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to
report upon unusual technical issues that arise.
7.1.3.5 Identification. The Building Official shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under “This Code”.
7.1.3.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the
provisions of “This Code”, or where the Building Official has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary
to or in violation of “This Code”, and other laws and ordinances of the jurisdiction to the
prescribed extent of each such reference, which makes the structure or premises
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official is authorized to enter the structure
or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by “This
Code” and other laws and ordinances of the jurisdiction to the prescribed extent of each
such reference, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials
be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is
unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner
or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry.
If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by
law to secure entry.
7.1.3.7 Records. The Building Official shall keep official records of applications
received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and
notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the
period required for retention of public records.
7.1.3.8 Liability. The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals or Town
employee charged with the enforcement of “This Code”, while acting for the jurisdiction
in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by “This Code”
or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and
is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property
as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed
by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of
“This Code” shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate shall not be
liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of “This Code”.
7.1.3.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices
approved by the Building Official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with
such approval.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.3.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet
the requirements of “This Code” for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and
devices shall not be reused unless approved by the Building Official.
7.1.3.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of “This Code” or other pertinent law or ordinance, the Building
Official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon
application of the owner or owner’s representative and appropriate fees paid, provided
the Building Official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of
“This Code” or other pertinent law or ordinance impractical and the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of “This Code” and other pertinent law or
ordinance and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire
safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be
recorded and entered in accordance with Section 7.1.3.7.
7.1.3.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and
equipment. The provisions of “This Code” are not intended to prevent the installation of
any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically
prescribed by “This Code”, provided that any such alternative has been approved and
the appropriate fees have been paid. An alternative material, design or method of
construction shall be approved where the Building Official finds that the proposed
design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of “This Code”, and
that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in “This Code” in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability and safety.
7.1.3.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the
approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in “This Code”, shall
consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
7.1.3.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of “This Code”, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to
the requirements of “This Code”, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative
materials or methods, the Building Official shall have the authority to require tests as
evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods
shall be as specified in “This Code” or by other recognized test standards. In the
absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the Building Official shall
approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
Reports of such tests shall be retained by the Building Official for the period required
for retention of public records.
7.1.3.12 Occupancy Violations. When a building, structure, premises or building
service equipment regulated by “This Code”, the technical codes, or any other
regulation within the jurisdiction is being used contrary to the provisions of “This Code”,
or the technical codes, the Building Official may order such use discontinued by written
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall,
after receipt of notice, discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the Building
Official and make the building, structure, premises, or portion thereof, comply with the
requirements of such codes.
7.1.3.13 Authority to Disconnect Utilities. In case of emergency, the Building Official
or authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect a utility service or
energy supplied to the building, structure, premise or building service equipment therein
regulated by “This Code” or the technical codes where necessary to eliminate an
immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall whenever possible
notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or building
service equipment of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action, and shall
notify such utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure, premise or building
service equipment, in writing, of such disconnection immediately thereafter.
7.1.3.14 Unsafe Structures And Equipment
7.1.3.14.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment or systems that are or
hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of
egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or
are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or
improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe
condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the
Building Official deems necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant
structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
7.1.3.14.2 Record. The Building Official shall cause a report to be filed on an
unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the
nature of the unsafe condition.
7.1.3.14.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the Building Official shall serve on
the owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a written notice that describes
the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to
be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be
demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus
notified to declare immediately to the Building Official acceptance or rejection of the
terms of the order.
7.1.3.14.4 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a
copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally; (b) sent by certified or
registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with the return
receipt requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law. If
the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered,
a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
owner’s agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute
service of notice upon the owner.
7.1.3.14.5 Restoration. The structure, premise or equipment determined to be
unsafe by the Building Official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the
extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a change of occupancy
occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions or
change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of “This Code” to the
prescribed extent of each such reference.
SECTION 7.1.4 - PERMITS
7.1.4.1 Permit Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or
structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by
“This Code”, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the
Building Official and obtain the required permit.
Exception:
Entities that are, as a matter of law, immune from having to obtain a permit are exempt
from the requirement to obtain permits unless agreed to in writing by both parties.
7.1.4.1.1 Annual permit. In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an
already approved electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing installation, the Building
Official is authorized to issue an annual permit upon application therefore to any
person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more qualified trade persons
in the building, structure or on the premises owned or operated by the applicant for
the permit. The Annual Facilities Permit fees shall be as indicated within the
currently adopted Permit Fee Schedule. The Building Official may develop a
process and procedures for Annual Permits. The Building Official may suspend or
revoke an Annual Facilities Permit when the facility fails to comply with any of the
responsibilities of any provisions of “This Code” or the processes and procedures
stipulated by the Building Official.
7.1.4.1.2 Annual permit records. The person to whom an annual permit is issued
shall keep a detailed record of alterations made under such annual permit. The
Building Official shall have access to such records at all times or such records shall
be filed with the Building Official as designated. Annual Facilities Permit is not
transferable.
7.1.4.1.3 Compliance with Other Town Code Provisions, When Required.
Building permits for construction of residences in new subdivisions shall not be
issued until installation of all utilities, streets and other offsite improvements have
been completed and accepted by the Town, except in those instances where the
Building Official or a duly authorized representative, determines that phasing of
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
utilities, streets and other selected offsite improvements are acceptable. When such
phasing is desired, the utilities, streets, and other offsite improvements to be phased
shall be approved in accordance with all Town-adopted Codes and Ordinances.
7.1.4.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of “This
Code” shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of “This Code” or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
7.1.4.2.1 International Building Code and the International Residential Code.
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200
square feet.
2. Fences not over 7 feet high unless required by any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction.
3. Oil derricks.
4. Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the
bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or
impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.
5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000
gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2
to 1.
6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent
grade and not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an
accessible route.
7. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
9. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 Single Family Dwelling
occupancies which are less than 18 inches (457 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000
gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.
10. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not
including service systems.
11.Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one and two
family dwellings.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
12. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than
54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.
13. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1773 mm) in
height.
14. Flag poles and light poles not over 35 feet (10.67 m) in height.
15. Window replacement with same style window in same opening. Egress
requirements must be maintained.
7.1.4.2.2 International Mechanical Code.
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation equipment.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment
regulated by “This Code”.
5. Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds or less of refrigerant
and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower or less.
8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and
are not interconnected to a power grid.
7.1.4.2.3 National Electrical Code.
1. Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a cord or
cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved receptacle
when the cord or cable is permitted by the adopted National Electrical Code.
2. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles.
3. The provisions of “This Code” shall not apply to electrical equipment used for
radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a
power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
4. Installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
5. Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers, overcurrent devices,
electrodes, transformers or approved appliances of the same type and rating in
the same location.
6. Listed cord and plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
7. Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, contactor or control
device.
8. Reinstallation of plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefore.
9. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less
than 27 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.
10.The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets.
11.Low-energy power, control and signal circuits of Class II and Class III as defined
by the Electrical Code.
12.Installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment or the
generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the
operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a public or private utility
in the exercise of its function as a serving utility.
13.Installation of temporary portable generators for special events.
7.1.4.2.4 International Plumbing Code.
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however,
that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes
defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new
material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be
obtained and inspection made as provided in “This Code”.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and
the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not
involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
3. Replacement of electric water heating appliances of equal or less amperage
rating and minor modification to electrical, mechanical, and plumbing connections
necessary to serve the new appliance.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
4. Replacement of electric air-handling units, appliances, furnaces, and log lighters
of equal or less amperage rating, and minor modification to electrical, mechanical,
and plumbing connections necessary to serve the new appliance.
5. Replacement of electric heaters, overhead radiant heaters, freestanding heaters,
overhead heaters, of equal or less amperage rating, and minor modification to
electrical, mechanical, and plumbing connections necessary to serve the new
appliance. Any appliance or appurtenances equipped with required fire detection,
fire notification or fire suppression systems will require a permit and inspections.
6. Water softeners.
7.1.4.2.5 International Fuel Gas Code.
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
make such equipment unsafe.
3. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and
are not interconnected to a power grid.
4. Replacement of gas water heating appliances of equal or less BTU/CFH rating
and minor modification to electrical, mechanical, and plumbing connections
necessary to serve the new appliance.
5. Replacement of gas pool and spa heating appliances of equal or less BTU/CFH
rating, and minor modification to electrical, mechanical, and plumbing
connections necessary to serve the new appliance.
6. Replacement of gas air-conditioning units, direct-vented appliances, furnaces,
and log lighters of equal or less BTU/CFH rating, and minor modification to
electrical, mechanical, and plumbing connections necessary to serve the new
appliance.
7. Replacement of gas unit heaters, overhead radiant heaters, vented freestanding
heaters, vented overhead heaters, direct gas-fired make-up air heaters, industrial
air heaters, and furnaces of equal or less BTU/CFH rating, and minor
modification to electrical, mechanical, and plumbing connections necessary to
serve the new appliance.
8. Replacement of gas air-conditioning units and heat pumps of equal or less
BTU/CFH rating, same toxicity and same flammability classification of
refrigerants and minor modification to electrical, mechanical, and plumbing
connections necessary to serve the new appliance. Any appliance or
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
appurtenances equipped with required fire detection, fire notification or fire
suppression systems will require a permit and inspections.
7.1.4.2.6 Emergency repairs.
Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency
situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business
day to the Building Official.
7.1.4.2.7 Repairs.
Application or notice to the Building Official is not required for ordinary repairs to
structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not
include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or
cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of
any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the
egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain
leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
7.1.4.2.8 Public service agencies.
A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation,
transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the
ownership and control of public service agencies by established right.
7.1.4.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an
application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety
for that purpose. Such application shall:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is
made.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description,
street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the
proposed building or work.
3. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
4. Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in
Section 7.1.5.
5. State the valuation of the proposed work.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
6. Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.
7. Give such other data and information as required by the Building Official.
8. Licensing requirement. When the Town requires the issuance of a building permit as
a condition precedent to the construction, alteration, improvement, demolition or repair
of a building, structure or other improvement to real property other than a single family
detached dwelling and it’s accessory structures, as part of the application procedures,
the town shall require that each applicant for a building permit file a signed statement
that the contractor is currently licensed under the provisions of this chapter with the
contractor’s license number and the privilege license number as required pursuant to
ARS section 42-5005. All work performed on the premises shall be by licensed
contractor(s) and the building permit shall be issued to a General Contractor licensed by
the State of Arizona Registrar of Contractors when a building permit other than “Stand
Alone Permits” is required.
Exception:
Permits for Single Family Detached Dwellings and their accessory structures may be
issued to the owner if the structure, group of structures or appurtenances, including
the improvements thereto, are intended for occupancy solely by the owner and are
not intended for occupancy by members of the public as the owner's employees or
business visitors and the structures or appurtenances are not intended for sale or for
rent. In all actions brought under this exception, proof of the sale or rent or the
offering for sale or rent of any such structure by the owner-builder within one year
after final approval or issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Town is prima
facie evidence that such project was undertaken for the purpose of sale or rent.
7.1.4.3.1 Action on application. The Building Official shall examine or cause to be
examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time
after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the
requirements of pertinent laws, the Building Official shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the Building Official is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of “This Code” and laws and
ordinances of the Town, the Building Official shall issue a permit therefore as soon
as practicable. A separate permit shall be issued for each building or structure. A
single Site Permit may be issued where the work associated with the site is relevant
to the entire project. The Building Official shall determine the Site Permit scope of
work.
7.1.4.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of
acceptance, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has
been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one extension of
time for an additional period not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated by the applicant. The
Building Official shall determine justifiable cause.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.4.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed
to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of “This Code”
or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to
violate or cancel the provisions of “This Code” or other ordinances of the jurisdiction
shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other
data shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring the correction of errors in the
construction documents and other data. The Building Official is also authorized to
prevent occupancy or use of a structure or the premise where in violation of “This Code”
or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.
7.1.4.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
authorized by such permit is commenced and required inspections are requested by the
permittee within 180 days after its issuance, or if more than 180 days elapses between
required inspections. The Building Official shall be authorized to grant one extension of
time for a period not to exceed 180 days. Permits shall not be extended more than once
and all requests for extensions shall be in writing. In order to renew action on a permit
after expiration, a new permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule
adopted by the Town.
7.1.4.6 Suspension or revocation. The Building Official is authorized to suspend or
revoke a permit issued under the provisions of “This Code” wherever the permit is
issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of “This Code” or any
other ordinance of this jurisdiction.
7.1.4.7 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of
the work until the completion of the project.
7.1.4.8 Dust Control. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner or contractor
causing or performing the work indicated within the permit, shall furnish a written plan,
approved by Maricopa or Pinal County (if applicable), specifying the methods or means
of controlling dust in accordance with County regulations concerning fugitive dust
sources. For the purposes of this section, dust means all fugitive particulate matter as
defined by applicable Maricopa or Pinal County fugitive dust regulations.
7.1.4.9 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for the
installation or repair of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
systems to comply with “This Code” or any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.
SECTION 7.1.5 - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
7.1.5.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and
structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets
with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a
registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction or the
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
State of Arizona. Where special conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to
require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design
professional.
Exception:
The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of construction
documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design
professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that
review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with
“This Code”.
7.1.5.1.1 Information on Construction Documents. Construction documents
shall be dimensioned and drawn to scale upon suitable material. Construction
documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of
the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of “This
Code” and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the jurisdiction, as
determined by the Building Official or duly authorized Town representative.
The construction documents shall contain, at a minimum, a sheet(s) indicating the
name, address and phone numbers of project owner(s), design professionals and
contractors (if known). The sheet shall also contain information regarding the Code
review as performed by the design professional, including the size of the building,
type of construction and type(s) of occupancy, area and height modifications (If any),
fire sprinklers (if any), and other information as directed by the Building Official.
7.1.5.1.2 Screening. Submittal documents may be subject to screening for
administrative completeness prior to being accepted for permit review. Incomplete
submittals shall be returned to the applicant without being accepted, unless
otherwise directed by the Building Official.
7.1.5.1.3 Standard Plans. The applicant shall submit the site drawings,
application, and other documents as required for permits to construct the approved
Standard Plan in accordance with “This Code”, the technical codes and relevant
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
7.1.5.1.4 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire
protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with “This Code”
and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system
installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the
referenced installation standards.
7.1.5.1.5 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient
detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of
egress in compliance with the provisions of “This Code”. The construction
documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every
floor, and in all rooms and spaces.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.5.1.6 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall
describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with
“This Code”. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall
envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials,
corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of
drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings.
7.1.5.1.7 Manufacturer’s Instructions. The construction documents shall include
manufacturer’s installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that
the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction
documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The
supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was
tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.
7.1.5.2 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for
permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of
new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the
established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood
hazard areas, floodways, design flood elevations and any additional information
required by the Building Official and Town Engineer; and it shall be drawn in
accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site
plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing
structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The Building Official, in
consultation with the Town Engineer, is authorized to waive or modify the requirement
for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when
otherwise warranted.
7.1.5.3 Examination of documents. The Building Official shall examine or cause to
be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such
examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with
the requirements of “This Code” and other pertinent laws or ordinances.
7.1.5.4 Approval of construction documents. When the Town issues a permit, the
construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for
Code Compliance” or other such designation as required by the Town. One set of
construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the Building Official. A second
approved set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and
shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or a duly authorized Town
representative.
7.1.5.4.1 Previous approvals. “This Code” shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for
which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized,
and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after
the effective date of “This Code” and has not been abandoned.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.5.4.2 Phased approval. The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for
the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the
construction documents for the whole building or structure have been approved,
provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed
complying with pertinent requirements of “This Code” or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other
parts of a building, structure or premises shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with
the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will
be granted.
7.1.5.5 Design Professional in Responsible Charge. When it is required that
documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the Building Official shall
be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit
application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design
professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall
designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall
perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible
charge. The Building Official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered
design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform
the duties.
The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for
reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased
and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building.
Where structural observation is required by “This Code”, the inspection program shall
name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the
stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur. The Building Official
shall approve the individual or firm before inspections are conducted.
7.1.5.6 Deferred Submittals. For the purposes of “This Code”, deferred submittals are
defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the initial
accepted application and that are to be submitted to the Building Official within a
specified period thereafter.
Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the Building Official. The
registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on
the construction documents for review by the Building Official.
Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design
professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the
Building Official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have
been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the
building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
submittal documents have been approved by the Building Official, the appropriate fees
are paid and the permits issued.
All deferred submittals shall be subject to the same plan review and approval process
as the original accepted permit application and the work associated with the deferral for
the project shall not commence before approval of the deferred submittal.
Deferred submittals do not constitute the phasing of construction permits but may
constitute a revision to the original permit or application if the deferred submittal
involves changes in the design or work meeting the definition of a revision.
7.1.5.7 Revised Construction Documents. Work shall be installed in accordance
with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction
that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be
resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents.
7.1.5.7.1 Revisions to Construction Documents. The project owner or owner’s
representative may submit revisions to or modifications of the application or the
construction documents at any time prior to the final completion of the work. Such
revision shall be subject to the same plan review and approval process as the
original accepted permit application. Revisions are documents or other data
submitted by applicants seeking to change the approved plans, for which a permit
has been issued and remains in force, such that the scope of the original permit is
not expanded. Upon approval, revised/modified documents shall supersede and
shall be incorporated into the original submission or permit documents. Such
approved revisions shall not constitute a new permit request.
7.1.5.8 Retention of Construction Documents. One set of approved construction
documents shall be retained by the Building Official for a period of not less than 180
days, from date of final approval or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy of the
permitted work, or as required by state or local laws.
SECTION 7.1.6 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
7.1.6.1 General. The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary
structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but
shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The Building Official is authorized to
grant extensions for demonstrated cause. Temporary buildings or structures shall be
completely removed upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.
7.1.6.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural
strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary
requirements of “This Code” and all other ordinances of the Town for temporary uses as
necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.6.3 Temporary power. The Building Official is authorized to give permission to
temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such
installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion or occupancy
has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the
requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the Town’s Electrical
Code.
7.1.6.4 Termination of approval. The Building Official is authorized to revoke such
permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be
discontinued.
SECTION 7.1.7 - FEES
7.1.7.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law
have been paid, nor shall a revision to a permit be released until the additional fee, if
any, has been paid. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with
the currently adopted fee schedule as established by the Town. Permit fees shall be
paid at the time of issuance of a permit.
7.1.7.2 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an
estimated construction valuation at time of application. Permit valuations shall include
total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued,
such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems.
For the purposes of determining final valuations for new buildings, the building valuation
data as indicated in the most currently adopted fee schedule shall be used. When a
foundation-only permit is authorized by the Building Official, it shall be permitted to
include the foundation, interior underground utilities and any interior slab-work when so
specified.
Any valuation not specifically provided for shall be classified in the use and construction
it most nearly resembles.
7.1.7.3 Work commenced before permit issuance. Any person who commences
any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before
obtaining the necessary permits or approvals shall be subject to an “Unauthorized
Construction” fee in addition to the required permit fees. The fee shall be in accordance
with the currently adopted fee schedule as established by the Town. This “Unauthorized
Construction Fee” is in addition to the permit fee and shall be assessed whether or not a
permit is then or subsequently issued.
7.1.7.4 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal
or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by
a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment
of other fees that are prescribed by law.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.7.5 Refunds. The Building Official shall be permitted to authorize refunding of a
fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official shall
be permitted to authorize refunding of the permit fee paid when no work has been done
under a permit issued in accordance with “This Code”. The Building Official shall be
permitted to authorize refunding of the plan review fee paid when an application for a
permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any
examination time has been expended. The amount of refunds shall be as indicated
under the currently adopted fee schedule.
The Building Official shall not be permitted to authorize refunding of any fee paid except
upon written application filed by the original permit holder.
7.1.7.6 Plan review fees. Plan review fees shall be as per the currently adopted fee
schedule. Any submittals that require third or subsequent reviews shall be charged an
additional plan review fee in accordance with the Town’s adopted fee schedule. The
estimated plan review fee shall be collected at the time of initial plan acceptance for
review and any subsequent review.
Exception:
Plan review fees of $100 or less.
After the plan review has been completed, if the permit has not been issued and
expiration of the plan review time period has passed as noted in Section 7.1.4.3.2, the
plan review fees shall become due and payable.
SECTION 7.1.8 – INSPECTIONS
7.1.8.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Official and such construction or work shall remain accessible
and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an
inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of
“This Code” or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of “This Code” or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the
work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the Building
Official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or
replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide an approved property address,
including the number and street address, at all construction sites. Such temporary
premises identification shall be clearly visible from the street or roadway fronting the
property, shall be installed prior to the first inspection, and shall be maintained until the
permanent premises identification is installed and approved.
7.1.8.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the Building Official is
authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
an application has been filed. Inspection fees shall be in accordance with the currently
adopted fee schedule.
7.1.8.3 Required inspections. The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the
inspections set forth in Sections 7.1.8.3.1 through 7.1.8.3.10.
7.1.8.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections
shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required
reinforcing steel and ufer is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms
shall be in place prior to inspection.
7.1.8.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and underfloor
inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and
building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary
equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing
installed, including the sub-floor.
7.1.8.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. The elevation certificate required in “This Code”
or any other Town ordinance or requirements shall be submitted when required by
the Building Official or Town Engineer.
7.1.8.3.4 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck
or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, pipes, chimneys and
vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, mechanical,
wires, pipes and ducts are installed and after the roof is loaded with the roof
covering material or material that would equal the weight of the finished roofing
material. Roof decking or sheathing may be inspected before the roof covering or
material of equal weight is applied.
7.1.8.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board
inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in
place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are
taped and finished.
Exception:
Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear
assembly.
7.1.8.3.6 Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fireresistance-
rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and
approved.
7.1.8.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine
compliance with “This Code” and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for:
envelope insulation R and U values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. The Building Official is authorized to
accept reports verifying the above requirements.
7.1.8.3.8 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the
Building Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of “This Code” and
other laws of the jurisdiction.
7.1.8.3.9 Special inspections. Special inspections and structural observations
shall be conducted as required by “This Code” or as required by the Building Official.
Special inspection approval shall be documented by the designated special
inspection agency and submitted to the Town at or before the final inspection.
7.1.8.3.10 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work
required by the building permit is completed.
7.1.8.4 Special inspection agencies. The Building Official is authorized to accept
reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the
requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
7.1.8.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or
their duly authorized agent to notify the Building Official when work is ready for
inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for
inspections of such work that are required by “This Code”.
7.1.8.6 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each
successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the Building Official. The
Building Official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either
indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the
permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with “This Code”. Any
portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or
concealed until authorized by the Building Official. There shall be a final inspection and
approval of all construction authorized by the permit when the work is completed and
prior to any occupancy or use.
7.1.8.7 Gas Certificate. If, upon final gas piping inspections, the installation is found to
comply with the provisions of “This Code”, the technical codes and any other
requirements of the jurisdiction, a certificate of inspection shall be issued by the Building
Official. The serving gas supplier to the premises shall be notified of the approval. It
shall be unlawful for any serving gas supplier, or person furnishing gas, to turn on, or
cause to be turned on, any fuel gas or any gas meter or meters, until such certificate of
final inspection has been issued. The certificate of inspection shall be of any form
approved by the Building Official.
7.1.8.8 Electrical Certificate. If, upon final electrical inspections, the installation is
found to comply with the provisions of “This Code”, the technical codes and any other
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
requirements of the jurisdiction, a certificate of inspection shall be issued by the Building
Official. The serving electrical supplier to the premises shall be notified of the approval.
It shall be unlawful for any serving electrical supplier, or person furnishing electric, to
turn on, or cause to be turned on, any electrical system or any electrical meter or
meters, until such certificate of final inspection has been issued. The certificate of
inspection shall be of any form approved by the Building Official.
SECTION 7.1.9 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/COMPLIANCE
7.1.9.1 Use and Occupancy. No building, structure or premise shall be used,
occupied or open to the public, in whole or in part, and no change in the existing
occupancy classification of a building, premise, structure or portion thereof shall be
made until the Building Official has issued a temporary, partial or a full Certificate of
Occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy shall
not be construed as an approval to violate or cancel the provisions of “This Code” or of
other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
7.1.9.2 Certificate of Occupancy. After the Building Official inspects the building or
structure and finds no violations of the provisions of “This Code”, other laws and any
other requirements of the jurisdiction associated with the project whether onsite or
offsite, the Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy that contains the
following:
1. The building permit number.
2. The address of the structure.
3. A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.
4. A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for
compliance with the requirements of “This Code” for the occupancy and division
of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.
5. The name of the Building Official or authorized representative.
6. The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.
7. The use and occupancy.
8. The type of construction.
9. The design occupant load.
10.If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is
required.
11.Any special stipulations and conditions of the certificate.
Exception:
A single family, detached dwelling unit, designated as an R-3 occupancies, and its
accessory structures, regulated under the International Residential Code unless
specifically requested by the permit holder or owner.
7.1.9.3 Temporary or Partial Occupancy. The Building Official is authorized to issue
a temporary or partial Certificate of Occupancy before the completion of the entire work
covered by or associated with the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
occupied or used safely. The Building Official shall set a time period during which the
temporary Certificate of Occupancy is valid. The Building Official may revoke the
Certificate of Occupancy for just cause.
7.1.9.4 Letter of Compliance. After the Building Official or designee inspects the
building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of “This Code” or of related
land use and public health ordinances, rules and regulations, the Building Official may
issue a Letter of Compliance. Such Letter of Compliance certifies that the work
performed under the permit has been satisfactorily completed at the time of the
inspection. The Letter of Compliance does not authorize the occupancy of the building
or structure.
7.1.9.5 Revocation. The Building Official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or
revoke a Certificate of Occupancy, Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or Partial
Certificate of Occupancy issued under the provisions of “This Code” wherever the
certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it
is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any
ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of “This Code” or ordinances of the
jurisdiction.
7.1.9.6 Posting. The Certificate of Occupancy or the Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be
removed except by the Building Official.
Exception:
Single family, detached dwelling unit and its accessory structures.
SECTION 7.1.10 - SERVICE UTILITIES
7.1.10.1 Connection of Service Utilities. No person shall make connections from a
utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by
“This Code” for which a permit is required, until authorized by the Building Official.
7.1.10.2 Temporary connection. The Building Official shall have the authority to
authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of
energy, fuel or power.
7.1.10.3 Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities. The Building Official shall have
the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, premise,
structure or system regulated by “This Code” and the codes referenced in case of
emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The
Building Official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and
occupant of the building, premise, structure or service system of the decision to
disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or
occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon
as practical thereafter.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
SECTION 7.1.11 - BOARD OF APPEALS
7.1.11.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation
of “This Code”, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals. The Board of
Appeals shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall hold office at its pleasure.
The Board may adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business.
7.1.11.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of “This Code” or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of “This Code” do not fully apply, or an equally
good or better form of construction is proposed. The Board shall have no authority to
waive requirements of “This Code”.
7.1.11.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of members who are
qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building
construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.
7.1.11.4 Administration. The Building Official shall take action in accordance with the
decision of the Board.
SECTION 7.1.12 - VIOLATIONS
7.1.12.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building,
structure, premises or equipment regulated by “This Code”, or cause same to be done,
in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of “This Code” or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction.
7.1.12.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official is authorized to serve a notice of
violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in
violation of the provisions of “This Code”, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of “This Code”. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the
illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
7.1.12.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with
promptly, the Building Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the
jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of “This Code” or of
the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
7.1.12.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of “This Code” or
fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of “This Code”, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. The violations of
“This Code” are in addition to any other violation established by law.
SECTION 7.1.13 - STOP WORK ORDER
7.1.13.1 Authority. Whenever the Building Official finds any work regulated by “This
Code” is being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of “This Code”,
or if such work is dangerous or unsafe, the Building Official is authorized to issue a stop
work order.
7.1.13.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work.
Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop
work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited
work will be permitted to resume.
7.1.13.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as
prescribed by law.
SECTION 7.1.14 - UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
7.1.14.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become
unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities,
inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise
dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper
occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe
structures shall be demolished and removed or made code compliant, as the Building
Official deems necessary and as provided for in “This Code” or other ordinances or
regulations of this jurisdiction. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall
be deemed unsafe.
7.1.14.2 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the Building Official shall serve on the
owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a written notice that describes the
condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be
made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be
demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to
declare immediately to the Building Official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the
notice.
7.1.14.2.1 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a
copy thereof is:
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
1. Delivered to the owner personally, or;
2. Sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known
address with the return receipt requested, or;
3. Delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law.
If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner
upon the owner’s agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall
constitute service of notice upon the owner.
7.1.14.3 Imminent Danger. When, in the opinion of the Building Official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building, equipment or system that
endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is
endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential
danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or
materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the Building Official is
hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the
premises forthwith. The Building Official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to
such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy
Has Been Prohibited by the Building Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to
remove such notice, to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the
structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of
demolishing the same.
7.1.14.4 Temporary Safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of “This Code”,
whenever, in the opinion of the Building Official, there is imminent danger due to an
unsafe condition, the Building Official shall order the necessary work to be done,
including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether
or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such
other action to be taken as deemed necessary to meet such emergency.
When necessary for public safety, the Building Official shall work closely with other
public safety agencies and may temporarily close structures and order the authority
having jurisdiction to close sidewalks, streets, public ways, and places adjacent to
unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
7.1.14.5 Emergency Repairs. When a condition of imminent danger exists, the
Building Official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible. The Town shall institute appropriate action against
the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery
of costs incurred for emergency repairs.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
7.1.14.6 Records. The Building Official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the
unsafe condition.
7.1.14.7 Restoration. The structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the
Building Official is permitted to be restored to a code compliant condition. To the extent
that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during
the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions or change of
occupancy shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.1.4 and “This Code”.
7.1.14.8 Hazard Marking System. The Building Official, in conjunction with other
public safety agencies, shall establish a hazard identification marking system to provide
personnel responding to a fire or other emergency with a visual identification marking
that the property is vacant, abandoned, or unsafe.
SECTION 7.2 AMENDMENTS
7.2.1 Amendments to the International Building Code
The following provision of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
Chapter 1, Administration.
Chapter 1, “Administration”, is hereby deleted except as follows: For administration of
this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town Code.
Chapter 2, Definitions.
Chapter 2 “Definitions”, is herby amended by adding the following definitions:
PERSONAL CARE SERVICE The care of persons who do not require medical care.
Personal care involves responsibility for the safety of persons while inside the building.
Assistance with activities of daily living that can be performed by persons without
professional skills or professional training and includes the coordination or provision of
intermittent nursing services and administration of medications or treatments.
SUPERVISORY CARE SERVICE General supervision, including daily awareness of
resident functioning and continuing needs.
DIRECTED CARE SERVICE Care of residents, including personal care services, who
are incapable of recognizing danger, summoning assistance, expressing need, or
making basic care decisions.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY A residential care institution, including adult foster care,
that provides or contracts to provide supervisory care services, personal care services
or directed care services on a continuing basis.
ASSISTED LIVING CENTER An assisted living facility that provides resident rooms or
residential units to eleven or more residents.
ASSISTED LIVING HOME An assisted living facility that provides resident rooms to ten
or fewer residents.
Chapter 3, Use and Occupancy Classification.
Sections 308.3, 308.4, 310.2, and 310.6 are amended to read as follows:
INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I
308.3 Institutional Group I-1. This occupancy shall include buildings, structures or
portions thereof for more than 16 persons who reside on a 24 hour basis in a
supervised environment, receive custodial care, and are capable of self-preservation.
This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Alcohol and drug centers
Assisted living facilities
Assisted living centers
Congregate care facilities
Convalescent facilities
Group homes
Halfway houses
Residential board and custodial care facilities
Social rehabilitation facilities
308.3.1 Five or fewer persons receiving care. A licensed care facility such as above
with five or fewer persons receiving care shall be classified as a Group R-3 and shall
comply with the International Residential Code.
308.3.2 Six to Ten Persons Receiving Care. A facility such as above, housing not
fewer than six and not more than 10 persons receiving such care, may be classified as
Group R-4.
308.4 Institutional Group I-2. This occupancy shall include buildings and structures
used for medical care on a 24-hour basis for more than five persons who are incapable
of self-preservation. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Foster care facilities
Detoxification facilities
Hospitals
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Nursing homes
Assisted Living Centers
Psychiatric hospitals
308.4.1 Five or fewer persons receiving care. A licensed care facility such as above
with five or fewer persons receiving care shall be classified as a Group R-3 and shall
comply with the International Residential Code.
SECTION 310
310.2 Definitions The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY
ASSISTED LIVING CENTER
ASSISTED LIVING HOME
BOARDING HOUSE
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES.
DIRECTED CARE SERVICES
DORMITORY
GROUP HOMES
PERSONAL CARE SERVICE
SUPERVISORY CARE SERVICES
TRANSIENT
Section 310.6 Residential Group R.
Replace text with the following language:
310.6 Residential Group R-4. A licensed care facility for more than 5 but not more
than 10 persons, excluding staff, who reside on a 24-hour basis in a supervised
residential environment and receive custodial care, within a single-family dwelling. The
persons receiving care are capable of self-preservation, except as provided for assisted
living homes. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Alcohol and drug centers
Assisted living facilities
Assisted living homes
Congregate care facilities
Convalescent facilities
Group homes
Halfway houses
Residential board and custodial care facilities
Social rehabilitation facilities
Group R-4 occupancies shall meet the requirements for construction as defined for
Group R-3 and Section 425.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
310.6.1. Condition 1. This occupancy condition shall include facilities licensed to
provide supervisory care services, in which occupants are capable of self-preservation
by responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff.
Condition I facilities housing more than 10 persons shall be classified as Group I-1.
310.6.2 Condition 2. This occupancy condition shall include facilities licensed to
provide personal or directed care services, in which occupants are incapable of selfpreservation
by responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from
staff. Condition 2 facilities housing more than 10 persons shall be classified as Group I-
2.
Chapter 4, Special Detailed Requirements based on Use and Occupancy.
Sections 406.3.4 is amended and a new Section 425 is added, as follows:
Section 406.3.4 Separation.
Add the following paragraph:
4. In buildings protected with an automatic fire sprinkler system, including the
private garage, the room finish materials of the garage shall be permitted to be a
minimum 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board applied to the garage side.
Section 425 Residential Care/Assisted Living Homes.
Add a new Section 425 as follows:
SECTION 425 RESIDENTIAL CARE/ASSISTED LIVING HOMES
425.1 Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to a building or part thereof
housing not more than 10 persons, excluding staff, on a 24-hour basis, who because of
age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment,
which provides licensed care services.
Except as specifically required by this division, R-4 occupancies shall meet all the
applicable provisions of Group R-3.
425.2 General. Building or portions of buildings classified as R-4 may be constructed of
any materials allowed by this code, shall not exceed two stories in height nor be located
above the second story in any building and shall not exceed two thousand square feet
above the first story, except as provided in Section 506.
425.3 Special Provisions. R-4 occupancies having more than 2000 square feet above
the first story shall be of not less than one-hour fire-resistive construction throughout.
425.3.1 Mixed Uses. R-4 occupancies shall be separated from other occupancies as
provided in Table 508.4.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
425.4 Access and Means of Egress Facilities
425.4.1 Accessibility. R-4 occupancies shall be provided with at least one accessible
route as provided in Section 1104.1.
425.4.2 Exits
425.4.2.1 Number of Exits. Every story, basement, or portion thereof shall have not less
than two exits.
Exception:
Basements and stories above the first floor containing no sleeping rooms used
by residents may have only one means of egress as provided in Chapter 10.
425.4.2.2 Distance to Exits. The maximum travel distance shall comply with Section
1016, except that the maximum travel distance from the center point of any sleeping
room to an exit shall not exceed 75 feet.
425.4.2.3 Emergency Exit Illumination. In event of a power failure, exit illumination shall
be automatically provided from an emergency system powered by storage batteries or
an onsite generator set installed in accordance with the International Electric Code.
425.4.2.4 Emergency Escape and Rescue. R-4 occupancies shall comply with the
requirements of Section 1029, except that Exception #1 to 1029 does not apply to R-4
occupancies.
425.4.2.5 Delayed Egress Locks. In R-4 Condition 2 occupancies, delayed egress locks
shall be permitted in accordance with 1008.1.9.7, Items 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6.
425.5 Smoke Alarms and Sprinkler Systems.
425.5.1 Smoke Alarms. R-4 occupancies shall be provided with smoke alarms installed
in accordance with 907.2.11.2, and such alarms shall be installed in all habitable rooms.
425.5.2 Sprinkler Systems. R-4 occupancies shall be provided with a sprinkler system
installed in accordance with 903.3.1.3. Sprinkler systems installed under this section
shall be installed throughout, including attached garages, and in Condition 2 facilities,
shall include concealed spaces of or containing combustible materials. Such systems
may not contain unsupervised valves between the domestic water riser control valve
and the sprinklers. In Condition 2 occupancies, such systems shall contain water flow
switches electrically supervised by an approved supervising station, and shall sound an
audible signal at a constantly attended location.
Chapter 5, General Building Heights and Areas.
Section 501.2 is amended to read as follows:
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Section 501.2 Premises identification.
Approved numbers or addresses shall be provided for all new buildings in such a
position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the
property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers
shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters or per the Town Code, whichever is the
more restrictive. Numbers shall be the minimum size required by the Fire
Department or other Town requirements, whichever is more restrictive.
Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems.
Sections 903.2 through 903.2.11.3 are deleted in their entirely and amended as follows:
903.2 Where required. All new building and structures shall be provided with an
automatic sprinkler throughout.
Exceptions:
1. Detached single family dwellings, Group R-3 and their associated detached
accessory structures not including Group R-4.
2. Detached telecommunication buildings not exceeding 600 square feet in floor area
and not intended for occupancy other than maintenance purposes.
3. Detached accessory use structures such as gazebos, ramadas, guardhouses,
restroom buildings at golf courses, parks and similar uses.
4. Detached canopies of type I or II construction not exceeding 3000 square feet in roof
area located a minimum of 10 feet from buildings, structures and property lines.
5. Fire rated fabric shade canopies of type I or II framing construction not in excess of
3000 square feet in roof area located a minimum of 10 feet from buildings, structures
and property lines.
6. Portable storage containers of type I or II construction not in excess of 360 square
feet located a minimum of 10 feet from buildings structures, property lines and other
containers, with no hazardous materials storage.
7. Factory built buildings less than 1,500 square feet used as temporary offices for real
estate leasing or construction management and not to exceed 12 months from
installation date.
8. Detached U occupancies of less than 3,000 square feet and located a minimum of 10
feet from buildings, structures and property lines.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
9. Covered walkways of type I or II construction with no combustible storage underneath
and approved by the fire code official.
903.2.1 Additions to Existing Buildings and Structure. Added as follows:
All additions to existing buildings or structures and all buildings or structures that are
expanded by an addition(s) shall be provided with an approved automatic fire sprinkler
system throughout all levels complying with section 903.2
Exception:
The maximum aggregate fire area of an addition (s) is less than 1,000 square feet or
10% of the floor area of the existing building or structure, whichever is less.
903.2.2 Change of Occupancy within hazard level 1. Added as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed when a building, regardless of the
building area, under goes a change of occupancy within hazard level 1 as defined by
table 903.2.5
903.2.3 Change of Occupancy over 5,000 square feet. Added as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in any building 5,000 square feet or
greater that under goes any change of occupancy.
903.2.4 Change of Occupancy less than 5,000 square feet. Added as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in any building less than 5,000
square feet that under goes a change of occupancy to a higher Level as defined by
Table 903.2.5
Table 903.2.5
Existing Building Hazard Levels
Hazard Level Building Occupancy Type*
1 (highest) A, H, I, R-1, R-2, R-4
2 F-1, S-1
3 E, F-2, S-2
4 (lowest) B, M, R-3, U
*Occupancies as defined in the Town of Queen Creek Building Code
Chapter 10 Means of Egress.
Section 1008.1.2 Door Swing.
Exception 4 is amended to read as follows:
4. Doors within or serving a single dwelling unit in Groups R-2 and R-3, as
applicable and R-4.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Section 1016.2 Limitations.
Section 1016.2 Limitations.
New subsection 1016.2.2 added to read as follows:
1016.2.2 Group F-1 and S-1 increase. The maximum exit access travel distance
shall be 400 feet (122 m) in Group F-1 and S-1 occupancies where all of the
following are met:
1. The portion of the building classified as Group F-1 or S-1 is limited to
one story in height.
2. The minimum height from the finished floor to the bottom of the ceiling
or roof slab or deck is 24 feet (7315 mm); and
3. The building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
Chapter 11, Accessibility.
Sections 1101.1, 1101.2, and 1103.2.4 are amended to read as follows:
Section 1101.1 Scope.
1101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and Arizona Revised statutes, ARS
sections 41-1492 through 41-1492.12 shall control the design and construction of
facilities for accessibility to physically disabled persons.
Section 1101.2 Design.
1101.2 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with this code and ICC A117.1 and in accordance with
provisions State of Arizona Attorney General Administrative Rules R10-3-401 through
R-10-3-404 (2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, referred to as "2010
Standards", adopted by the U.S. Department of Justice), whichever standard provides
the greatest degree of accessibility.
Section 1103.2.4 Detached dwellings.
A new Section 1103.2.4.1 is added to read as follows:
1103.2.4.1 Home Occupations. Home occupations as defined in the Town Code
are not required to be accessible. For all other combinations of businesses in Group
R occupancies, the business portion shall be accessible and shall include a
minimum of one accessible toilet room and an accessible route from the business
portion to the accessible toilet room, accessible parking space and public sidewalk.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Chapter 12, Sound Transmission.
A new Section 1207.4 is added to read as follows:
Section 1207.4 Maximum Residential Interior Noise Level.
All residences shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements as
described in Article 4.15 of the Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance.
Chapter 16, Structural Design.
Table 1607.1 is amended to read as follows:
Table 1607.1 Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads and Minimum
Concentrated Live Loads
Revise Item 25, Residential – revise two values in the Table, and delete footnote j,
replacing it as follows:
OCCUPANCY OR USE UNIFORM (psf) CONCENTRATED
(lbs.)
25. Residential
One- and two-family
dwellings
Uninhabitable attics with
limited storage i,j,k
Habitable attics and
sleeping areas
20 40
30 40
j. For trussed systems, this live load need not be considered as acting
simultaneously with other live loads imposed upon the ceiling framing or its
supporting structure.
Chapter 31, Special Construction.
Section 3109 Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety Devices.
Section 3109 is hereby amended to read as follows:
3109 Swimming pool enclosures and safety devices. Swimming pool enclosures
and safety devices shall comply with Appendix G of the International Residential
Code.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Appendices.
The following appendices are adopted:
Appendix C, Group U - Agricultural Buildings
Appendix I, Patio Covers
Appendix J, Grading
7.2.2 Amendments to the International Residential Code
The following provision of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, published by
the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
Chapter 1, Administration.
Chapter 1, “Administration”, is hereby deleted except as follows: For administration of
this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town Code.
Chapter 3, Building Planning.
Sections R302.1, R302.2, R302.3, R302.4, R310.2.2, R313, R318.1, R319.1, R322.1.1,
and R322.2, and Tables R301.2(1) and R301.5 are amended to read as follows:
Section R302.1 Exterior walls is amended to read as follows:
R302.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls with a fire separation distance less than 3
feet (914mm) shall have not less than a one-hour fire-resistive rating with exposure
from both sides. Projections shall not extend to a point closer than 2 feet (610 mm)
from the line used to determine the fire separation distance.
Exception:
Detached garages accessory to a dwelling located within 2 feet of a lot line may
have roof eave projections not exceeding 4 inches.
Add a new Section R302.2 to read as follows:
R302.2 Projections. Projections with a fire separation distance less than 3 feet
(914mm) shall have one-hour fire-resistive construction on the underside. The above
provisions shall not apply to walls which are perpendicular to the line used to
determine the fire separation distance.
Exception:
Tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar structures exempted from permits
are not required to provide wall protection based on location on the lot. Projections
beyond the exterior wall shall not extend over the lot line.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Add a new Section R302.2 to read as follows:
R302.3 Openings. Openings shall not be permitted in the exterior wall of a dwelling
or accessory building with a fire separation distance less than 3 feet (914 mm). The
above provisions shall not apply to walls which are perpendicular to the line used to
determine the fire separation distance.
Section R302.2.4 Structural Independence.
Replace Exception 5 to read as follows:
5. Post tensioned slabs and foundations.
R310.2.2 Drainage is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R313 Automatic Sprinkler Systems is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R318.1 is amended to read as follows:
R318.1 Subterranean termite control methods. In areas designated as slight to
moderate, moderate to heavy, and very heavy, as indicated by Table R301.2(1),
methods of protection shall be one of the following methods or a combinations of
these methods:
Section 319.1 Premises identification.
Add the following language at the end of the paragraph:
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters or per the Town Code, whichever is the more
restrictive. Numbers shall be the minimum size required by the Fire Department or
other Town requirements, whichever is more restrictive.
Section R322.1.1 Model Home complex.
Add a new section to read as follows:
R322.1.1 Model Home complex. At least one single family dwelling as part of a
model home complex as described in Town Codes and Ordinances shall have a nostep
entrance.
Residential single family dwellings, as part of a model home complex, as described
in Town Codes and Ordinances, shall have a route of travel as described herein.
The route of travel shall be a continuous no–step path connecting each subdivision
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
sales office or public way to the primary entry. The route of travel shall conform to
the following requirements:
1. The running slope shall not exceed 1:12.
2. Routes of travel complying with this section are not required to have
handrails.
3. The route of travel shall be a firm, stable, and slip resistant surface for a
minimum width of 36 inches (914 mm) continuous and clear for a height of 7
feet above the route.
4. The entry to the model home shall have a maneuvering space of a
minimum 48 inches (1219 mm) by 48 inches (1219 mm) on the exterior side
of the entry door.
5. The threshold at the entry shall not exceed ½ inch (13 mm).
6. The no step entry shall be identified by a readily viewable sign.
If public restrooms are provided for residential development models, such restroom
facilities shall be accessible and shall be provided by either of the following methods:
1. Converting one ground model home restroom into an ADA accessible unisex
facility; or
2. Providing one ADA accessible unisex portable toilet and hand washing unit
located on an accessible route. The accessible portable toilet facility shall be
removed when the sales office is permanently closed.
Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
Insert the following into Table R301.2(1):
Ground Snow Load: N/A
Wind speed: 90 mph, Exposure C
Seismic Design Category: B
Weathering: NEGLIGIBLE
Frost Line Depth: 12”
Termite: MODERATE TO HEAVY
Decay: NONE TO SLIGHT
Winter Design Temperature: 32 degrees F
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: NO
Flood Hazards: (a) July 25, 1990, (b) October 16, 2013 (Maricopa County)
December 4, 2007 (Pinal County)
Air Freezing Index: NO
Mean Annual Temp: 70º F
Table R301.5 Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads.
Revise the Table R301.5, and add a new footnote i:
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
USE LIVE LOAD
Attics with storage b, g 20 40
Sleeping rooms 30 40
i. For trussed systems, this load need not be considered as
acting simultaneously with other live loads imposed upon the
ceiling framing or its supporting structure.
Chapter 4, Foundations.
Section R403.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section R403.1.1 Minimum size.
Add the following exception:
Exception:
For enclosure of existing carports and patio covers, nonbearing wood-framed
exterior walls within the projection of the existing roof may be supported on an
existing, uncracked concrete slab. The minimum slab thickness shall be 3½ inches
and the construction shall comply with the requirements of R319 for protection
against decay.
Chapter 7, Wall Covering.
Section R703.6.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section R703.6.2.1 Weep screeds.
Add the following exception:
Exception:
At no-step entries to a residence a weep screed may be installed over an approved
drain channel. The drain channel shall drain to an approved area.
Chapter 11, Energy Efficiency.
Chapter 11, Energy Efficiency is amended as follows:
Sections N1101.7.1, N1101.15.1, R401.2.1, N1101.17, R401.4, N1103.2, N1103.2.1,
N1103.2.2.1, R403.2.2.1are hereby amended as follows:
N1101.7.1 RESNET Testing & Inspection Protocol. The Residential Energy Services
Network (RESNET) Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating System Standards
Protocol for third party testing and inspections, shall be deemed to meet the
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
requirements of sections N1102.4.1.1, N1102.4.1.2 and N1103.2.2. and shall meet the
following conditions:
1. Third Party Testing and Inspections shall be completed by RESNET certified Raters
or Rating Field Inspectors and shall be subject to RESNET Quality Assurance Field
Review procedures.
2. Sampling in accordance with Chapter 6 of the RESNET Standards shall be
performed by Raters or Rating Field Inspectors working under a RESNET Accredited
Sampling Provider.
3. Third Party Testing is required for the following items:
a. N1102.4.1.1 –Building Envelope – Thermal and Air Barrier Checklist
b. N1102.4.1.2 –Testing – Air Leakage Rate
c. N1103.2.2 – Sealing – Duct Tightness
4. The other requirements identified as “mandatory” in Chapter 11 shall be met.
5. Alternate testing and inspection programs and protocols shall be allowed when
approved by the Code Official.
N1101.15.1 (R401.2.1) Alternative approach for compliance. A Home Energy Rating
System (“HERS”) Index of 73 or less, confirmed in writing by a Residential Energy
Services Network certified energy rater may be used in place of the approach described
in section N1101.15. Compliance may be demonstrated by sampling in accordance with
Chapter 6 of the Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating Systems Standard as
adopted by the Residential Energy Services Network.
Section N1101.17 (R401.4) New section to read as follows:
All mandatory testing and inspections required by this chapter shall be conducted in
accordance with Chapter 8 of the Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating
Standards as adopted by the Residential Energy Services Network. Compliance with
mandatory testing may be demonstrated through the use of sampling in accordance
with Chapter 6 of the Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating Standards as
adopted by the Residential Energy Services Network.
N1103.2 Ducts. Ducts and air handlers shall be in accordance with
Sections N1103.2.1 through 1103.2.3.
N1103.2.1 Insulation (Prescriptive). Supply ducts shall be insulated to
a minimum of R-8. Ducts in floor trusses shall be insulated to a
minimum of R-6.
Exceptions: Ducts or portions thereof located completely inside the
building thermal envelope.
1. Ducts or portions thereof located completely inside the building
thermal envelope.
2. Supply and return ducts may be insulated to a minimum of R-6 when
one or more of the following conditions are met;
2.1. Minimum SEER rating of space heating/cooling system is increased
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
to 15
2.2.Maximum U-factor is decreased to 0.35 and maximum SHGC is
decreased to 0.22 for all fenestration products
2.3.Wall cavity insulation minimum R-value is increased to R-19.
2.4.Residential buildings that meet section N1101.7 or section R405 of
the 2012 International Energy Conservation Code.
2.5.Residential buildings with attic radiant barriers in accordance with
ASTM C1313, installed in accordance with ASTM C1743.
Sections N1103.2.2.1 (R403.2.2.1) are hereby deleted in their entirety.
Section M1411.6 Locking access port caps is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section M1901.3 Prohibited Locations is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Table E3603.1 Service conductor and grounding electrode conductor sizing. New column
added as follows:
CONDUCTOR TYPES AND SIZES-THHW, THW, THWN, USE, EXHHW
(Parallel sets of 1/0 and larger conductors are permitted in either a single
raceway or in separate raceways)
Service or Feeder
Rating (Amperes)
Copper
(AWG)
Aluminum and copper-clad aluminum
(AWG)
= 30ºC (86ºF) > 30ºC (86ºF)
4 2 100
3 1 110
2 1/0 125 100
1 2/0 150 125
1/0 3/0 175 150
2/0 4/0
or two sets of 1/0
200 175
3/0 250 kcmil
or two sets of 2/0
225 200
4/0
or two sets of 1/0
300 kcmil
or two sets of 3/0
250 225
250 kcmil
or two sets of 2/0
350 kcmil
or two sets of 4/0
300 250
350 kcmil
or two sets of 3/0
500
or two sets of 250 kcmil
350 300
400 kcmil
or two sets of 4/0
600
or two sets of 300 kcmil
400 350
500 kcmil 750 kcmil 400
(Minimum grounding electrode conductor size and footnotes to remain.)
Section E3902.2 Garage and accessory building receptacles is hereby amended by
adding the following exceptions:
Exceptions:
1. Receptacles that are not readily accessible.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
2. A single receptacle or a duplex receptacle for 2 applications located within
dedicated space for each appliance that in normal use is not easily moved
from one place to another, and that is cord-and- plug connected.
Appendices.
The following appendices are adopted:
Appendix B:
Appendix C:
Appendix D:
Appendix G: (as amended)
Appendix H:
Appendix K: (as amended)
Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs.
Is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
SECTION AG101 - SCOPE
AG101.1 General. The provisions of this Appendix shall control the design and
construction of swimming pools, spas and hot tubs installed in or on the lot of a
detached one- or two-family dwelling or a one-family townhouse.
The purpose of these requirements is to provide an integrated level of protection against
potential swimming pool drowning through the use of physical barriers and warning
devices. It is not intended as a substitute for adult supervision of children.
Swimming pools constructed prior to the effective date of this Appendix, need only
comply with the required pool barrier requirements in effect at the time of permit
issuance. All pools constructed after the effective date of “This Code” shall meet or
exceed the requirements within this Appendix.
AG101.2 Notice Required. A person, on entering into an agreement to build a
swimming pool or contained body of water shall give the buyer, lessee or renter a notice
explaining safety education and responsibilities of pool ownership as approved by the
State and/or County Department of Health Services.
AG101.3 Submittal Requirements. All swimming pool plans are required to identify
the location of the required swimming pool barrier fencing, the height of the fencing, and
all details necessary to show compliance with the requirements within this Appendix.
When plans are submitted for a pool permit, they must show at a minimum, the
following:
1. An accurate outline of the swimming pool or spa.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
2. Location of the swimming pool (and rock formations and waterfalls) with
dimensions to each lot line, dwelling and any accessory structure and equipment
location.
3. Location of any exterior doors or windows opening into the area of the swimming
pool.
4. Location and height of the pool barrier (fence) and gate(s).
5. Details of the construction of the barrier to include materials, size of all openings
within the barrier, etc.
6. All necessary information required to show compliance with this Appendix.
AG101.4 Easements. If there is an easement affecting the property, the swimming
pool, decking and pool equipment cannot violate/disturb the easement unless approved
by the Town.
AG101.5 Zoning Ordinance. The general design, materials, and appearance of the
required Pool Barrier shall meet the requirements of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance,
however, in all cases shall meet the minimum safety requirements of this Appendix.
AG101.6 Setbacks. The swimming pool water’s edge shall be set back from all lot
lines a distance of not less than three (3) feet.
SECTION AG102 - DEFINITIONS
AG102.1 General. For the purposes of these requirements, the terms used shall be
defined as follows and as set forth in Chapter 2.
ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”
BARRIER. A permanent fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which
completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
As used within this Appendix, permanent shall mean not being able to be removed,
lifted or relocated without the use of tools.
HOT TUB. See “Swimming pool.”
IN-GROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”
RESIDENTIAL. That which is situated on the premises of a detached one- or twofamily
dwelling or a one-family townhouse.
SPA, NONPORTABLE. See “Swimming pool.”
SPA, PORTABLE. A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in
which all controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of
the product.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that is
designed to contain water 18” inches or more in depth. This includes in-ground,
aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a
structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of the enclosing structure.
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC OR SEMI-PUBLIC. Any swimming pool which is not
accessory to a residential use as defined herein.
SECTION AG103 - SWIMMING POOL REQUIREMENTS
AG103.1 In-ground pools. In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in
conformance with ANSI/NSPI-5 as listed in Section AG108.
AG103.2 Above-ground and on-ground pools. Above-ground and on-ground pools
shall be designed and constructed in conformance with ANSI/NSPI-4 as listed in
Section AG108.
AG103.3. Public or Semi-public swimming pools. Shall comply with State and
County Requirements.
SECTION AG104 - SPA AND HOT TUB REQUIREMENTS
AG104.1 Permanently installed spas and hot tubs. Permanently installed spas and
hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in conformance with ANSI/NSPI-3 as listed
in Section AG108.
AG104.2 Portable spas and hot tubs. Portable spas and hot tubs shall be
designed and constructed in conformance with ANSI/NSPI-6 as listed in Section
AG108.
SECTION AG105 - BARRIER REQUIREMENTS
AG105.1 Application. The provisions of this Appendix shall control the design of
barriers for residential swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. These design controls are
intended to provide protection against potential drownings and near-drownings by
restricting access to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. There are no exemptions for
households without children.
AG105.1.1 Effective Date. All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs installed in or on
the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling on or after the effective date of the ordinance
adopting this Appendix shall be enclosed by a permanent fence, wall or barrier, as
set forth in this Appendix.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
AG105.1.2 Special Considerations. It is the responsibility of the property owner
and any other person in responsible charge of a swimming pool to insure that the
required swimming pool barrier, including all gates, doors, locks, latches and other
portions of the barrier, are maintained safe and in good working order at all times.
No person shall alter or remove any portion of a swimming pool barrier except to
repair, reconstruct or replace the barrier in compliance with the provisions of this
Appendix.
AG105.1.3 Approval Required. No swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall be filled in
whole or in part with water unless the pool enclosure has been installed in
accordance with this Appendix and approved by the Building Official.
AG105.1.4 Temporary Fencing Unsuitable. Plastic mesh and fences defined by
the manufacturer as a temporary or removable fence, even if indicated as a
swimming pool barrier, are deemed unsuitable for the purposes of this Appendix
regardless of any modifications proposed to make said fence compliant.
AG105.2 Outdoor swimming pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an inground,
aboveground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be completely surrounded
by a barrier which shall comply with the pool barrier requirements as described in Article
6.1 of the Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance.
AG105.3 Indoor swimming pool. All walls surrounding an indoor swimming pool shall
comply with the pool barrier requirements of AG105.2.
AG105.4 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent
structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers. For the
purposes of structures, equipment or similar objects, the nearest edge being a minimum
of three (3) feet or more horizontal distance away from the required barrier shall be
considered adequate for the determination of not being used to climb the barrier.
AG105.5 Barrier exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with
ASTM F 1346, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Appendix.
SECTION AG106 - ENTRAPMENT PROTECTION FOR SWIMMING POOL AND SPA
SUCTION OUTLETS
AG106.1 General. Suction outlets shall be designed to produce circulation throughout
the pool or spa. Single outlet systems, such as automatic vacuum cleaner systems, or
other such multiple suction outlets whether isolated by valves or other-wise shall be
protected against user entrapment.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
AG106.2 Suction fittings. All Pool and Spa suction outlets shall be provided with a
cover that conforms with ANSI/ASME A112.19.8M, or a 12” x 12” drain grate or larger,
or an approved channel drain system.
Exception:
Surface skimmers
AG106.3 Atmospheric vacuum relief system required. All pool and spa single or
multiple outlet circulation systems shall be equipped with atmospheric vacuum relief
should grate covers located therein become missing or broken. Such vacuum relief
systems shall include at least one approved or engineered method of the type specified
herein, as follows:
1. Safety vacuum release system conforming to ASME A112.19.17, or
2. An approved gravity drainage system
AG106.4 Dual drain separation. Single or multiple pump circulation systems shall be
provided with a minimum of two (2) suction outlets of the approved type. A minimum
horizontal or vertical distance of three (3) feet shall separate such outlets. These
suction outlets shall be piped so that water is drawn through them simultaneously
through a vacuum relief-protected line to the pump or pumps.
AG106.5 Pool cleaner fittings. Where provided, vacuum or pressure cleaner fitting(s)
shall be located in an accessible position(s) at least (6) inches and not greater than
twelve (12) inches below the minimum operational water level or as an attachment to
the skimmer(s).
SECTION AG107 - ABBREVIATIONS
1. ANSI. American National Standards Institute
11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036
2. ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials
1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103
3. NSPI. National Spa and Pool Institute
2111 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, VA 22314
SECTION AG108 - STANDARDS
1. ANSI/NSPI-3-99 Standard for Permanently Installed Residential Spas
2. ANSI/NSPI-4-99 Standard for Above-ground/On-ground Residential Swimming
Pools
3. ANSI/NSPI-5-99 Standard for Residential In-ground Swimming Pools
4. ANSI/NSPI-6-99 Standard for Residential Portable Spas
5. ANSI/ASME A112.19.8M-1987 Suction Fittings for Use in Swimming Pools,
Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs and Whirlpool Bathing Appliances
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
6. ASTM F 1346-91 (1996) Performance Specification for Safety Covers and
Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
7. ASME A112.19.17 Manufacturers Safety Vacuum Release Systems (SVRS) for
Residential and Commercial Swimming Pool, Spa, Hot Tub and Wading Pool
Appendix K, Sound Transmission.
Add the following new section AK102.2 tioread as follows:
AK102.2 Sound Attenuation. All residences shall be constructed in accordance
with the requirements as described in Article 4.15 of the Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance.
7.2.3 Amendments to the International Mechanical Code
The following provision of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
Chapter 1, Administration.
Chapter 1, “Administration”, is hereby deleted except as follows: For administration of
this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town Code.
7.2.4 Amendments to the National Electrical Code
The following provision of the National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, as published by
the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
Article 90, Introduction.
Article 90.1 is amended to read as follows:
Article 90.1 Purpose.
Add a new subsection (E) as to read as follows:
(E) Administration. For administration of this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town
Code.
210.8 Ground Fault Circuit interceptor protection for personnel.
(A) Dwelling Units
Add two exceptions to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. Receptacles that are not readily accessible.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
2. A single receptacle or a duplex receptacle for 2 applications located within dedicated
space for each appliance that in normal use is not easily moved from one place to
another, and that is cord-and- plug connected.
Article 230 Services
Add a new subsection 230.11 to read as follows:
230.11 Performance Testing. All service entrance equipment and associated
equipment rated 1000 amperes or more, or where otherwise required by the servicing
utility company, or registered design professional shall be performance tested (high
potential testing) when first installed on site. The test shall be conducted in accordance
with instructions that shall be provided with the equipment. A written record of the test
shall be made and shall be available to the authority having jurisdiction.
Add a new subsection 230.63 to read as follows:
230.63 Location. All service equipment rated at 1000 amperes or more and located
inside a building shall be enclosed within a room or space separated from the rest of
the building by not less than one-hour fire-resistive occupancy separation or fire
barrier installed in compliance with the International Building Code.
Article 310 Conductors for General Wiring.
Table 310-15 (B)(7) is amended to read as follows:
Table 310-15 (B)(7). Conductor Types and Sizes for 120/240-Volt and 120/208-Volt, 3-
Wire, Single-Phase Dwelling Services and Feeders. Conductor types RHH, RHW,
RHW-2, THHN, THHW, THW, THW-2, THWN, THWN-2, XHHW, XHHW-2, SE, USE,
USE-2 – New column added as follows:
Conductor (AWG or kcmil)
Copper Aluminum or
Copper-Clad
Aluminum
Service or Feeder Rating (Amperes)
= 30ºC (86ºF) > 30ºC (86ºF)
4 2 100 ----
3 1 110 ----
2 1/0 125 100
1 2/0 150 125
1/0 3/0 175 150
2/0 4/0
or two sets of 1/0
200 175
3/0 250 225 200
4/0 300 250 225
250 350 300 250
350 500 350 300
400 600 400 350
500 750 ---- 400
7.2.5 Amendments to the International Plumbing Code
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
The following provision of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
Chapter 1, Administration.
Chapter 1, “Administration”, is hereby deleted except as follows: For administration of
this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town Code.
Sections 410.3, 504.6, 504.7.2, 903.1, Chapter 13, and Appendix B are amended to
read as follows:
410.3 Substitution. The last sentence of the section revised to read as follows:
In other occupancies, where drinking fountains are required, bottled water dispensers or
water coolers shall be permitted to be substituted.
504.6 Requirements for discharge pipe. Items number 5 and 10 revised to read as
follows:
5. Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors.
10. Shall terminate not less than 6 inches (152 mm) and not more than 24 inches
(610 mm) above the adjacent ground surface.
An exception is added to Section 504.7.2 to read as follows:
Exception:
Where structural conditions do not permit extending the drain to the exterior the
drain may extend to and terminate not less than 6 inches (152 mm) and not more
than 24 inches (610 mm) above the adjacent garage floor surface sloped to drain
to the exterior.
Section 607.2 Hot or tempered water supply to fixtures. Is hereby deleted.
Section 903.1 Roof extension. Is hereby amended by inserting the number 6 as the
number of inches and 152 as the number of mm.
Chapter 13, Gray Water Recycling Systems is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Appendices.
The following appendices are adopted:
Appendix B: (as amended)
Appendix E:
Appendix F:
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
APPENDIX B, RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES.
Is hereby amended to read as follows: Arizona: Queen Creek………...6.0
7.2.6 Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code
The following provision of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
Chapter 1, Administration.
Chapter 1, “Administration”, is hereby deleted except as follows: For administration of
this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town Code.
Section 404.12 Minimum burial depth is deleted in its entirety and revised to read as
follows:
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a
minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) below grade for metal piping and 18 inches (457
mm) for plastic piping.
404.12.1 Individual outside appliances is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section 404.17.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
404.17.3 Tracer. An insulated copper tracer wire or other approved conductor shall be
installed adjacent to underground nonmetallic piping. Access shall be provided to the
tracer wire or the wire shall terminate above ground at each end of the nonmetallic
piping. The tracer wire shall be not less than 18 AWG.
Section 406.4 is herby amended to read as follows:
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Amended to read as follows and
This inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been
installed and prior to concealment. An additional inspection is required after all portions
thereof which are to be covered or concealed are so concealed and before any fixtures
or appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall include an air, Co2 or
nitrogen pressure test, at which time the gas piping shall stand a pressure of not less
than ten (10) pounds per square inch (68.9 kPa) gauge pressure, or at the discretion of
the Administrative Authority, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at
least six (6) inches (152.4mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge.
Test pressures shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Administrative
Authority, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes, with no perceptible drop in
pressure. For welded piping, and piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen
(14) inches (0.4m) water column pressure, the test pressure shall not be less than sixty
(60) pounds per square inch (413.4 kPa) and shall be continued for a length of time
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
satisfactory to the Administrative Authority, but in no case for less than thirty (30)
minutes. These tests shall be made using air, Co2, or nitrogen pressure only and shall
be made in the presence of the Administrative Authority. All necessary apparatus for
conducting tests shall be furnished by the permit holder.
Sections 406.4.1 and 406.4.2 are hereby deleted in their entirety:
7.2.7 Amendments to the International Existing Building Code
The following provision of the International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition,
published by the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
Chapter 1, Administration.
Chapter 1, “Administration”, is hereby deleted except as follows: For administration of
this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town Code.
7.2.8 Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code
The following provision of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
Chapter 1, Administration.
Chapter 1, “Administration”, is hereby deleted except as follows: For administration of
this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town Code.
Sections C101.2, R101.2, R102.1.2, R401.2.1, R403.2, R403.2.1 and R403.2.2.1 are
hereby amended as follows:
C101.2 Scope. This code applies to commercial buildings and the building sites and
associated systems and equipment. Group R-2 when defined as a Commercial Building by
section C202, shall have the option of complying under the Residential Provisions of the
code, regardless of height. Once defined as such on the submittal documents, all
components of the Residential Provisions shall be followed.
R101.2 Scope. This code applies to residential buildings and the building sites and
associated systems and equipment. Group R-2 when defined as a Residential Building by
section R202, shall have the option of complying under the Commercial Provisions of the
code, regardless of height. Once defined as such on the submittal documents, all
components of the Commercial Provisions shall be followed.
R102.1.2 RESNET Testing & Inspection Protocol. The Residential Energy Services
Network (RESNET) Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating System Standards
Protocol for third party testing and inspections, shall be deemed to meet the
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
requirements of sections R402.4.1.1, R402.4.1.2 and R403.2.2. and shall meet the
following conditions:
1. Third Party Testing and Inspections shall be completed by RESNET certified Raters
or Rating Field Inspectors and shall be subject to RESNET Quality Assurance Field
Review procedures.
2. Sampling in accordance with Chapter 6 of the RESNET Standards shall be
performed by Raters or Rating Field Inspectors working under a RESNET Accredited
Sampling Provider.
3. Third Party Testing is required for the following items:
a. R402.4.1.1 –Building Envelope – Thermal and Air Barrier Checklist
b. R402.4.1.2 –Testing – Air Leakage Rate
c. R403.2.2 – Sealing – Duct Tightness
4. The other requirements identified as “mandatory” in Chapter 4 shall be met.
5. Alternate testing and inspection programs and protocols shall be allowed when
approved by the Code Official.
R401.2.1 Alternative approach for compliance. A Home Energy Rating System
(“HERS”) Index of 73 or less, confirmed in writing by a Residential Energy Services
Network certified energy rater may be used in place of the approach described in
section 401.2 above. Compliance may be demonstrated by sampling in accordance with
Chapter 6 of the Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating Systems Standard as
adopted by the Residential Energy Services Network.
R403.2 Ducts. Ducts and air handlers shall be in accordance with Sections R403.2.1
through R403.2.3.
R403.2.1 Insulation (Prescriptive). Supply ducts in attics shall be insulated to a
minimum of R-8. Ducts in floor trusses shall be insulated to a minimum of R-6.
Exceptions: Ducts or portions thereof located completely inside the building thermal
envelope.
1. Ducts or portions thereof located completely inside the building thermal envelope.
2. Supply ducts may be insulated to a minimum of R-6 when one or more of the
following conditions are met;
2.1 Minimum SEER rating of space heating/cooling system is increased to 15.
2.2 Maximum U-factor is decreased to 0.35 and maximum SHGC is decreased to 0.22
for all fenestration products.
2.3 Wall cavity insulation minimum R-value is increased to R-19.
2.4 Residential buildings that meet the requirements of sections R102.1.1 or R405.
2.5 Residential buildings with attic radiant barriers in accordance with ASTM C1313,
installed in accordance with ASTM C1743.
Section R403.2.2.1. Sealed air handler is deleted in its entirety.
7.2.9 Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
The following provision of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition,
as published by the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified as
follows:
Chapter 3, General Requirements.
Sections 303.2 and 304.14 are amended to read as follows:
Section 303.2 Enclosures.
Replace with the following language:
Swimming pool enclosures shall comply with the requirements of Appendix G of the
Queen Creek Residential Building Code.
Section 304.14 Insect screens is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Chapter 6, Mechanical and Electrical Requirements.
Sections 602.3 and 602.4 are amended to read as follows:
Section 602.3 Heat supply.
1. Insert the following dates: “November 1 to April 1”.
2. Delete both Exceptions.
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces.
Insert the following dates: “November 1 to April 1”.
7.2.10 Amendments to the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code
The following provision of the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, 2012
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby amended or modified
as follows:
Chapter 1, Administration.
Chapter 1, “Administration”, is hereby deleted except as follows: For administration of
this Code, refer to Section 7.1 of the Town Code.
Appendices.
The following appendices are adopted:
Appendix A, General Requirements
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Appendix B, Vegetation Management Plan
Appendix C, Fire Hazard Severity Form
7.2.11 Amendments to the International Fire Code
The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the National Fire Prevention
Association, is hereby amended or modified as follows:
101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Town of Queen Creek Fire Code, may
be cited as such, and hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
105.2.3 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days
after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or
a permit shall have been issued; except that the fire code official is authorized to
grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180
days upon written request by the owner or applicant showing that circumstances
beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken.
105.6.16 Flammable and combustible liquids. An operational permit is
required:
1. To store, handle or use more than 10 gallons of Class I-A or more
than 30 gallons of Class I-B or I-C liquids (19 L) inside or outside a
building,
2. To store, handle or use Class II or Class IIIA liquids in excess of 60
gallons inside or outside a building, except for fuel oil used in
connection with oil-burning equipment.
3. To remove Class I or Class II liquids from an underground or
aboveground storage tank used for fueling motor vehicles by any
means other than the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally
used for dispensing purposes.
4. To operate equipment, tanks, plants, terminals, wells, refineries,
distilleries and similar facilities where flammable and combustible
liquids are produced, processed, transported, stored, dispensed or
used.
5. To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or
combustible liquid tank to a material which poses a greater hazard
than that for which the tank was designed and constructed.
6. To utilize a site for the dispensing of Class II or III liquid fuels from
tank vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles at commercial,
industrial, governmental or manufacturing establishments.
To slurry fill an underground tank.
7. To abandon an underground or aboveground tank.
105.6.27 LP-gas. An operational permit is required for:
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
1. LP-gas containers with an aggregate water capacity of 2,000
gallons or more used exclusively for vapor service.
2. Flaring off LP-gas prior to the abandonment or removal of an LPgas
container.
3. LP-gas containers used for liquid transfer service.
105.6.43 Temporary membrane structures, and tents. A permit is required to
erect a temporary membrane structure, or a tent having an area in excess of
1600 square feet.
Exceptions:
1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping.
2. Funeral tents and curtains or extensions attached thereto, when used
for funeral services.
105.6.47 Aircraft refueling vehicles An operational permit is required to
operate any refueling vehicle located within the Town of Queen Creek.
105.6.48 Commercial rubbish handling operation. An operational permit is
required for the handling or storage of any commercial rubbish.
105.6.49 Recycling operations. An operational permit is required to operate
commercial recycling operations.
105.6.50 Used or waste tires and tire byproducts. An operational permit is
required to establish, conduct or maintain storage of 100 or more used or waste
tires and tire byproducts that exceeds 2,500 cubic feet (71 m
3
) of total volume of
scrap tires in an open area or portion thereof outdoors and for indoor storage of
tires and tire byproducts.
105.6.51 Health care facility inspections. An operational permit for health care
facilities shall be required for a fire inspection which is conducted once per year
and upon change of ownership. This includes adult care, hospitals and
congregate living facilities. The fee schedule is based on the number of licensed
beds as determined by ADHS.
Note: The annual inspection fee includes consulting services for fire and life
safety concerns and maintenance issues. The annual fee does not include permit
fees for new construction, remodeling or Annual Facility Permit (AFP) projects, or
hazardous materials assessment fees.
105.6.52 Assisted living facilities inspections . An operational permit for
assisted living facilities shall be required for a fire inspection which is conducted
upon opening and once every three years or upon change of ownership, and
complies with the Arizona Department of Health Services (ADHS) requirements.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
This includes assisted living homes R-4, assisted living centers, supervisory
care and adult foster care.
Note: The annual inspection fee includes consulting services for fire and life
safety concerns and maintenance issues. The annual fee does not include permit
fees for new construction, remodeling or Annual Facility Permit (AFP) projects, or
hazardous materials assessment fees.
105.6.53 Commercial Daycare Facilities inspections . An operational permit
shall be required for a thorough fire inspection which is conducted once per year
and upon change of ownership.
105.6.54 Behavioral or Correctional facilities inspections. An operational
permit shall be required for a fire inspection which is conducted once per year
and upon change of ownership.
105.7 Required construction permits. The fire code official is authorized to issue
permits for work as set forth in Section 105.7.1 through 105.7.29
105.7.2 Battery systems:
105.7.2.1 Stationary lead-acid. A construction permit is required to
install or modify a stationary lead-acid battery system having a liquid
capacity of more than 100 gallons in a sprinklered building or 50 gallons
in a non-sprinklered building.
105.7.2.2 Valve-regulated lead-acid (VRLA). A construction permit is
required to install or modify a valve-regulated lead-acid (VRLA) battery
systems.
105.7.8 Flammable and combustible liquids. A permit is required to:
1. Temporarily or permanently install a storage tank or aboveground
storage tank or pressure vessel for Class I, II or III-A liquids with a
nominal capacity of 125 or more gallons located outside a building.
2. Temporarily or permanently install a storage tank or aboveground
storage tank or pressure vessel for Class I, II or III-A liquids inside a
building regardless of size.
3. Temporarily or permanently install a storage tank or aboveground
storage tank or pressure vessel for Class III-B liquids with a
nominal capacity of 1,000 gallons or more whether installed inside
or outside a building.
4. Install, construct or equipment, plants, terminals, wells, fueldispensing
stations, refineries, distilleries and similar facilities
where flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed,
transported, stored, dispensed or used.
5. Alter, remove, abandon or otherwise dispose of a flammable or
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
combustible liquid tank.
6. Construct or modify a flammable liquids room or warehouse.
105.7.9 Hazardous materials. A permit is required to:
1. Install, repair damage to, abandon, remove, place temporarily out
of service, or close or substantially modify a storage facility or other
area regulated by Chapter 27 when the hazardous materials in use
or storage exceed the amounts listed in Permit Amounts and Fees
By Hazardous Materials Classification and Quantity Table.
2. Install or modify a hazardous materials storage tank.
3. Install or modify a Group H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 or H-5 occupancy.
4. Install or modify gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures, gas rooms or
chemical drainage and containment.
Exceptions:
1. Routine maintenance.
2. For repair work performed on an emergency basis,
application for permit shall be made within two working days
of commencement of work.
105.7.11 LP-gas. A permit is required to:
1. Install, alter or modify an LP-gas system.
2. Install, alter or modify LP-gas containers with an aggregate water
capacity of 125 gallons or more used exclusively for vapor service.
3. Install, alter or modify racks storing 20-pound cylinders or larger for
the purpose of conducting an LP-gas exchange program at a specific
site.
4. Install, alter or modify LP-gas containers used for liquid transfer
service.
Exception: A permit is not required to install, alter or modify portable
containers of less than 125 gallon aggregate water capacity used
exclusively for vapor service.
105.7.16 Temporary membrane structures, and tents. A permit is required to
erect a temporary membrane structure, or a tent having an area in excess of
1600 square feet.
Exceptions:
1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping.
2. Funeral tents and curtains or extensions attached thereto, when used
for funeral services.
105.7.17 Access gates, fire apparatus. A permit is required to install, or
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
modify manual or automatic fire apparatus access gates and their
appurtenances. This also includes gates for auxiliary access openings.
105.7.18 Fire apparatus access roads. A permit is required to install or
modify fire apparatus access roads.
105.7.19 Alternative surface access roads. A permit is required to install
or modify alternative surface fire apparatus access roads.
105.7.20 Fire protection equipment. A permit is required for installation or
modification, or removal from service of any fire protection system, automatic
sprinkler system, automatic underground, standpipe, fire main, fire pump, fire
hydrant, halon or any other extinguishing device or equipment. Maintenance
performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and
does not require a permit.
105.7.21 Flammable finishes. A permit is required to install or modify a
spray booth, spray room, spray area, or powder coating booth.
105.7.22 Kitchen hoods systems, commercial. A permit is required to
install or modify fire suppression systems installed above commercial cooking
equipment.
105.7.23 Refrigeration system, anhydrous ammonia. A permit is required
to install, alter or modify an anhydrous ammonia refrigeration system.
105.7.24 Special extinguishing systems. A permit is required to install, alter
or modify special extinguishing systems, including but not limited to, Halon, dry
chemical, carbon dioxide, FM200.
109.4. Civil actions or criminal citations. Any person, firm, or corporation who
causes, permits, facilitates aids or abets any violation of this Code or who fails to
perform any act or duty required by this Code is subject to a civil sanction of not less
than 500 dollars ($500) nor more than 2500 dollars ($2500) or a Class 1 criminal
misdemeanor.
109.4.1 Commencement of civil action. Any civil action to enforce the provisions
of this Code shall be commenced, and summons shall be issued, in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes, City ordinance or as provided in
the Local Rules of Practice and Procedure – Town Court – Town of Gilbert.
109.4.2 Admission or denial of allegation; hearing; findings of court; civil
sanction.
109.4.2.1 A person served with a civil citation or complaint shall appear at the
time and place stated in the citation or summons, or may appear prior to the
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
time, and admit or deny the allegations of the complaint. Allegations not denied
at the time of appearance are deemed admitted.
109.4.2.2 If the allegations are admitted, the court shall enter judgment for the
Town and impose a civil sanction.
109.4.2.3 If the person denies the allegations, the court shall set the matter for
hearing. Civil hearings are informal and held without a jury, and the Town of
Queen Creek is required to prove the violation charged by a preponderance of
the evidence. Technical rules of evidence do not apply, except for the statutory
provisions relating to privileged communications. If the person elects to be
represented by counsel, the person shall also notify the court at least 10 days
prior to the hearing date. Hearings may be recorded. If the court finds in favor of
the person, the court shall enter an order dismissing the citation or complaint. If
the court finds in favor of the Town, the court shall enter judgment for the city and
impose a civil sanction.
109.4.2.4 If the person served with a civil citation or complaint fails to appear on
or before the time directed to appear or at the time set for hearing by the court,
the allegations shall be deemed admitted and the court shall enter judgment for
the Town and impose a civil sanction.
109.4.3 Criminal penalties. Whenever in any section of this Code the doing of any
act is required, prohibited or declared to be unlawful, any person, firm or corporation
who shall be convicted of a violation of any such section shall be guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor.
ADD NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS
ADD OR REVISE CHAPTER 2, DEFINITIONS TO READ AS FOLLOWS:
ADDRESS DIRECTORIES. See Section 502.
ASPHALT (ROOFING) KETTLE. A vessel or container used to process, heat, hold for
heating, or dispense flammable or combustible roofing materials that are in liquid form
or will take that form as a result of being exposed to such vessel or container.
AUXILIARY ACCESS OPENINGS. See Section 502
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE MATERIAL. Rubbish and refuse including, but not limited to
magazines, books; trimmings from lawns, trees or flower gardens, plastic, pasteboard
boxes, rags, paper, straw, sawdust, packing material, shavings, and boxes that will
ignite through contact with flames of ordinary temperatures and recyclables.
CONFINED SPACE is a space that is large enough and so configured that an employee
can bodily enter and perform assigned work; and has limited or restricted means for
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
entry or exit (for example tanks, vessels, silos, storage bins, hoppers, vaults and pits
and spaces that may have limited means of entry; and is not designed for continuous
employee occupancy.
EMERGENCY. An event or set of circumstances demanding immediate attention and
remediation.
EMERGENCY POWER SYSTEM. An electrical system where the current supply is
designed such that in the event of interruption of the normal power supply, a second
source of adequate capacity and rating is available within 10 seconds of power failure.
EXCAVATION is any man-made cut, cavity, trench or depression in an earth surface,
formed by earth removal.
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS GATES. See Section 502.
FIRE OFFICER. A fire officer is a sworn member of the Queen Creek Fire Department
having the rank of Captain or higher.
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. Fire Code Official charged with the administration and
enforcement of the 2006 IFC or “This Code” is the Fire Chief or duly authorized
representative.
IMMINENT HAZARD. Is defined as a high, real and immediate risk to life, health or
property.
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY EVENTS. Private and public events conducted outdoors,
including but not limited to beer gardens and mazes, having a projected attendance of
500 or more persons, at any one time, or confines 50 or more attendees by the
permanent or temporary installation of barricades or fencing.
PEDESTRIAN GATES. See Section 502.
PREEMPTION DEVICE. See Section 502.
R-4 See the International Building Code (IBC)
SPREAD NUMBERS. See Section 505.
SPREAD PLATE.. A permanent sign that identifies individual dwelling units at a
common entrance of a building.
STANDBY POWER SYSTEM. An electrical system where the current supply is
designed such that in the event of interruption of the normal power supply, a second
source of adequate capacity and rating is available within 60 seconds of power failure.
TEMPORARY. Temporary shall be for a period of less than 180 days.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
TRENCH is a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the
depth is greater than the width, but the width of a trench (measured at the bottom) is not
greater than 15 feet. If forms or other structures are installed or constructed in an
excavation so as to reduce the dimension measured from the forms or structure to the
side of the excavation to 15 feet or less (measured at the bottom), the excavation is also
considered to be a trench.
REVISE CHAPTER 3 TO READ AS FOLLOWS
307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning of rubbish that contains paper
products is prohibited. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of
smoke or odor emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances
make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited.
307.6 Warming fires.
307.6.1 General. Warming fires shall be conducted in accordance with Section 307.6
when no other form of heat is available for warming and the following is complied with:
1. All warming fires shall be under control at all times and have a responsible
person in constant attendance.
2. A noncombustible container shall be used for burning wood scraps. Maximum
size of the container shall be 55 gallons water capacity.
3. A spark arrester shall be installed on the top of each container. The spark
arrester shall be constructed of iron, heavy wire mesh or other noncombustible
material with openings not larger than ½ inch.
4. A minimum of a10 foot radius shall be provided between the
warming fire container and combustible materials.
ADD NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS
SECTION 319
EXCAVATIONS AND CONFINED SPACES
319.1 Scope. This section shall apply to any man-made cut, cavity, trench or
depression in an earth surface formed by earth removal and procedures to protect
employees from the hazards of entry into confined spaces.
319.2 Excavations and Trenches. Excavations and trenches shall be in accordance
with Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1926.
319.3 Confined Spaces. Confined spaces shall be in accordance with Title 29 Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 1910.
319.4 Unsafe Conditions. When in the opinion of the fire code official, an unsafe
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
condition exists, excavation and confined space operations shall cease and all persons
removed until such time as adequate means have been taken to provide for the safety
of persons working in or around the excavation or confined space.
ADD NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS
SECTION 409
DIGITAL / ELECTRONIC DRAWING FILE SUBMISSIONS
409.1 General. Projects requiring a construction permit from the Building Safety
Division, including projects performed under annual facilities permits, shall submit a
digital/electronic copy of the permit drawings in accordance with the required format. A
digital/electronic copy of the drawing shall not be required for the following:
(1) R3 occupancies.
(2) R4 occupancies.
(3) Single family residences.
(4) Other buildings or structures accessory to and located on the same lot with one
and two family dwellings.
(5) Projects not required to submit drawings to obtain a permit.
The digital/electronic copy of the permit drawings shall be submitted to the Fire
Department through the Building Safety Division for approval by the Fire Department's
Technical Services Section prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/completion by the Building Official.
409.2 Required Format. The digital/electronic files, required under this section, shall be
submitted on cd/dvd-rom in one of the following formats: (dwg), (dxf), or (dgn). If
submitted files are embedded with external references ("xref's"), such (xref) drawings
shall be included on the submitted cd/dvd-rom. Cryptic naming for layers/files shall
include a "definition key." All digital/electronic files shall be drawn in "feet" at a 1:1 scale.
409.2.1 Required Information. At a minimum, each file shall contain the following
information:
Floor Plans:
One plan for each building floor.
All exterior and interior walls.
All door locations (ingress/egress) throughout the building, including roll up doors
and roof hatch/doors.
Stairs and elevator locations.
Room/suite's names and/or numbers.
Utility shutoff locations (water, electric and gas).
Special hazards and high-piled stock/racks, if any.
Fire Department items shall include, but are not limited to, standpipes, fire
sprinkler risers, alarm panels, fire department connections, and key boxes.
Site Plan:
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
Including parking lot, building numbers, parking garages, fire lanes and hydrants.
Roof Plan:
Layout and access (ladder/hatch locations).
409.3 Not Required. The drawings are not required to contain layers listing furnishings,
floor coverings, ceiling styles/grids, plumbing fixtures, electrical (lights, switches,
outlets), wall coverings, or landscape information.
ADD OR REVISE 503 AS FOLLOWS
503.2.4 Turning radius. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum 45-
foot center line radius (35 foot inside radius, 55 foot outside radius) on curves.
503.2.6 Bridges and elevated surfaces. Where a bridge or an elevated surface
is part of a fire apparatus access road, the bridge shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with AASHTO HB-17. Bridges and elevated surfaces
shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed loads of fire
apparatus 66,000 pounds with a maximum axle load of 28,000 pounds. Vehicle
load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges when required by the
code official. Where elevated surfaces designed for emergency vehicle use are
adjacent to surfaces which are not designed for such use, approved barriers,
approved signs or both shall be installed and maintained when required by the
code official.
503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 15
percent (15 feet in 100 feet). Cross-slope of an access road shall not exceed 6%.
503.3.1 Curbs. Fire apparatus access roads shall be identified by curbs painted
red on both the top and face along the entire length of the fire apparatus access
road. Where no curb exists or a rolled curb is installed, a 6 inch wide red stripe
applied the full length of the fire apparatus access road shall be installed. Refer
to Appendix D.
503.3.2 Marking not required. Signs and red painted curbs are not required on
either side of the fire apparatus access road when a fire apparatus access road
is greater than 32 feet in width.
503.3.3 Signs required on both sides of a road. When a fire apparatus access
road is less than 26 feet in width fire lane signs and red painted curbs are
required on both sides of the access road.
Fire apparatus access roads serving only R-5 or R-3 single family detached
dwelling occupancies are required to have signs and red painted curbs installed
on both sides of the road when 20 feet or less in width.
503.3.4 Signs required on one side of road. When a fire apparatus access
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
road is 26 feet or greater and less than or equal to 32 feet in width, fire lane signs
and red painted curbs are required to be installed on a minimum of one side of
the access road. Fire apparatus access roads serving only R-5 Occupancies
require signs and red painted curbs on a minimum of one side of the fire
apparatus access road when it is greater than 20 feet and less than 26 feet in
width.
503.3.5 Stenciling. The fire department is authorized to require stenciling or
other permanent markings to improve the identification of fire apparatus access
roads. When required, the stenciling shall state “FIRE LANE NO PARKING”.
Lettering shall be white on a red painted curb and shall be a minimum of 3 inches
high with ½ inch brush stroke.
503.4.2 Stopping or parking in fire apparatus access roads. Motor vehicles,
with or without power, including trailers, shall not be stopped or parked in any fire
apparatus access road.
Any vehicle stopped or parked within an approved fire apparatus access road
may be issued a “Notice of Parking Violation” by any member of the Queen
Creek Fire Department, Maricopa County Sheriff, Pinal County Sheriff or any
representative that the fire chief or Sheriff designates.
Any vehicle stopped or parked within the fire apparatus access road may be
removed at the expense of the vehicle owner. Removal of a vehicle under such
circumstances may be authorized by the person in lawful possession of the
property or by the chief. The person in lawful possession of the property shall
keep designated fire apparatus access roads free of vehicles and other
obstructions.
503.4.3 Maintenance of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access
roads shall be maintained by the owner at all times. Faded, damaged or
vandalized signs shall be replaced with approved signs and posts.
503.4.4 Marking. The curb shall be painted red or approved red reflectors shall
be installed to define the width of alternative surface fire apparatus access roads.
The reflectors shall be imbedded into bordering curbing at intervals not
exceeding 15 feet.
503.7 Fire Apparatus Access Roads During Construction.
Fire department access during construction, shall comply with this section.
503.7.1 Required access. Fire apparatus access is required within 200 feet of
all points on the exterior of the building. Fire apparatus access roads shall be
provided prior to introducing combustible materials on the construction site.
503.7.2 Width. Fire apparatus access roads shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
width. Fire apparatus roads on construction sites shall not be obstructed.
503.7.3 Surface. At a minimum, the surface of fire apparatus roads shall be as
follows:
1. Minimum 6 inches of native soil compacted to 95% of standard proctor
density (ASTM D698), and
2. Minimum 4 inches of aggregate base compacted to 100% of standard
proctor density (ASTM D698).
The surface of fire apparatus access roads may differ from the above
requirements if it is shown that the surface provided is sufficient to support an
imposed live load of 66,000 pounds with a maximum axle load of 28,000 pounds.
An engineer registered in the State of Arizona shall prepare and seal the soil
compaction report. The report shall be available for review by the fire code
official.
503.7.4 Stabilization. Curbs are not required for fire apparatus access roads for
sites under construction.
503.7.5 Turning radius. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum 45-
foot center line radius (35 foot inside radius, 55 foot outside radius) on curves.
503.7.6 Dead-ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 200 feet
in length shall terminate in an approved turnaround.
505.2 Premises identification for residential occupancies. Shall be in accordance
with Section 505.
505.2.1 Single-family homes. The address numbers for single-family homes
shall be a minimum of 4 inches high, with a minimum 3/8 inch brush stroke on a
contrasting background.
505.2.2 Address Marking of Multi-Family Residential Occupancies. The
address, individual building, spread, and dwelling numbers at Group R
occupancies shall be in accordance with this section.
505.2.2.1 Building or Site Address. The street address numbers for
Group R, other than single family occupancies shall be a minimum of 12
inches high with a minimum of 2 inch wide brush stroke on contrasting
color. For buildings less than 100 feet long, a minimum of one address
shall be provided. For buildings over 100 feet in length, the address is
required in a minimum of two places. Each building in a complex shall
display its own identification.
505.2.2.2 Building identification numbers. Each building shall display
its specific alphabetical or numerical designation which must be clearly
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
visible from the fire apparatus access road. The building identification
numbers shall be a minimum of 18 inches high with a minimum 3-inch
brush stroke on contrasting color. For buildings less than 100 feet long, a
minimum of one building identification number per building shall be
provided. The building identification number is required to be internally or
externally illuminated.
505.2.2.3 Spread numbers. Spread numbers shall be provided adjacent
to the building identification numbers to indicate the apartment or unit
numbers by floors in the building. Spread numbers shall be a minimum of
7 inches high with a 1-inch brush stroke on a contrasting background. The
spread numbers are required to be internally or externally illuminated.
505.2.2.4 Unit identification at entrances. When more than one dwelling
or unit is accessed from an entrance, a spread plate is required.
505.2.2.5 Apartment or unit numbers. Individual apartment or unit
numbers shall be a minimum 4inch high with a minimum 3/8 inch brush
stroke on a contrasting background.
505.2.2.6 Additional unit identification signs.
Where a building is not visible from the fire apparatus access road, a
directional sign indicating the location of the unit is required.
505.3 Premises identification for commercial buildings. Commercial building
address numbers shall be a minimum of 12 inches high with a minimum 2-inch brush
stroke on contrasting background. The address shall be visible from all access
directions. When buildings are more than 200 feet long or set back from the road more
than 100 feet they shall be identified with building address numbers that are a minimum
of 24 inches high with a 4-inch brush stroke of a contrasting color. When buildings are
greater than 500 feet in length, the number and address shall be provided in a minimum
of two locations. When buildings have multiple access points, numbers and addresses
shall be provided at each access point.
505.3.1 Multi-tenant commercial buildings. Individual tenant spaces in multitenant
commercial buildings shall have their address or suite number posted at
the front entrance and rear access doors. This number shall be a minimum of 6”
high with a 1-inch brush stroke on a contrasting background.
505.3.2 Multiple buildings at a single address. Each building shall display its
specific alphabetical or numerical designation that shall be clearly distinguishable
from the fire apparatus access road. See Section 505.2.1 for minimum letter
height and brush stroke requirements.
505.4 Address directories.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
505.4.1 When required. An approved address directory shall be provided at
properties containing one of the following:
1. More than one principal building,
2. Buildings with unit identification numbers that are randomly numbered or
sequenced.
3. When, in the opinion of the fire code official, emergency response may be
delayed due to the physical layout of the complex.
505.4.2 Specifications. Address directories shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with this section.
505.4.3 Dimensions. The number of buildings in the complex shall determine
the minimum dimensions of the directory. Minimum directory dimensions shall be
as follows:
1. Complexes containing 12 or fewer buildings require a minimum 3 feet by 3
feet (9 square feet) site directory.
2. Complexes containing 13 to 30 buildings require a minimum 4 feet by 4
feet (16 square feet) site directory.
3. Complexes containing 31 or more buildings require a minimum 5 feet by 5
feet (25 square feet) site directory. Stanchions or supports shall not be
included in the required size of the directory.
505.4.4 Protection. The directory shall be protected against vandalism and
disfigurement by a clear polycarbonate cover, having a minimum thickness of 1/8
inch, sealed to protect the directory from weather.
505.4.5 Illumination. Address directories shall be internally illuminated utilizing
white light.
505.4.6 Installation requirements. Support posts or stanchions shall be set in
concrete. Directories with dimensions of 3 feet by 3 feet (9 square feet) shall be
mounted with the bottom of the directory not less than 36 inches above grade.
Directories with dimensions of 4 feet by 4 feet (16 square feet) and 5 feet by 5
feet (25 square feet) shall be mounted with the bottom of the directory not less
than 24 inches above grade.
505.4.7 Depictions. All depictions must be clear, easily understood, and legible
at a distance of 8 feet. The directory shall depict structures, building numbers,
units, apartment or space numbers, tennis courts, swimming pools, elevators,
driveways, streets, laundry rooms, fire hydrants, fire apparatus access roads and
other features as determined by the fire department. The depictions shall comply
with the following:
1. Directories shall be a dark print on a contrasting light background.
Buildings shown on the directory shall not be the same color as other
features indicated on the directory.
2. The name and address of the complex are required and shall not exceed
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
10% of the total size of the site directory.
3. Swimming pools, canals, and waterway areas shall be translucent blue.
4. Tennis courts shall be translucent green.
5. Fire hydrants shall be a ¼ inch diameter black circle filled in with a
translucent yellow center. The abbreviation ‘HYD” must be affixed by the
location of the hydrant on the directory.
6. The directory shall be properly oriented to the viewer with a red dot, 1-inch
in diameter, with the words “YOU ARE HERE” affixed at the appropriate
location on the directory.
7. A north arrow shall be included in the upper right quadrant of the directory.
The arrow shall be a minimum of 3 inches in length and a minimum of 1-
inch brush stroke.
8. Interior fire apparatus access roads, where provided, shall be marked on
the directory with red crosshatching.
505.4.8 Setbacks. The directory shall be installed on the occupancy’s property,
at locations approved by the fire code official. Placement of the address directory
shall be as follows:
1. The directory shall be set back from the street or curbing at least 25 feet to
allow emergency vehicles to clear the public right-of-way.
2. Shall not exceed a distance of 4 feet from the edge of the fire apparatus
access road facing the direction of oncoming traffic.
3. Shall not conflict with traffic visibility zones as provided for by other
ordinances.
4. Shall be immediately visible and free from obstructions including
architectural design and landscaping.
505.4.9 Prohibitions. Information such as advertising or additional art work shall
not be allowed on the address directory.
505.4.10 Maintenance. All premises identification shall be maintained clearly
visible and free from obstructions, including landscaping.
505.5 Private street or road signs. Private streets and roads shall be identified with
approved signs. Signs shall be of an approved size, weather resistant and be
maintained until replaced by permanent signs.
506.1.2 Height. The key box shall be mounted between 5 ½ and 6 feet above
grade measured within 3’ of the box.
506.1.3 Visibility. The key box shall be illuminated so as to be immediately
visible to fire personnel from the emergency apparatus. Posts, fences, vehicles,
growth, trash, storage, and other materials shall not be placed or kept near key
boxes in a manner that would prevent the key boxes from being immediately
discernible.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
507.3 Fire Flow. Fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and
facilities shall be determined by Appendix B.
ADD NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS
SECTION 511
CONTROLLED ACCESS GATES
511.1 General. The installation of controlled access gates across a fire apparatus
access road shall be approved by the fire code official and meet the requirements of
Section 511.
511.1.1 Permits. Permits shall be required to install or modify controlled access
gates.
511.1.2 Gate installation companies. When gates are installed at any location
that obstructs a fire apparatus access road, the installing company shall be
licensed by the Arizona Registrar of Contractors
511.1.3 Egress. Fire apparatus access gates shall be designed and installed
such that they do not obstruct the ingress and egress of emergency vehicles.
511.1.4 Maintenance. All fire apparatus access gates shall be maintained
operable at all times and shall be inspected at least annually. Copies of the
annual inspection report shall be maintained and be accessible for fire
department review.
511.1.5 Inoperable gates. Controlled access gates that are inoperable and
impede the entrance of fire apparatus shall be chained open or removed at the
owner’s expense.
511.1.6 Illegal gates. Controlled access gates that cross fire apparatus access
roads that have been installed without a permit shall be chained open or
removed at the owner’s or installing contractor’s expense until a permit and final
approval has been obtained from the fire department.
511.2 Fire Apparatus Access Gates.
511.2.1 General. Access gates are required to be automatic where no turnaround
is provided for fire apparatus.
511.2.2 Main entrance identification. Access openings shall have signs that
identify the location of the property’s primary entrance, and signs shall be bolted
on the street side of the fire apparatus access gate.
511.2.3 Marking and signage. Manual and automatic access openings are
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
required to be marked in accordance with Section 511.3.5. Signage shall be
provided in accordance with Section 511.5.2.
511.3 Controlled access Gate Specifications. When controlled access gates are
installed across a fire apparatus access road the specifications in 511.2 shall apply.
511.3.1 Opening width. When the gate is fully opened, a minimum 20-foot clear
width shall be provided for both the entrance and exit gates. Gates installed and
approved prior to the effective date of this code shall be maintained in
accordance with the original approval.
The Fire Code Official shall require additional width opening when existing
conditions cannot met the 45-foot fire apparatus turning radius.
511.3.2 Electrically operated gates. Electrically operated gates shall be
installed in accordance with this section.
511.3.2.1 Standby power systems. Electrically operated gates shall be
provided with a standby power system. Standby power is permitted to be,
but not limited to, battery back-up or connection to an emergency
generator. The activation of the system shall open gates and maintain
them in the open position until primary power is restored to the system.
Standby power systems are required to comply with the National Electrical
Code Article 701.
Exception: Controlled access gates installed at occupancies other
than multi-family residential properties may remain closed until the
emergency gate switch is activated, and shall then remain open
while the standby power system is operating the gate.
511.3.3 Opening time. Electrically operated controlled access gates shall open
at a minimum rate of one foot per second.
511.3.4 Key switch. Each electrically operated controlled access gate shall be
equipped with an approved key switch on both sides of the gate. When separate
entry and exit gates are provided, the emergency key switch shall open the
entrance and exit gates.
511.3.5 Key switch identification. An approved sign reading “F.D. ACCESS”
shall be installed within 12 inches of the emergency key switch. The key switch
shall be illuminated so as to be visible from fire apparatus.
511.3.6 Height. The key switch shall be mounted between 5 ½ feet and 6 feet
above grade.
511.3.7 Obstruction and impairment. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash,
storage and other materials shall not be kept near key switches in a manner that
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
would prevent the key switches from being visible. A three foot clear space shall
be maintained around the circumference of the key switch.
511.3.8 Bypass of systems. When activated, the emergency key switch shall
bypass all occupant and loop switch systems.
511.4 Preemption devices. Preemption devices are required on all new automatic fire
access gates installed after the adoption of this code, at residential properties. Gates
installed without permits or proof of installation date, require preemption devices.
Voluntary installations of preemption devices shall comply with the requirements of
Section 511.4.2.
511.4.1 Locations. The devices shall be installed such that the gate will open for
both ingress and egress of emergency vehicles.
511.4.2 Minimum installation standards. The installation of preemption devices
shall comply with the following:
1. Detectors shall be mounted 8 feet to 10 feet above grade.
2. Detectors shall be located a minimum of 18 inches behind the gate on the
property side.
3. Detectors shall be mounted on a separate 4 inch by 4 inch metal post and
not on the guidepost. The metal post shall be cemented a minimum of 18
inches below grade.
4. Detectors shall activate at a minimum of 150 feet from the gate.
5. Detectors shall point toward both the approach and the exit path of the
emergency vehicle.
6. The sight path of the detector shall be free of visual obstructions such as
signs, covered parking, canopies and vegetation.
7. Individual detectors shall be mounted together with the power module in
the dual detector-mounting box. Detectors shall be approved by the fire
department.
ADD OR REVISE SECTIONS WITHIN 903 AS FOLLOWS.
Sections 903.2 through 903.2.11.3 are deleted in their entirely and amended as follows:
903.2 Where required. All new building and structures shall be provided with an
automatic sprinkler throughout.
Exceptions:
1. Detached single family dwellings, Group R-3 and their associated detached
accessory structures not including Group R-4.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
2. Detached telecommunication buildings not exceeding 600 square feet in floor area
and not intended for occupancy other than maintenance purposes.
3. Detached accessory use structures such as gazebos, ramadas, guardhouses,
restroom buildings at golf courses, parks and similar uses.
4. Detached canopies of type I or II construction not exceeding 3000 square feet in roof
area located a minimum of 10 feet from buildings, structures and property lines.
5. Fire rated fabric shade canopies of type I or II framing construction not in excess of
3000 square feet in roof area located a minimum of 10 feet from buildings, structures
and property lines.
6. Portable storage containers of type I or II construction not in excess of 360 square
feet located a minimum of 10 feet from buildings structures, property lines and other
containers, with no hazardous materials storage.
7. Factory built buildings less than 1,500 square feet used as temporary offices for real
estate leasing or construction management and not to exceed 12 months from
installation date.
8. Detached U occupancies of less than 3,000 square feet and located a minimum of 10
feet from buildings, structures and property lines.
9. Covered walkways of type I or II construction with no combustible storage underneath
and approved by the fire code official.
903.2.1 Additions to Existing Buildings and Structure. Added as follows:
All additions to existing buildings or structures and all buildings or structures that are
expanded by an addition(s) shall be provided with an approved automatic fire sprinkler
system throughout all levels complying with section 903.2
Exception:
The maximum aggregate fire area of an addition (s) is less than 1,000 square feet or
10% of the floor area of the existing building or structure, whichever is less.
903.2.2 Change of Occupancy within hazard level 1. Added as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed when a building, regardless of the
building area, under goes a change of occupancy within hazard level 1 as defined by
table 903.2.5
903.2.3 Change of Occupancy over 5,000 square feet. Added as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in any building 5,000 square feet or
greater that under goes any change of occupancy.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
903.2.4 Change of Occupancy less than 5,000 square feet. Added as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in any building less than 5,000
square feet that under goes a change of occupancy to a higher Level as defined by
Table 903.2.5
Table 903.2.5
Existing Building Hazard Levels
Hazard Level Building Occupancy Type*
1 (highest) A, H, I, R-1, R-2, R-4
2 F-1, S-1
3 E, F-2, S-2
4 (lowest) B, M, R-3, U
*Occupancies as defined in the Town of Queen Creek Building Code
903.3.1.2.2 Attics. Where installed in buildings, Fire Sprinkler systems
shall be provided within attic areas.
903.3.1.2.3 Exterior storage closets. Where installed in buildings,
sprinkler protection shall be extended into attached exterior storage closets.
903.3.1.2.4 Attached garages, carports and balconies. Where installed in
buildings, sprinkler protection shall be extended into attached garages,
carports, open patios or balconies with living space directly above or
adjacent to.
903.3.1.2.5 Residential combination services.
With Water Department approval a single combination water supply shall be
permitted provided that the domestic demand is added to the sprinkler
demand as required by NFPA 13R.
903.5.1. Fire Sprinkler Riser Room. For the purpose of inspection, testing, or
maintenance of NFPA 13 & 13R fire protection systems in new buildings, there
shall be provided, at the time of construction, a dedicated interior riser room with
direct exterior access door on the side of the building next to the fire sprinkler
riser of adequate size to allow for valves and gauges to be accessed, repaired
and viewed for testing and maintenance purposes. The dimensions of the access
door will be dependent upon the design of the riser and system devices but shall,
in no case, require that service personnel must enter a private dwelling or garage
to reach the riser for service and/or repair.
903.3.7.1 Remote Fire Department Connections. Remote fire department
connections shall be located within four (4) feet (1219.2mm) to eight (8) feet
(2438.4mm) of the curb line of an access road or public street, or as otherwise
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
specified. The fire department connection line shall be a wet line with the check
valve at the hose connection above grade.
903.3.7.2. Fire department connection sizing. The size of the fire department
connection and piping is dependent on the automatic sprinkler design flow. The
maximum design flow for a 2-½ inch Siamese connection is 500 gpm. For design
flows greater that 500 gpm install a single 2-½ inch siamese connection and 5
inch Storz connection ted by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler
of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be
provided on the exterior of the building in an approved location. An interior alarm
to alert the occupants shall be provided in the interior of the building in a normally
occupied location when off-site monitoring is required. Where a fire alarm system
is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building
fire alarm system.
903.4.2 Alarms. Approved audible devices shall be connected to every
automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be
active
905.3.4 Stages. Stages greater than 1,000 square feet in area (93 m2) shall be
equipped with a Class I wet standpipe system with 2.5 inch (64 mm) hose
connections on each side of the stage supplied from the automatic fire sprinkler
system and shall have a flow rate of not less than that required for class 1
standpipes.
905.3.4.1 Hose and cabinet. Delete section.
905.12. Hose connections for access challenges. Buildings exceeding 10,000
square feet (929 m2) in area per story, and not otherwise required to be equipped with a
standpipe system by section 905.3 of the 2012 IFC, shall be equipped with class I
manual hose connections (2-1/2” NST) for fire department use as follows:
1. The locations shall be in accordance with, NFPA13, and 2012 IFC sec. 905.4,
except item 1. 905.4, item 1 locations shall be at each floor-level landing,
including grade level, within enclosed stairways, rather than located at
intermediate floor level landings.
2. The hose connections are required when exterior ground floor walls exceed the
required distance from fire apparatus access roads.
3. Single story structures are not required to have hose connections except in those
interior portions of the building that exceed 200 feet (60.96 m) of travel from an
emergency access road.
4. Where the most remote portion of a floor or story is more than 200 feet of travel
from a hose connection, additional hose connections are required.
5. The hose connections may be combined with the fire sprinkler system and sized
to deliver 250 gallons per minute at 100 psi from the most hydraulically remote
outlet, using 150 psi fire department pump-in pressure. Calculations for hose
demand shall be submitted with sprinkler plans.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
907.2.12.1 Automatic fire detection. Smoke detectors shall be provided in
accordance with this section. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an automatic
fire alarm system. The activation of any detector required by this section shall
operate the emergency voice/alarm communication system.
907.10 Visible alarms. Visible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in
accordance with Sections 907.10.1.1 through 907.10.1.45.
ADD SECTION 907.10.1.5 TO READ AS FOLLOWS
912.1.1 Underground pipe. All fire department connection underground piping
shall be installed as a minimum DIP Class 350.
REPLACE SECTION 912.2.1 TO READ AS FOLLOWS
912.2.1 Visible location. Fire department connections shall be located on the
street side of buildings, fully visible and recognizable from the street or nearest
point of fire department vehicle access or as otherwise approved by the fire code
official. The location of fire department connections shall be approved and
installed as follows:
1. Within 50 feet of an approved fire access rd., and arranged so that hose
lines can be readily attached to the inlets without interference from any
objects including buildings, fences, posts, plantings, or other fire
department connections.
2. Within 300 feet of an approved hydrant.
3. So that the inlet height shall not be less than 18 inches nor more than 48
inches above grade.
4. Guard posts or other approved means may be required to protect fire
department inlet connections from vehicular damage.
912.2.3 Wall mounted Fire Department Connections. Wall mounted fire
department connections are permitted on light and ordinary Group 1
construction, when:
1. There are no glazed structural openings within 5 feet (1524mm)
horizontally from inlet connection.
2. The structure is not classified as an “H” occupancy.
3. The fire department connection is within 50 feet of an approved roadway
or driveway and arranged so that hose lines can be readily attached to the
inlets without interference from any nearby objects including buildings,
fences, post, plantings or other fire department connections. as approved
by the fire code official.
912.4 Signs. Each fire department connection shall be identified by a permanent
weather resistant sign. The sign face shall be a minimum 12” x 12” and fabricated from
.080 aluminum sheet or equivalent. The sign face shall have a white 3M diamond grade
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
sheeting or equivalent applied as background. When the system supplied by the FDC
does not supply the entire building or supplies multiple buildings, the sign shall identify
the buildings or areas of the building supplied by the FDC. The fire department
connection sign shall identify the building address or area, where necessary, and type
of systems the FDC supplies.
ADD NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS
SECTION 915
FIREFIGHTER BREATHING AIR REPLENISHMENT SYSTEM
915. Firefighter Breathing Air Replenishment Systems
915.1. General. A firefighter breathing air replenishment system (FBAR System) is a
complete, self-contained high pressure breathing air replenishment system for
emergency responders. This system consists of a fire department air connection panel,
remote air fill panels and high pressure interconnected piping, permanently installed
within a structure. This allows fire department personnel to replenish empty selfcontained
breathing apparatus (SCBA) cylinders within close proximity to the location of
the incident requiring emergency response, thus reducing the amount of travel distance,
time and support personnel needed at an emergency incident.
915.2. Applicability. The requirements of this subsection shall apply to all new
buildings and structures meeting the specifications set forth in paragraph 915.3.
915.3. Buildings and structures requiring FBAR System. A FBAR System shall be
installed in all new buildings, existing buildings that have a change of occupancy and
structures meeting any of the following criteria:
915.3.1. Buildings and structures five (5) floors or more above grade or high rise
buildings as defined by the Queen Creek Code; or
915.3.2. Underground buildings and structures, or components thereof, totaling
ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more that are either more than two (2)
floors below grade or more than thirty (30) feet below grade.
915.4. Drawings. Submit scaled drawings of the FBAR system to the Town of Queen
Creek as required in Section 105 of the Queen Creek Code.
915.5. Contractor qualifications. The FBAR system shall be installed tested and
maintained by a contractor with an Arizona Registrar of Contractors license and have
knowledge of high pressure and medical gas piping.
915.6. FBAR System requirements. The FBAR System installation shall allow fire
department personnel to simultaneously replenish four (4), 45 cubic foot self-contained
breathing apparatus cylinders at any one (1) time, with two (2) connections at three
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
thousand (3,000) psi and two (2) connections at four thousand five hundred (4,500) psi.
Fire department personnel shall be able to connect into the FBAR System's fire
department air connection panel at grade level from a mobile air support apparatus
thereby providing a constant source of breathing air supplied directly from the air
support apparatus to the system's remote air fill panels.
915.7. FBAR System components. The FBAR System shall consist of the following
minimum components:
915.7.1. Exterior fire department air connection panel;
915.7.2. Interior cylinder fill panels;
915.7.3. Interconnected piping; and
915.7.4. Low pressure monitoring switches and alarm.
915.8. Exterior Fire Department Air Connection Panel.
915.8.1. Location: An exterior fire department air connection panel shall be
installed on the exterior of the building or within a remote monument at a location
approved by the Fire Chief with a minimum of six (6) foot – 180 degree clear
unobstructed access to the front of the panel and shall be interconnected to the
building's interior remote air fill panels. Locate the fire department fill panel within
50 feet of the approved fire access.
915.8.2. Enclosure: The fill inlet and associated components of the air
connection panel shall be contained in a lockable, weather tight enclosure. The
enclosure shall be a weather resistant metal cabinet constructed of minimum 18-
gauge carbon steel or equivalent. The enclosure shall be provided with a coating
or other means to protect the enclosure from corrosion.
915.8.3. Enclosure components: The exterior fire department connection panel
shall contain all of the necessary gauges, isolation valves, pressure relief valves,
pressure regulating valves, check valves, tubing, fittings, supports, connectors,
adapters and other necessary components as may be required to allow the fire
department’s mobile air unit to quickly connect and augment the system with a
constant source of breathing air. The panel shall be locked at all times, unless in
use by fire department personnel. The locking mechanism for the panel cover
shall be contained in an approved key box installed at a location approved by the
Fire Chief. The key to unlocking the cover shall be stored in the approved key
box. Each fire department connection panel shall contain at least two (2)
connections.
915.8.4. Pressure relief valve: Install a pressure relief valve downstream of the
pressure regulator inlet. The relief valve shall meet the requirements of CGA SOrdinance
539-13
January 2014
1.3 Safety Relief Valves and shall not be 28 field adjustable. The relief valve shall
have a set to open pressure not exceeding 1.1 times the design pressure of the
system. Pressure relief valve discharge shall terminate so that the exhaust air
stream cannot impinge upon personnel in the area. Valves, plugs or caps shall
not be installed in the discharge of a pressure relief valve. Where discharge
piping is used the end shall not be threaded.
915.8.5. Damage protection: The fire department air connection panel shall be
installed in an area protected from physical damage.
915.9. Interior cylinder fill panels.
915.9.1. New buildings. Unless otherwise approved by the chief, the interior
cylinder fill panels shall be installed in the above grade portion of applicable
structures in all stairwells. Install the required interior cylinder fill panels
commencing on the third floor and on every other floor above the third floor. The
interior cylinder fill panels are not required on the highest floor or on the floor
immediately below the highest floor. Unless otherwise approved by the chief, the
interior cylinder fill panels shall be installed in the below grade portion of
applicable structures at stairwells, or other areas of ingress or egress approved
by the chief, commencing on the third floor below ground level and every other
floor below grade level thereafter or, if there are fewer than three (3) floors below
ground level, the lowest floor.
915.9.2. Existing buildings. Install the interior cylinder fill panels per Section
915.9 in existing buildings within one stairwell only. The Fire Chief shall approve
that stairwell. The interior cylinder fill panels may be surfaced mounted within the
stairwell and shall be at the stairwell floor landing.
915.9.3. Cabinet requirements. Each cylinder fill panel shall be installed in a
metal cabinet constructed of minimum 18-gauge carbon steel or equivalent. The
depth of the cabinet shall not create an exit obstruction when installed in building
stairwells. With the exception of the shutoff valve, pressure gauges, fill hoses and
ancillary components, no system components shall be visible and shall be
contained behind a minimum 18-gauge interior panel.
915.9.3.1. Door. Hinges for the cabinet door shall be located inside of the
cabinet. The door shall be arranged such that when the door is open, it
does not reduce the required exit width or create an obstruction in the path
of egress.
915.9.3.2. Cabinet components. The cabinet shall be of sufficient size to
allow for the installation of the following components:
915.9.3.2.1. The cylinder fill panel shall contain all of the gauges,
isolation valves, pressure relief valves, pressure regulating valves,
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
check valves, tubing, fittings, supports, connectors, hoses, adapters
and other components to refill SCBA cylinders.
915.9.3.2.2. Cylinder filling hose. The design of the cabinet shall
provide a means for storing the hose to prevent kinking. When the
hose is coiled, the brackets shall be installed so that the hose bend
radius is maintained at 4 inches or greater. Fill hose connectors for
connection to SCBA cylinders shall comply with the requirements of
NFPA 1981. No other SCBA cylinder fill connections shall be
permitted.
915.9.3.2.3. Security. Each panel cover shall be maintained locked
by an approved means.
915.9.3.3. Clearance and access. The panel shall be a minimum of 36
inches but not more than 60 inches above the finished floor or stairway
landing. Clear unobstructed access shall be provided to each panel.
915.9.4. The interior cylinder fill panel capacity. The interior cylinder fill panels
shall contain all of the necessary gauges, isolation valves, pressure relief valves,
pressure regulating valves, check valves, tubing, fittings, supports, connectors,
adapters and other necessary components as may be required to allow
firefighters and other first responders to safely and reliably replenish a minimum
of two (2) forty-five (45) cubic feet breathing air cylinders simultaneously.
915.10. Tubing, valves and fittings. Unless otherwise approved by the Fire Chief, all
tubing, valves and fittings shall be compatible and support a minimum working pressure
of five thousand (5,000) psi. Design the tubing, valves and fittings with a safety factor of
four (4). Support the tubing not less than at five-foot intervals.
915.10.1. Tubing. Tubing shall be stainless steel complying with ASTM A269 or
other approved materials that are compatible with breathing air at the system
pressure. Routing of tubing and bends shall be such as to protect the tubing from
mechanical damage.
915.10.2. Fittings. Fittings shall be constructed of stainless steel complying with
ASTM A403/A403M or other approved materials that are compatible with
breathing air at the system pressure.
915.10.3. Prohibited materials. The use of non-metallic materials, carbon steel,
iron pipe, malleable iron, high strength gray iron, or alloy steel shall be prohibited
for breathing air pipe and tubing materials.
915.10.4. Protection. The entire system shall be protected by a minimum of twohour
rated construction that protects the system from possible damage. When
piping must pass through a fire rated or solid material, protect the piping with a
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
sleeve that is at least three (3) times the pipe diameter. Fill both ends of the
sleeve and wall gap with an approved fire stop. Label the piping with “Rescue
Breathing Air” at internals not less than 10 feet.
915.11. Low pressure monitoring and alarm. When not being utilized by fire
department personnel, the FBAR System shall maintain a constant pressure of at least
four thousand five hundred (4,500) psi. An alarm or monitoring system capable of
detecting, and that is set to detect, a pressure drop of one thousand (1,000) psi shall be
included and maintained with the FBAR System. The low-pressure alarm shall transmit
a supervisory signal to the building alarm fire system and to the central alarm monitoring
station when the system pressure falls below the minimum allowed pressure. A building
or structure owner or designee, shall notify the fire department of any scheduled test of
the system conducted by the owner of the building or structure. Unless otherwise
approved by the Fire Chief, the low-pressure alarm shall be monitored by an approved
fire and smoke alarm system for the building or structure.
Exception:
In lieu of the low pressure monitoring and alarm, the building owner shall test the
air quality of the system every three months according to NFPA 1989.
915.12. Isolation valve. A system isolation valve shall be installed downstream of each
air fill station and shall be located in the panel or within 3 feet of the station. The
isolation valve shall be marked with its function in letters that are a minimum of 3/16-
inches high with a 1/16-inch brush stroke.
915.13. Markings and record keeping. The fire department air connection panel and
the remote air fill panels shall be clearly identified by means of permanently installed
signage which says: “FIREFIGHTER AIR SYSTEM” in minimum letters 1½ inch high
with a ¼ inch stoke and be located where plainly visible. The building or structure owner
shall keep the area in and around the fire department air connection panel and the
remote air fill panels free of objects that may block use of these panels and shall
maintain and test the FBAR System in accordance with NFPA Standards and
manufacturer specifications. Records of all maintenance and testing of the FBAR
System shall be kept on-site for a minimum of three (3) years and be available to fire
department personnel upon request.
915.14. Testing requirements. When fabrication, assembly and installation of the
FBAR System is complete, the entire system shall be tested in accordance with the
following:
915.14.1 The system shall be inspected for leaks by pneumatically pressure
testing the system to five thousand (5,000) psi using oil-free, dry air. An approved
solution shall be used on each joint and fitting in the system to detect leaks. All
leaks or failure to maintain five thousand (5,000) psi pneumatic pressure shall be
documented by the system installer and forwarded to the system manufacturer
for inspection, repair and/or replacement.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
915.14.2 Upon successful completion of the five thousand (5,000) psi pressure
testing, the entire system shall be pneumatically pressure tested to one and onehalf
(1 1/2) times the working pressure (seven thousand five hundred (7,500) psi)
using oil free, dry air for at least one (1) hour. All leaks or failure to maintain
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) psi pneumatic pressure shall be
documented by the system installer and forwarded to the system manufacturer
for inspection, repair and/or replacement.
915.14.3 Final Proof Test. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall witness filling
of two (2) empty sixty six (66) cubic foot capacity SCBA cylinders in three (3)
minutes or less using compressed air supplied by fire department equipment
connected to the exterior fire department connection panel. The SCBA cylinders
shall be filled at the air fill panel or station farthest from the exterior fire
department connection panel. Following this, a minimum of two (2) air samples
shall then be taken from separate air filling stations and submitted to an
independent certified gas analyst laboratory to verify the system's cleanliness
and that the air meets the requirements of NFPA 1989. The written report shall
be provided to the Authority Having Jurisdiction certifying that the air analysis
complies with the above requirements.
915.15 Air quality testing. Upon completion of the pressure testing, test the air quality
of the systems according to NFPA 1989.
CHAPTER 37
PLACES OF ASSEMBLY
SECTION 3701
GENERAL
3701.1 Scope. Places of assembly, including, trade shows and exhibitions, outdoor
assembly events, outdoors mazes, special amusement buildings and special scaffolding
structures shall comply with Chapter 37.
3701.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.7.
3701.3 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be submitted to the
fire code and building official prior to the construction or modification of special
amusement buildings, special scaffolding-type structures and multi-level exhibits
3701.4 Site plans. Site plans shall be submitted to the fire code official for prior
approval in accordance with the following:
1. Outdoor assembly events: At least 30 work days prior to the event, site plans
shall be submitted to the fire code official that include, but not be limited to the
location and width of exits, location of fencing or means used to confine attendees,
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
and locations of fire apparatus access roads.
2. Trade shows and exhibitions: A minimum of 30 days prior to set-up of trade
shows or exhibitions, site plans shall be submitted to the fire code official
documenting all details of the trade show or exhibition including, but not limited to
the location and size of exhibits and booths, aisles and exits, location of fire
extinguishers, hose valves, manual pull stations, and fire alarm strobes, location of
covered or multi-level exhibits or booths.
3. Outdoor mazes. A minimum of 30 days prior to the event, site plans shall be
submitted to the fire code official. The site plan shall document the location of mazes
and any other buildings or structures on the site, location of means to confine
attendees, location and width of exits, location of internal combustion engines,
location of approved fire extinguishers, location of generators and location of fire
hydrants.
4. Vehicle displays: At least 10 work days prior to the display of liquid- or gasfueled
vehicles, boats or other motor craft in Group A occupancies. See Section
314.4.
Exception:
Auto dealerships.
5. Vehicle competition or demonstration. At least 10 days prior to the competition
or demonstration of gas-fueled vehicles, boats or other motor craft in Group A
occupancies. See Section 314.4.
SECTION 3702
DEFINITIONS
3702.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this
chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein.
[B] Assembly Group A. See Section 202, General Definitions.
EXHIBITS. A space or portable structure used for the display of products or services.
MAZES. A labyrinth of paths throughout a confined area accessible by walking or
mobile.
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY EVENTS. Private and public events conducted outdoors,
including but not limited to beer gardens and mazes, having a projected attendance of
500 or more persons throughout the event and confine attendees by the permanent or
temporary installation of barricades or fencing.
SWEAT LODGE. A structure constructed for a religious ceremony that contains a fire.
TORCHES. The use of open flame torches for entertainment purposes before a
proximate audience.
TRADE SHOWS OR EXHIBITIONS. Public or private displays, events or occurrences
held in buildings or portions of buildings for gathering together of 50 or more persons for
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
purposes of competition, demonstration, a setting or presentation of something in open
view, or showing the merits of a product or service to a prospective consumer.
SECTION 3703
TRADE SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
3703.1 General. Trade shows and exhibitions, conducted within any occupancy shall
comply with Sections 3703 and 314.
3703.2 Fixtures and displays. Fixtures and displays of goods for sale to the public
shall be arranged so as to maintain free, immediate and unobstructed access to exits as
required by Chapter 10.
3703.3 Vehicles. Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles, boats or other motor-craft displayed
shall comply with Section 314.
3703.4 Means of egress. Shall comply with this code and the requirements of the
International Building Code.
3703.4.1 Travel distance. The maximum travel distance from any point in an exhibit
to an exit access shall not exceed 50 feet (15240mm).
3703.4.2 Aisles.
3703.4.2.1 Aisle width. Minimum aisle width in a trade show or exhibition shall
comply with the following:
Square Footage of Trade Show or Exhibition
Minimum Aisle Width
Greater than 15,000 square feet 10 feet
5,000 square feet to 15,000 square feet 8 feet
Less than 5,000 square feet 6 feet
The square footage of the trade show or exhibition shall be determined by
adding all of the areas being used in the occupancy for the venue, not the
individual size of each room.
3703.4.3 Obstructions. Aisles shall be kept clear of all obstructions, including but
not limited to, chairs, tables, product, displays, vehicles, and trailer tongues.
3703.4.4 Exit signs. Exit signs shall be visible from all locations in the occupancy.
3703.5 Exhibit construction and materials. The materials used for an exhibit shall
comply with Section 3703.6.
3703.5.1 Materials.
1. Noncombustible or limited-combustible materials.
2. Wood exceeding ¼-inch (6mm) nominal thickness
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
3. Wood ¼-inch (6mm) nominal thickness or less that is pressure-treated fireretardant
wood meeting the requirements of NFPA 703, Standard for Fire
Retardant Impregnated Wood and Fire Retardant Coatings for Building Materials.
The product shall be marked or labeled by the manufacturer. See NFPA 703,
Section 1.2.3 for labeling requirements. The product shall not be painted or
similarly modified until the material has been inspected and the marking or
labeling verified, or provide documentation acceptable to the fire code official.
3703.5.1.1 Flame retardant materials. Vertical materials shall comply with
NFPA 701.
3703.5.1.2 Wall and ceiling coverings. Textile wall coverings, such as
carpeting and similar products used as wall or ceiling finishes shall comply with
NFPA 101, Sections 10.2.2 and 10.2.4.
3703.5.1.3 Plastics. Plastics shall be limited to those that comply with Section
803.2.1. Plastics used in trade shows and exhibitions with an occupant load of
300 or more shall be Class A or Class B. Plastics used in trade shows and
exhibitions with an occupant load of less than 300, shall be Class A, Class B or
Class C.
3703.6 Combustible materials storage.
3703.6.1 Quantity. Combustible materials shall be limited to a one-day supply.
3703.6.2 Location. Storage of combustible materials behind exhibits is prohibited.
Combustible materials, including but not limited to wood crates, paper and
cardboard boxes, shall be stored outside the building in an approved area or in a
storeroom having a fire-resistance rating of at least one hour and protected by an
approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.
3703.7 Fire Protection.
3703.7.1 Clearance. A minimum 3-foot (914mm) clearance shall be provided around
all fire extinguishers, fire hose cabinets, fire alarm pull stations and all other fire
protection equipment, and shall be visible and accessible from an aisle.
3703.7.2 Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with Section
906.
3703.7.3 Covered exhibits and booths.
3703.7.3.1 Automatic extinguishing systems. Approved automatic
extinguishing systems shall be provided in covered exhibits and booths
exceeding 300 square feet. See Section 105.7. Each level of multi-level exhibit
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
booths shall be protected throughout, including the uppermost level where the
uppermost level is covered with a ceiling.
Exception: Displays including boats, motor homes and other recreational
vehicles.
3703.7.3.2 Smoke detectors. Single-station smoke detectors shall be provided
in all enclosed, covered exhibits exceeding 120 square feet (111,484 cm2).
3703.8 Multi-level booths. Construction documents for all multi-level exhibits shall be
approved and stamped by a licensed structural engineer or architect and shall be
submitted with the permit application. This includes any exhibit where a live load is
proposed above the exhibit area floor level, regardless of the accessibility of the area to
the public. Upper levels of multi-level booths with an occupant load greater than 10
persons shall have at least 2 remote exits.
3703.8 Hazardous Materials. Hazardous materials shall comply with Section 4703.10
and Chapter 27.
3703.8.1 Specific prohibitions. The following hazardous materials and operations
are prohibited in trade shows and exhibitions:
1. Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.5 explosives as classified by the U.S.
Department of Transportation.
2. Detonable, Class I and Class II organic peroxides.
3. Class I-A flammable liquids.
4. Class 4 and Class 3 oxidizers.
5. Class 4 and Class 3 (unstable) reactive materials.
6. Class 3 water-reactive materials.
7. Pyrophoric materials.
8. Highly toxic materials
9. Toxic gases.
10. Fueling or defueling of flammable or combustible liquids or compressed
gases.
3703.9 Decorations. Curtains, drapes and decorations including, but is not limited to
drapes, signs, banners, acoustical materials, cotton, hay, fabric, paper, straw, moss,
split bamboo, and wood chips shall be flame resistant as demonstrated by testing in
accordance with NFPA 701, or provide documentation of flame retardancy. Materials
that cannot be treated for flame retardancy shall not be used. This includes but is not
limited to oilcloth, tarpaper, nylon, plastic cloth, and other plastic materials.
3703.10 Liquid- and Gas-fueled vehicles and equipment. Liquid- and gas-fueled
vehicles used for display, competition or demonstration within a building shall be in
accordance with Section 314.4.
3703.11 Demonstration Cooking and warming equipment and devices.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
3703.11.1 General. Cooking and warming devices shall be in accordance with
Section 4703.13. This section shall apply to the use of cooking and warming
devices for demonstration purposes only.
3703.11.2 Public Isolation. The equipment and devices shall be isolated from the
public by not less than 4 feet (1219mm) or by a noncombustible 3-sided barrier
between the equipment and devices and the public.
3703.11.3 Protection. Single-well cooking equipment using combustible oils or
solids shall meet the following:
1. A noncombustible lid shall be immediately available. The lid shall be of
sufficient size to cover the cooking well completely.
2. The cooking surface shall not exceed 288 square inches (18,580mm).
3. The equipment shall be placed on a noncombustible surface.
4. The equipment shall be separated from each other by a horizontal distance of
not less than 2 feet (609mm).
3703.11.4 Fire extinguishers. An approved 20-B: C rated dry chemical fire
extinguisher shall be provided within 30 feet (9144mm) of deep fat fryers using
animal fat oil. An approved Class K rated fire extinguisher shall be provided within
30 feet (9144mm) of deep fat fryers using vegetable oils.
3703.11.5 The cooking equipment shall be separated from combustible materials by
a horizontal distance of at least 2 feet (609mm).
3703.12 Electrical. See Section 605.
3703.13 Open flame devices. See Section 308.
3703.14 Lasers. Lasers shall comply with State of Arizona regulations.
SECTION 3704
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY EVENTS
3704.1 General. Outdoor assembly events shall be in accordance with Section 4704.
3704.2 Occupant load. The fire code official shall establish an occupant load for the
event site when not in conjunction with building occupant loads determined under the
IBC.
3704.3 Exits. Exits as remote from each other as practical shall be provided as follows:
Occupant Load Minimum Number of Exits
500 to 4,999 2
5,000 to 8,999 3
9,000 or more 4
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
3704.3.1 Width. The aggregate clear width of exits shall be a minimum of 36 inches
wide (914mm) for each 500 persons to be accommodated.
3704.3.2 Signs. Exits shall be identified with signs that read “EXIT”. The signs shall
be weather-resistant with red lettering on a contrasting background. The lettering
shall be of sufficient height and brush stroke to be immediately visible from 75 feet
(22,860mm). Placement of the exit signs shall be approved by the fire code official.
3704.4 Access. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided in accordance with
Chapter 5.
3704.5 Fire extinguishers.
3704.5.1 General. Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided for the entire event
site in accordance with Section 906.
3704.5.2 Travel distance. Maximum travel distance to reach a portable fire
extinguisher shall not exceed 75 feet (22,860mm).
3704.6 Electrical equipment. Electrical equipment and installations shall comply with
the National Electrical Code.
3704.7 Concession stands and food booths.
3704.7.1 General. Concession stands and food booths shall be in accordance with
Section 4704.7.
3704.7.1.1 Distances. A minimum of 10 feet (3048mm) shall be provided behind
booths when placed back-to-back. A minimum of 20 feet (6096mm) shall be
provided between every 150 feet (45,720mm) of concession stand and food
booth space. A minimum of 30 feet (9144mm) shall be provided between food
booths and the parking of automobiles, generators, or any other internal
combustion engine.
3704.7.1.2 Location. Concession stands used for cooking shall have a minimum
of 10 feet (3048mm) of clearance on 2 sides and shall not be located within 10
feet (3048mm) of amusement rides or devices.
Exception: hotdog carts that are licensed by the City for use in right-of-ways.
3704.7.1.3 Fire extinguishers. An approved 20-B: C rated dry chemical fire
extinguisher shall be provided within 30 feet (9144mm) of deep fat fryers using
animal fat oil. An approved Class K rated fire extinguisher shall be provided
within 30 feet (9144mm) of deep fat fryers using vegetable oils.
3704.7.2 Cooking appliances or devices.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
3704.7.2.1 Public isolation. Concession stand and food booth cooking
appliances or devices shall be isolated from the public by providing the following:
1. A minimum of 4 feet (1219mm) between the cooking appliances or
devices from the front of the booth, or
2. A noncombustible 3-sided shield installed between the cooking
appliance or device and the public.
A minimum of 3 feet (914mm) shall be provided between concession
stands and food booths and solid fuel-burning appliances or devices.
3704.7.3 Liquefied petroleum gas (LP-gas). LP-gas shall be in accordance with
Chapter 38 and NFPA 58.
3704.7.3.1 Maximum number and quantity. A maximum of two LP-gas
containers with a total aggregate water capacity of 25 gallons (95L) is permitted
at one concession stand or food booth.
3704.7.3.2 LP-gas cylinder hoses. Hoses shall be designed for a working
pressure of 350 PSIG with a safety factor of 5 to 1 and shall be continuously
marked with LP-GAS, PROPANE, 350 PSI WORKING PRESSURE, and the
manufacturer’s name or trademark. Hose assemblies, after the application of
couplings, shall have a design capability of 700 PSIG. Hose assemblies shall be
leak tested at the time of installation at not less the operating pressure of the
system in which they are installed. The hose length shall be 36-inches (914mm)
or less.
3704.7.3.3 Storage of containers. Containers shall be stored in accordance
with Chapter 38.
3704.8 Internal combustion engines. Internal combustion power sources, generators
and similar equipment shall be in accordance with Section 4704.8.
3704.8.1 Fueling. Fueling of internal combustion power sources shall be conducted
only when not in use.
3704.8.2 Protection. Internal combustion power sources shall be isolated from the
public by physical guard, fence or enclosure installed at least 3 feet (914mm) away
from the internal combustion power source.
3704.9 Water stations. When outdoor temperatures are expected to exceed 100oF
(38oC), the event sponsor shall provide and maintain a minimum of one staffed water
station for each 25,000-projected attendance. The water station shall include adequate
water supply and cups, and a means for rapid replenishing of exhausted water and ice
supplies. Each water stations shall be located as far apart as practicable to allow ease
of access for event attendees.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
SECTION 3705
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDINGS
3705.1 General. Special amusement buildings shall be in accordance with this
section, Section 411 of the International Building Code, and this section.
Exception: Amusement buildings or portions thereof, that are without walls or a
roof and constructed to prevent the accumulation of smoke.
3705.2 Use of combustible decorative materials. Use of combustible decorative
materials shall be in accordance with Chapter 3.
3707.4 Combustible decorative materials. Combustible decorative materials shall be
Class A in accordance with Chapter 8.
3705.3 Assistance. Adult monitors with flashlights shall be available to provide
assistance in the event someone becomes lost or disoriented.
3705.4 Automatic sprinkler system. Special amusement buildings shall be equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Chapter 9.
3705.4.1 Temporary special amusement buildings. Where the special
amusement building is temporary, the sprinkler water supply shall be of an approved
temporary means. The sprinkler piping shall be connected to a temporary water
supply having sufficient capacity (flow and pressure) to supply residential or
standard quick spray response sprinkler heads at a minimum design density of 0.15
gpm per square foot of protected floor area. The design shall be based on flowing
the six most hydraulically remote sprinkler heads. Should the temporary amusement
building contain less than six heads, the design shall assume that all heads are
flowing simultaneously. The temporary water supply may be connected to either a
domestic water line, a fire line, or temporary on-site storage, as long as the minimum
design densities are met. An indicating type control valve shall be installed in an
accessible location between the sprinkler system and the connection to the water
supply.
When the temporary sprinkler system is installed from a domestic water line, back
flow prevention shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
Plumbing Code.
SECTION 3706
OUTDOOR MAZES
3706.1 General. Outdoor mazes including, but not limited to corn stalk or hedge mazes,
shall be in accordance with Section 3706.
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
3706.1.1 Smoking and open flame devices. Smoking and open flame devices
shall not be permitted within 50 feet of the maze site.
3706.1.2 Safe refuge areas. Safe refuge areas shall be established outside of the
maze or building and structure, and not closer than 50 feet (15240mm).
3706.1.3 Generators. When generators are installed, a permit from the
Development Services Department shall be obtained. The generators shall be
installed at least 10 feet (3048mm) from combustible materials.
3706.1.4 Paths. Paths throughout the maze shall be a minimum of 36 inches
(914mm) clear and unobstructed width.
3706.1.5 Separation. A minimum of 20 feet (6096mm) shall be provided between
mazes and buildings and structures. The 20-foot (6096mm) clearance shall be free
from vegetation and obstructions.
3706.1.6 Means of egress. Each exit shall be a minimum of 6 feet (1828mm) wide.
3706.1.6.1 Travel distance. The maximum travel distance to reach an exit
access shall not exceed 75 feet (22,860mm). The travel distance shall be
determined by using the maze path.
3706.1.6.2 Number. The travel distance required to reach an exit access shall
determine the number of exits required. Locking devices shall not be allowed on
exits when the maze is occupied.
3706.1.6.3 Exit signs. Exit signs shall be provided next to or above each exit.
The lettering shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305mm) high with 2-inch (51mm)
brushstroke. The signs shall read EXIT with lettering in a color contrasting to the
sign’s background.
3706.1.6.4 Fire extinguishers. A minimum 2:A:10-B:C portable fire extinguisher
shall be provided at each exit.
3706.2 Permit application. At time of permit application, the event coordinator shall
submit to the fire code official, a letter from the property owner authorizing the use of the
site, the address of the site, dates and hours of operation and names and 24-hour
phone numbers of at least two principals.
3706.2.1 Event plans. The following plans shall be submitted to the fire code official
for approval.
3706.2.1 .2 General fire safety plan. The plan shall include, but not be limited to
procedures that shall be used to prevent over-drying of vegetation throughout the
Ordinance 539-13
January 2014
site, documentation of decorative materials flame-retardancy, the maximum
number of attendees.
3706.2.1.3 Security plan. The plan shall document who shall provide security
(e.g., off-duty Police Officers, Sheriff’s posse, employees). Each security
personnel shall be provided with a 2-way radio and flashlight.
3706.2.1.4 Evacuation plans. The plan shall document the responsibilities of all
on-site employees. The plan shall also document how attendees will be
evacuated, and where they will be evacuated.
3706.2.1.5 Maze rules. Each attendee shall be provided with maze rules.
3706.3 Employee responsibilities. Each employee shall be familiar with the
evacuation plan and with fire extinguisher locations.
3706.3.1 Guides. An employee shall be responsible for guiding a group of not more
than 14 attendees through the maze. Each employee shall be provided with a
minimum of one “D” size flashlight and two-way radio. The employees shall be
responsible for detecting and reporting fire or smoke to a competent person posted
at the maze main entrance.
3706.3.2 Main entrance employee. Each maze shall be manned by an employee at
the entrance. The employee shall be capable of communicating with the employees
and shall be provided with a cellular telephone. When the main entrance employee
receives a report of smoke, fire or injury, the employee shall immediately call 9-1-1.
3706.4 Watering. Corn stalk and hedge mazes shall be provided with sufficient water
and at a frequency that prevents the vegetation from becoming dry or brittle. Failure to
comply with this provision is an imminent hazard and the fire code official shall issue a
stop order.
3706.5 Buildings and structures. When buildings and structures are intended to be
occupied by attendees, the building and structure shall comply with Section 4705.
Appendices.
The following appendices are adopted:
Appendix A
Appendix B
Appendix C
Appendix D
Appendix E
Appendix F
Appendix G
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 126-98 as modified by Ordinance 154-99; 209-01; 426-08 and 479-10
43
CHAPTER 7 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 7-3 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS UNDER MAG CODES
7-3-1 MAG Standard Specifications and Uniform Details for Public Works Construction
7-3-2 MAG Building Code Standards Notebook
Section 7-3-1 MAG Standard Specifications and Uniform Details for Public Works
Construction
Those certain specifications entitled “MAG Standard Specifications and Uniform Details for
Public Works Construction”, sponsored and distributed by the Maricopa Association of
Governments (MAG), are hereby adopted by the town and made part of this chapter the same
as though said specifications were specifically set forth in full herein; and at least three copies of
said specifications shall be filed in the office of the town clerk and kept available for public use
and inspection.
Section 7-3-2 MAG Building Code Standards Notebook
Those certain specifications entitled “MAG Building Code Standards Notebook”, sponsored and
distributed by the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG), and hereby adopted by the
town and made part of this chapter the same as though said specifications were specifically set
forth in full herein; and at least three copies of said specifications shall be filed in the office of
the town clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
ARTICLE 7-4 BUILDING OFFICIAL1
The building official and administrative authority, as such may be referenced in any section of
this chapter for all matters pertaining to any building, plumbing, electrical or any other
inspections, shall be vested in the office of the Community Development Department or such
other person the council may appoint.
ARTICLE 7-5 UNDERGROUND UTILITY LINES2
7-5-1 Definitions
7-5-2 Underground Utility Lines
7-5-3 Exceptions
7-5-4 Town Participation as Developer
7-5-5 Waiver of Underground Installation Requirements
Section 7-5-1 Definitions
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Developer" means the individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication,
trust or other legal entity (other than the serving utility) that is responsible for the
development of land thereby creating a demand for service or causes alteration of existing
services.
B. "Distribution feeder" means that portion of the distribution system feeding from a distribution
substation to a specific load area and having a capacity of over three KVA and less than
12.5 KVA.
C. "Existing utility poles and wires" means such poles and wires and other related facilities that
are in place and in operation as of October 6, 1995 and including repairs, replacements,
additions, enlargements or betterments, changes, improvements hereinafter made to
maintain or increase service capabilities of existing utility poles, wires, service drops and
other facilities, but it does not include extensions made to existing distribution lines.
D. "New utility poles and wires" means poles and structures, wires, cables, transformers and
other related facilities used in or as a part of the distribution or transmission of electricity
or in the transmission of telephone, telegraph, radio or television communications that are
not in place as of October 6, 1995 and constituting new extensions made from existing
poles and wires.
E. "Transmission line" means an electric line used for the bulk transmission of electricity
between generating or receiving points and major substations or delivery points, having a
rating greater than twelve thousand five hundred volts.
1Ordinance 476-10
2Ordinance 69-95F. "Underground policy" means the then current policy
governing payment of the cost of undergrounding distribution feeders and service facilities as
established by the serving utility.
Section 7-5-2 Underground Utility Lines
Except as exempted in Section 7-5-3, all existing and new utility and telephone lines, electric
utility distribution feeders, cable television lines and all other communication and utility lines
adjacent to or within new residential, commercial or industrial subdivisions or other areas to be
developed within the town shall be installed underground at the time of development of the
property as part of the required off-site and on-site improvements. The developer of the
property shall be responsible for the costs of the underground construction in accordance with
the underground policy of the serving utility.
Section 7-5-3 Exceptions
The following construction may occur without meeting the underground installation
requirements:
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
43.3 Rev. 1/97
A. Transmission lines and betterment to existing utilities together with related switch yards,
substations and related equipment.
B. Repair or improvement of existing utility poles and wires by the serving utility, provided that
activity is not initiated on request of or by a developer.
C. Installation of new utility poles and wires or relocation of existing utility poles and wires not
initiated by a developer.
D. Pad-mounted transformers or pull boxes, service terminals, pedestal type telephone
terminals, telephone splice closures or similar on-the-ground facilities attached to existing
overhead facilities which are used for the purpose of connecting an underground system
with the existing facilities.
E. Temporary service facilities, such as facilities to furnish emergency service during an
outage, facilities to provide service to construction sites, or other service of a limited
duration, such as to a fair, carnival, outdoor exhibit or function where the facilities will be
installed for a temporary period only.
F. New service drops or improvement of existing service drops from existing overhead lines to
single family residential customers, except when underground service is required by the
town subdivision regulations.
Section 7-5-4 Town Participation as Developer
In the event of relocation, improvement or repair of existing utility poles and wires or installation
of new utility poles and wires by the serving utility, the town may elect to act as a developer and
participate in the cost of underground installation in accordance with the underground
installation policy of the utility. Prior to commencing any relocation, improvement or installation
work within the town, the serving utility shall notify the town engineer of the pending action.
Within thirty days of receipt of notification, the town will determine its intent to act as developer
and notify the utility of the decision.
Section 7-5-5 Waiver of Underground Installation Requirements
The council, upon petition by a developer, may waive or modify the requirements for
underground installation of existing or new utility lines based on the findings that the strict
enforcement of this article would constitute an undue hardship on the developer and the minimal
benefits would accrue to the town. The council's decision shall include but not be limited to
review and analysis of the following factors:
A. The extent of existing overhead lines and poles in the immediate area of the project.
B. The location and heights of such poles and wires and their relation to present or future
roads.
C. The crossing of such lines over much traveled highways or streets.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
D. The proximity of such lines to schools, churches, commercial areas or other places where
people congregate.
E. The aesthetic appearance of that portion of the town should the lines be installed overhead
instead of underground.
F. The impact on future development expected in the area.
G. The practicality and feasibility of underground installation with due regard for the
comparative costs between underground overhead installations; however, a mere
showing that an underground installation is more costly than overhead shall not be the
sole criteria for granting a waiver.
ARTICLE 7-6 PLANNING AND ENGINEERING REVIEW, CONSTRUCTION MONITORING,
BUILDING SAFETY, FIRE PREVENSTION AND FEES1
7-6-1 General: Planning and Engineering Review and Construction Monitoring Fees
7-6-2 Technical Study Review Fees
7-6-3 Engineering Plan Review Fees
7-6-4 Construction Monitoring Fees
7-6-5 GIS/Mapping Fees
7-6-6 Planning Administrative Fees
7-6-7 Planning and Zoning Review Fees
7-6-8 General: Building Safety and Permitting Fees
7-6-9 Valuation
7-6-10 Fee table
7-6-11 Permit fees
7-6-12 Building Safety Plan Review Fees
7-6-13 Building Safety Inspection Fees
7-6-14 Miscellaneous Building Safety And Permitting Fees
7-6-15 General Fire Prevention Fees
7-6-16 Fire Prevention Permit Fees
7-6-17 Fire Prevention Plan Review Fees
7-6-18 Miscellaneous Fire Prevention Fees
Section 7-6-1 General: Planning and Engineering Review and Construction Monitoring
Fees
Fees are charged for the following services provided by the Town of Queen Creek:
A. Review of site plan, development plan, design review, plats, zoning and other
documents submitted through the Town’s Planning Processes;
B. Review of technical studies, reports, drawings and documents for drainage,
water, sewer, sewer pre-treatment, traffic, property surveys, environmental,
geotechnical, and other reports related to permits issued by the Town;
1
Ordinance 68-95 revised by Ordinance 215-02; Ordinance 294-04 and 424-08; 444-09;447-09& 463-09, 482-10
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
C. Review of construction drawings for grading, paving, utilities, drainage
facilities, flood irrigation, landscaping, parks, trail systems, sidewalks,
streetlight improvement districts, signing, striping, traffic signals and other
work permitted by the Town;
D. Construction monitoring of grading, paving, utility installation, drainage
facilities, flood irrigation, landscaping, parks, trails systems, sidewalks,
streetlights, signing, striping, traffic signals and other work permitted by the
Town;
E. Collection and preparation of data relating to “as-built” construction in a GIS
Format; and
F. Preparing new addresses and address changes for residential and
commercial/retail properties.
Section 7-6-2 Technical Study Review Fees
A. Final Drainage Report
1. Master residential (>500 lots) $1,200 + $1/ lot
2. Individual parcel within master residential $500
3. Major residential (>10 lots) $300 + $25/acre
4. Minor residential (1 to 10 lots) $500
5. Commercial subdivision $500 + $25/acre
6. Individual commercial $500
7. Coordination with MCFCD/PCFCD $800
B. Final Water Report $200 + $1 /lot
C. Final Sewer Report $200 + $1 /lot
D. Sewer Pre-Treatment $200 + $1 /lot
E. Final Traffic Report
1. Master residential (>500 lots) $1,200
2. Major residential (requiring traffic report) $850
3. Commercial subdivision (>20 acres) $850
4. Individual commercial (<20 acres) $500
5. Surcharge for general plan regional commercial zone $400
6. Amendment to commercial or residential $250
F. Geotechnical Report $400 + $1/ lot
G. Final Environmental Report $200 + $1/lot
H. Fissure Report $400 + $1/lot
I. C.C.& R. Report $100
J. ALTA Survey $150
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section 7-6-3 ENGINEERING Plan Review Fees**
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
**all review fees are for first and second submittal. Third and subsequent submittals will be at
15% of original engineering plan review fee.
Notes:
A. Final Plat $1,200 + $20/lot
B. Final Plat Amendment 50% of original Final Plat Fee
C. Site Grading Plans $275/sheet
D. Paving Plans with Ribbon Curb $275/sheet
E. Paving Plans with Curb and Gutter $275/sheet
F. Signing and Striping Plans $275/sheet
G. Sewer Plans $275/sheet
H. Drainage Channel/Storm Drain Plans $275/sheet
I. Water Plans (1) $275/sheet
J. Flood Irrigation Plans $275/sheet
K. Landscape and Irrigation Plans $275/sheet
L. S.L.I.D. assessment Diagrams & Documents $1,000/sheet
M. Multi-Family Site improvement Plans $500/sheet + $100/ acre
N. Office and Condominium $500/sheet + $100/acre
O. Commercial Site Improvement Plans $500/sheet + $100/acre
P. Industrial Site Improvement Plans $500/sheet + $100/acre
Q. Street Light Improvement Plans $275/sheet
R. As-built plan reviews $100/each
S. Engineers Cost Estimate $250/each
T. Revisions of approved plans $100/each
U. Map of Dedication $1,500
V. Lot Split/Lot Tie/Lot Adjustment $350
W. Easement Abandonment $1,000 for a single family
property;$1,500 for non-residential or
subdivisions
X. Easement Dedication $1,000 for a single family
property;$1,500 for non-residential or
subdivisions
Y. Right of Way Abandonment $1,000 for a single family
property;$1,500 for non-residential or
subdivisions
Z. Right of Way Dedication $1,000 for a single family
property;$1,500 for non-residential or
subdivisions
1. Application for modification or correction of
Assessments
$500 base fee, plus all outside
engineering and legal fees incurred by
the Town
2. Assurance of Construction Documents $500
3. Modification to assurances of construction,
including but not limited to reductions,
substitutions and lot sale prohibitions
$400/occurrence
4. Special Studies (as required) Actual Consultant Cost, plus 15%
5. Certificate of Correction $500/application
6. Subdivision Recording(1) Actual Expense to Town + $93
administrative fee
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
(1) Separate subdivision recording fees are charged by Maricopa County Recorder’s Office. The
Town of Queen Creek collects both fees.
Section 7-6-4 Construction Monitoring Fees
Processing fee Unit Unit Cost Sewer Line with Video LF $1.25
Permit Application Fee EA $80 Sewer Lines LF $0.75
Permit extension EA $80 Sewer Services
(up to 180 days) (Right of Way) LF $0.50
Taps EA $50.00
Permit refund (prior to commencing
work) 80% of fee maximum (no later
than 30 days after permit expiration,
and upon written request by the
Applicant
Paving Unit Unit Cost
Adj. Str. to Fin. Gr. EA $10.00
Asphalt Paving - Streets SY $0.35 Site Grading/Drainage Unit Unit Cost
Barricades EA $30.00 Catch Basins EA $40.00
Guard Rail LF $0.50 Commercial (1 acre min.) ACRE $250.00
Overlay - Streets SY $0.15 Cutoff Walls LF $0.20
Overlay with Milling SY $0.20 Drywells EA $70.00
Paving - On Site SY $0.10 Headwalls EA $40.00
Q.C. Survey Monuments EA $10.00 Manholes EA $50.00
Town street Signs & Bases EA $5.00 Residential (Non-Subdivision) ACRE $100.00
Residential (Subdivision) LOT $10.00
Concrete Unit Unit Cost Retention Basins ACRE $250.00
ADA Ramps EA $25.00 Slope Protection SY $0.35
Aprons EA $12.00 Storm Drains LF $0.95
Curb & Gutter LF $0.20
Decorative Pavers SF $0.45 Street Lights Unit Unit Cost
Driveways - Commercial EA $100.00 St. Lights
(includes SRP set-up) EA $230.00
Driveways - Residential EA $25.00
Pipe Encasement EA $50.00 Traffic Signals Unit Unit Cost
Scuppers EA $20.00 Trafic Inter-tie Conduit LF $0.20
Sidewalk SF $0.08 Traffic Signals EA $50.00
Valley Gutter LF $0.30
Miscellaneous Unit Unit Cost
Water Unit Unit Cost Irrigation Lines LF $0.50
Backflow Device EA $50.00 Utility Trench Crossings EA $10.00
Fire Hydrants EA $15.00 Utility Trenches LF $0.20
Water Lines (Backfill) LF $1.00 Landscaping & Irrigation SF $0.01
Services (In Right of Way) LF $0.25 Mail box EA $20.00
Sewer Unit Unit Cost Overtime Inspection Unit Unit Cost
Clean Outs EA $35.00 Weekdays (1 hr. min) HR $90
Interceptor EA $250.00 Weekends (4 hr. min) HR $90.00
Manholes EA $50.00 Holidays (4 hr. Min) HR $120.00
Section 7-6-5 GIS/Mapping Fees
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
GIS/Mapping fees are currently built into the Construction Monitoring Fees.
Section 7-6-6 PLANNING Administrative Fees
Notes:
(1) There is no fee for address assignments to utility meters or other addresses not
assigned to buildings.
Section 7-6-7 Planning and Zoning Review Fees
All application fees are non-refundable.
A. Pre-Application $350/meeting
B. Annexation
> 20 acres $1,600
< 20 acres $1,200
C. Temporary Use $250
D. Conditional Use
Residential $250 + $30/acre + $50 fire review
Commercial $1,000 + $30/acre + $50 fire review
E. Design Review $1,500
F. Design Review/Modification $500
G. Preliminary Plat $1,600 + $40/lot
H. General Plan/Area Specific Amendment
Minor $2,000 + $20/acre
Major $5,500 + $20/acre
A. Address Assignment during subdivision process $5/address
B. Address Assignment at time of building permit (1) $10/address
C. Address Assigned to vacant property prior to subdivision or
permit $25/address
D. Address changed during subdivision process $5/address
E. Street Number Change $50/address
F. Street Name Change $500/street
G. Board of Adjustment $300
H. Appeal/Zoning Administrator $300
I. Continuance – at applicant’s request (otherwise explicitly
provided in this section $250
J. Time Extension – at applicant’s request $250
K. Zoning Confirmation letter $250
L. Zoning Interpretation letter $250
M. Mailing labels if not provided $2/label
N. Public Hearing Sign – Provision & Posting $300/sign
O. Group Care Home $250
P. Work begun without Town authorization Double current rates
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
I. Continuance of General Plan 50% of Original General Plan
/ Area Specific Plan Amendment Amendment / Area Specific
Applications (as requested by Amendment Application Fee
the applicant)
J. Sign Permit Application $125 per individual sign
K. Comprehensive Sign Package $750
L. Site Plan
Residential $1,300 + $50/acre
Non-Residential $2,000 + $50/acre
M. Site Plan Amendment (1) 50% of original fee
N. Subdivision $1,000 + $20/lot
O. Text Amendment: Zoning Ordinance $2,000
P. Text Amendment: Sub. Ordinance $2,000
Q. Text Amendment: General Plan $2,000
R. Rezoning
<20 acres $1,600 + $50/acre
>20 acres $2,000 + $50/acre
S. Planned Area Development (PAD)
<20 acres $1,600 + $50/ acre
>20 acres $2,000 + $50/acre
T. PAD Amendments 50% of original fee
U. Variance
Residential Minor
(2) $100
Residential Standard (3) $500
Commercial $1,000
Notes: (1-3)
(1) Amendments that are determined by the Zoning Administrator to constitute a
substantial change in the Council adopted plan, shall be required to remit the entire original
filing fee.
(2) Minor Variance=A determination made by the Zoning Administrator consisting of an addition
to any structure that is less than 20% of the aggregate site’s building area or two (2) feet or less
encroachments. Examples include small room additions, patio covers.
(3) Standard Variance=A determination made by the Zoning Administrator consisting of any
addition to any structure that is greater than 20% of the aggregate site’s building area and
encroachments greater than two (2) feet.
SECTION 7-6-8 GENERAL: BUILDING SAFETY AND PERMITTING FEES
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
A. The purpose of the permit fees are to ensure that the costs for providing enforcement
and administration services are borne entirely by the construction activity prompting
the need for such services.
B. The fee for each permit and other services provided by the Building Safety Division
shall be as set forth in Article 7-6.
C. The effective date for revisions to the schedule of fees and charges shall be as stated
in the ordinance adopted by the Town Council.
SECTION 7-6-9 VALUATION
The valuation data table referred to herein shall be used to calculate the construction
valuation used in computing building permit and plan review fees. For the purposes of
determining valuation the most current valuation table as published in February 2008
issue of the Building Safety Journal published by The International Code Council shall
be used. The valuation table will be kept on file with the Town Clerk’s office, or may also
be obtained directly from the International Code Council at 500 New Jersey Avenue, Nw,
6th Floor, Washington, D.C. 20001-2070, the construction valuation shall include the total
value of the proposed work, including structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, interior
finish and normal site preparation. The data does not include the cost of the land.
Actual construction costs may exceed or be less than the building valuation designated
herein. The building valuation is the average cost based on published data.
The valuation data table does not apply to alterations or repairs to existing buildings.
Alterations and repairs shall be determined by actual construction costs. For reference
purposes the Building Official may use published data such as Rs Means Building
Construction Cost Data when the construction costs submitted is in question. Any
valuation not specifically provided for shall be determined by the Building Official and
shall be classified in the use and construction type it most nearly resembles.
The Building Official shall update the valuation data table on March 1 of each year with
the most current valuation data table published in February of each year in the Building
Safety Journal Published by The International Code Council.
The valuation table currently in effect will be kept on file with the Town Clerks office, or
may also be obtained directly from the International Code Council At 500 New Jersey
Avenue, Nw, 6th Floor, Washington, D.C. 20001-2070,
SECTION 7-6-10 FEE TABLE
TOTAL VALUATION fee
$1.00 TO $500 $24.00
$501 TO $2,000 $24.00 for the first $500; plus $3 for each additional
$100, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.
$2,001 TO $40,000 $69.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $11.00 for each
additional $1,000, or fraction thereof, to and
including $40,000.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
$40,001 TO $100,000 $487.00 for the first $40,000 plus $9.00 for each
additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and
including $100,000.
$100,001 TO $500,000 $1,027 for the first $100,000 plus $7.00 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and
including $500,000.
$500,001 TO $ 1,000,000 $3,827 for the first $500,000 plus $5 for each
additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and
including $1,000,000
$1,000,001 TO $5,000,000 $6,327 for the first $1,000,000 plus $3 for each
additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and
including $5,000,000
$5,000,001 AND OVER $18,327 for the first $5,000,000.00 plus $1.00 for
each additional $1,000, or fraction thereof
BUILDING AREA: For fee calculation purposes, the building area in square feet shall be the
total area of all floors under roof and enclosed within the outer surfaces of the exterior
surrounding walls or columns. Building area includes roofed patios, roofed porches, bay
windows, basements, mezzanines, penthouses and other mechanical spaces. Building area
does not include roof eaves not exceeding 3 feet in horizontal projection, overhangs not
exceeding 3 feet in horizontal projection, courts open at the top, vent shafts open at the top,
unroofed patios and unroofed porches.
SECTION 7-6-11 PERMIT FEES (Shall be based on the valuation table or the applicant’s
valuation – whichever is greater).
1. Building permit – combination (not including fire systems)
per fee table
2. Building permit (stand alone permit) 60% of fee table
3. Plumbing permit (stand alone permit) 25% of fee table
4. Electrical permit (stand alone permit) 10% of fee table
5. Mechanical permit (stand alone permit) 5% of fee table
A stand alone permit shall also include a $20 administrative fee for each permit.
6. Demolition permit:
residential accessory structure $100
one- or two family dwelling $100
structures other than above (per structure) $200
7. Fence/wall permit
a) single family open style fence (such as but not limited to rail or wire) $98
b) single family solid style fence: (any fencing that can divert water flow) $198
c) subdivision perimeter fence/walls 40% of fee table
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
d) other than single family per fee table
8. Swimming pool permit
a) in-ground pools and spas (includes stand-alone permits. does not include $225
fences/wall - barrier)
b) above-ground pools and spas (includes stand-alone permits. does not include
fences/wall - barrier) $150
9. Temporary construction/sales trailer* $200
*(INSTALLATION ONLY – SEPARATE PERMITS REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL, WATER, AND SEWER.)
10. Manufactured home permit (permit & 2 inspections) $280
11. Temporary electric power permit $95
12. Sewer connection permit $95
13. Building relocation permit (electric, mech., plumbing permit is not included
$100 each
14. Permit extension (up to 180 days) $50
15. Renew expired permit (after permit extension expires):
A new permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule
16. Noise permit $150
17. “Foundation-only” permit 20% of applicable permit fee
Foundation only permit premiums shall not be credited toward the building permit or any other
fee.
18. Utility clearance permit * (2 inspections maximum) $150
*for inspection required by utility provider when a construction permit is not applicable.
19. Re-roofing (2 inspections) $150
20. Permits for existing one- and two family dwellings (except swimming pools),
including but not limited to, interior alterations, detached garages, carports,
storage sheds requiring permits, patio covers and gazebos or similar
structures.
per fee table based on valuation
21. Pool barrier enclosures per fee table based on valuation
22. Temporary structures (180 days maximum) per fee table based on valuation
23. Occupancy verification (no construction required) $75.00/hr
(two hour minimum which includes the inspection)
24. Annual Facilities Permit Primary site: $500/calendar year
Each additional site: $250/calendar year
Plan review and inspections: $70/hour, minimum 1 hour
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
*25. Single Family Residential Grid-Tied Photovoltaic System $375
(includes one plan review and two inspections)
*26. Single Family Residential Solar Hot Water Heating System $150
(includes one plan review and one inspection)
*Ordinance 478-10
SECTION 7-6-12 BUILDING SAFETY PLAN REVIEW FEES
1. Single family
a) new, additions, remodels 65% of applicable permit fee
b) standard plan (use of approved plan on file.) $50
2. Other than single family (new, additions, remodels) 65% of applicable permit fee
a) additional and subsequent identical building located on the same lot or development
and submitted at the same time. $50
3. Combination permit (includes bldg, plumb, elect, mech) 65% of applicable permit fee
4. Plumbing (stand alone) 65% of applicable permit fee
5. Electrical (stand alone) 65% of applicable permit fee
6. Mechanical (stand alone) 65% of applicable permit fee
7. Swimming pool $40
a) in-ground pool & spas $40
b) above ground pools & spas
8. Addendum / revisions $180 non-refundable
9. Demolition $ 40
10. Deferred submittals $180 non-refundable
11. Fence/wall $75
12. Miscellaneous plan review $40/ sheet
13. Third and subsequent plan reviews 15% of applicable permit
fee (due at submittal)
14. Code update/existing standard plan review $325/plan
SECTION 7-6-13 BUILDING SAFETY INSPECTION FEES
1. Re-inspection fee $75 (plus 24 hour delay)
2. Unauthorized construction: equal to the applicable permit fee
3. Timed inspections $75/hr (two hour minimum)
4. Inspections outside normal business hours $75/hr (two hour minimum)
5. Inspections for which no fee is specified $75/hr (one hour minimum)
6. Preliminary inspection $75/hr (one hour minimum)
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION 7-6-14 MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING SAFETY AND PERMITTING FEES
1. Certificate of occupancy issued at conclusion of all code required construction
no additional charge (included with permit fee)
2. Written response to requests for building code alternate methods, materials and
equipment, or policy issues. Non-refundable, paid at application time. $250
3. Appeals, modifications and formal interpretation of code for single family project $180
4. Appeals, modifications and formal interpretation of code for non-single family project $360
5. Extended construction work hours permit $250
6. Special studies (as required) actual consultant cost
7. Subscription service $12/report
8. Illegible or oversized plans (exceeding 24”x36” where allowed). Building permit drawings
submitted on larger than 24" x 36" sheets shall be subject to a premium fee, over and above
the plan review fee, of $75 per sheet, as applicable.
9. Replacement of lost plans $90 per plan or actual cost, whichever is greater
10. Replacement of inspection record card $20
11. Replacement certificate of occupancy $20
12. Residential certificate of occupancy $40
13. Replacement of permit $20
14. Building code board of appeals (non-refundable) $250
15. Temporary certificate of occupancy
a) initial issuance no charge
b) subsequent extensions (non refundable) $250/extension
16. Refund: permit fees prior to commencing work - 80% of fee maximum
(no later than 30 days after permit expiration, and upon written request by the applicant)
17. Refund: plan review fees, prior to review - 80% of fee maximum
(upon written request by the applicant)
SECTION 7-6-15: GENERAL FIRE PREVENTION FEES: FIRE PREVENTION
PERMITTING, FIRE PREVENTION PLAN REVIEW, FIRE PREVENTION
INSPECTION FEES1
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
A. General (Fire Prevention Fees): The Town’s fees for plan reviews, construction
permits, operating permits, occupancy inspections annual assessments, fire watch personnel,
appeals and other Fire Prevention fees shall be in accordance with this ordinance and the fee
schedule herein. The Fire Prevention fee schedule has been determined by the average time to
complete the type of service being rendered at an hourly rate of $100 per hour (excluding
Emergency Medical Equipment, Standby Personnel, and Consultant fees). Additional time to
complete the services outlined herein, otherwise explicitly provided in this ordinance, will be
assessed at the hourly rate.
B. Permits: The Town issues Fire Prevention permits for Operational, Occupancy and
Construction inspections. Other inspection services are available through prior arrangement
with the Town’s Fire Prevention Bureau along with payment of the appropriate fee(s). These
additional inspection services provided by the Town include overtime inspections, reinspections,
optional (non-required) inspections and requests for time-specific inspections. Fees
for additional inspection services include one inspection and one re-inspection. Additional
inspections will require a re-inspection fee.
C. Operational Permits and Occupancy Inspections: The Operational Permits and
Occupancy Inspections are both designed to allow for fire prevention inspections by the Fire
Marshal, or designee, for activities that present potential fire and safety hazards to the citizens
of Queen Creek and the community. Operations and occupancies subject to these permits and
inspections require the Fire Inspector to take special precautions when implementing fire
prevention measures. The Town’s Fire Code (International Fire Code, 2006 edition, third
printing, as amended in Section 7.2.10 of the Town Code), outlines specific operations that the
Town is authorized to issue an operational permit on. Additionally, the Town’s Fire Code
requires all non-residential occupancies (businesses) to be inspected to determine adequate
compliance with the Fire Code. The frequency of these inspections is outlined hereafter.
Operational Permits and Occupancy Inspections fees are organized into two categories:
Category 1 - High, Medium, and Low Risk Inspections for Ongoing Operations/Occupancies (as
defined in the Fire Code and in concurrence with this Ordinance); Category 2 - Onetime Events
/Temporary Operations/Special Hazards.
In Category 1, designation as Low, Medium, or High Risk will determine the permit/inspection
fee and the frequency of inspection. Designation as Low Risk shall result in a fire prevention
inspection for the business once every 3 years and a permit fee of $35, paid triennially.
Designation as Medium Risk shall result in a fire prevention inspection for the business once
every 2 years and a permit fee of $75, paid biennially. Designation as High Risk shall result in a
fire prevention inspection for the business each year and an annual permit fee of $100, plus an
additional $75 annually for occupancies greater than 12,000 square feet. In Category 2,
inspections and fees are per occurrence and as outlined in this Ordinance.
Operational Permits and Occupancy Inspections fees include one inspection and one reinspection.
Additional inspections will require a re-inspection fee.
D. Construction Permits: The following inspections are included in the Construction
Permit fee: one rough-in, one follow-up and one final inspection. Additional construction
inspections will require a re-inspection fee.
E. Construction Permit Expirations: Permits shall become invalid unless the work
authorized by such permit is commenced and required inspections are requested by the
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
permitee within 180 days after its issuance, or if more that 180 days elapses between required
inspections. The Fire Code Official shall be authorized to grant a one-time extension, per permit,
for a period not to exceed 180 days. Permits shall not be extended more than once and all
requests for extensions shall be in writing. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration,
new permit fees shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the Town.
F. Re-inspection: A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection
when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when
corrections called for are not made. If the items that were identified during the first re-inspection
of a particular phase are not corrected at the time of the re-inspection, no further fire inspections
will be scheduled until the re-inspection fee is paid. Re-inspection fees may also be assessed
when a permit is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not
readily available on-site for the Fire Inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which
inspection is requested, failure to have a competent party on-site or deviating from approved
plans requiring the approval of the Fire Inspector or designee. Re-inspections fees will comply
with the adopted fee schedule.
G. General Inspections: Otherwise explicitly provided in this ordinance, Inspection fees
include one inspection and one re-inspection. Additional inspections will require a re-inspection
fee.
H. Plan Review Fees: Plan review fees offset the Town’s costs for the review of plans to
determine compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. Fire Prevention plan review fees
shall be in accordance with this ordinance and include one initial plan review and one
subsequent (second) plan review. Any submittals that require third or subsequent reviews shall
be charged an additional plan review fee in accordance with the fee schedule.
I. Unauthorized Construction: When the Fire Inspector, or designee, determines that
construction or grading work have commenced and the applicable fees were not paid, a penalty
equal to the cost of the required construction permit fees shall be assessed for the work. This
fee is due and payable even if a permit is not issued. This fee is non-refundable.
J. Technical/Scientific Report Review Fee: A technical or scientific report is a document
that describes the process, progress, and or results of technical or scientific research or the
state of a technical or scientific research problem. It might also include recommendations and
conclusion of the research. A Technical/Scientific Report may be required to
demonstrate/validate the effectiveness of new or non standard processes. The review fee for a
Technical/Scientific Report shall be $100 per hour, with a two hour minimum. Additional review
time shall be assessed at $100 per hour.
K. Appeals Board: An Appeal of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code
official relative to the application and interpretation of this code shall be submitted to the Board
of Appeals in accordance with Section 108 of the currently adopted International Fire Code.
Appeal fees shall comply with the currently adopted fee schedule.
L. Fire Watch Fees: When Fire Department personnel are required by the Fire Code to
stand fire watch, the individual required to provide such service shall pay a minimum fee of $100
per person, 3 hours minimum. If the time period exceeds 3 hours, an additional fee of $100
shall be paid for each hour, or portion thereof, for each person assigned.
M. Emergency Medical Equipment and Standby Personnel Fees: Emergency Medical
Equipment and Standby Personnel fees help recover the cost of having firefighters, paramedics,
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
and equipment on standby at a large/special event in case of an emergency. These events may
include, but not limited to, concerts, carnivals, large outdoor assembly events and trade shows.
These fees are also applicable when Town of Queen Creek firefighters, paramedics, and
equipment are used to provide service outside the Towns incorporated boundaries and
concurrently outside the Automatic Aid System.
N. Payment of Fees: A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been
paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been
paid. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the currently adopted
fee schedule as established by the Town. Permit fees shall be paid at the time of issuance of a
permit.
The estimated plan review fees shall be collected at the time of plan acceptance for initial
review and any subsequent review. Plan review fees not captured in the plan review fee
estimate (resulting from additional system elements, system components and time to perform
the required plan review as outlined in this ordinance), are due at the time of plan acceptance
for any subsequent review. If the plan review has been completed, any unpaid plan review fees
are due at the time of issuance of a corresponding permit. If the permit has not been issued and
expiration of the plan review time period has passed, as noted in Section 7.1.4.3.2 of the Queen
Creek Town Code, the plan review fees shall become due and payable.
Fees for services other than plan reviews and permits, such as Fire Watch, Emergency Medical
Equipment and Standby Personnel, shall be billed to the person for which such service was
rendered and due upon receipt or as approved by the Town; Except fees for appeals, after-hour
inspections, applicable re-inspections, outside consultant fees, and hazardous material
abatement which shall be paid prior to services being rendered or as approved by the Town.
1 Ordinance 482-10
SECTION 7-6-16: FIRE PREVENTION PERMIT FEES1
OPERATIONAL PERMITS AND OCCUPANCY INSPECTIONS
CATEGORY 1: High, Medium, and Low Risk Inspections for Ongoing Operations
1. High Risk - Annual Operating Permit / Occupancy Inspection $100.00 annually; an
additional $75 annually
If > than 12,000 square feet
High Risk Inspections Include the Following Occupancies:
a) I – institutional
b) H – hazardous (Hazmat assessment fee may also apply)
c) R4 – residential
d) A – assembly > 100 occupant load
e) M – mercantile>50,000 square feet
f) B – business> 50,000 square feet
g) Multi-floor > 3 stories
h) E – educational
i) F – factory w/special processes or hazards
j) Occupancy w/ exhaust hood = 50 occupant load
2. Medium Risk - Biennial Operating Permit / Occupancy Inspection: $75.00
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Medium Risk Inspections Include the Following Occupancies:
a) A – assembly = 100 occupant load
b) F – factory w/o special processes
c) S – storage (s1)
d) R1/R2 – residential
e) M – mercantile =12,000-50,000 square feet
f) B – business =12,000 – 50,000 square feet
g) Occupancy w/exhaust hood < 50 occupant load
3. Low Risk – Triennial Fire Prevention Occupancy Inspection: $35.00
Low Risk Inspections Include the Following Occupancies:
a) s – storage (S2)
b) b – business < 12,000 square feet
c) m – mercantile < 12,000 square feet
d) u – unclassified
CATEGORY 2: One Time Events / Temporary Operations / Special Hazards
1. Carnivals and fairs $200
2. Carnivals & fairs: special scaffolding Type structures $200
3. Explosive & blasting agents, blasting operations, fireworks blasting operations
renewal:
a) Storage, permanent or temporary $100
b) Conduct blasting operations each site 1 – 30 days $200 + $100 for each
additional 30 days or
fraction thereof
c) Supervised Public Display of Fireworks (pyrotechnics): new location $200
d) Supervised Public Display of Fireworks (pyrotechnics): per day $75
4. Places of assembly
a) 1-5000 sq ft trade show $150
b) Greater than 5000 sq ft trade show $300
5. Temporary membrane structures, tents & canopies:
a) 200 to 700 square feet $200
b) Greater than 700 square feet $300
c) Each additional tent, canopy or temporary membrane structure
at same event $100
d) To erect an air-supported temporary membrane structure $200
Note: Tent permit submittals shall be submitted 10 days in advance of the event.
A fee of $25 per day progressive penalty shall be assessed for permit applications
not submitted 10 business days prior to the event.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
6. All other special events, one-time events, temporary operations or special
hazards requiring an Operational Permit by the Queen Creek Fire Code $100
7. Hazardous Materials: To store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle
hazardous materials in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.20 of the
Queen Creek Fire Code $200
8. Liquefied petroleum gasses – LPG:
a) Store, handle, use $100
b) Greater than 125 gal. $175
c) With fire protection equipment $300
CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
1. Access:
a) Access Gate (Automatic) $150
b) Access Gate (Manual) $ 50
c) Access Roadways $100
d) Alternative Surface Access Roads $100
e) Address Directories $ 50
2. Amusement Building (Special) $100
3. Battery Systems $200
4. Combustible Dust Producing Operations $100
5. Compressed Gas Systems:
a) compressed gas system (in excess of exempt quantities): Install, repair,
abandon, remove, place out of service, close or substantially modify $400
b) Installation – this fee includes all systems and tanks installed at one site
provided plans are submitted and inspections are conducted concurrently $400
c) Modification $150
6. Cryogenic Fluid Systems: Installation (fee includes all systems and tanks
Installed at one site provided inspections are conducted concurrently $300
7. Cryogenic Fluid Systems: modification $150
8. Fire Fighter Breathing Air Systems: Installation $250
9. Fire Fighter Breathing Air Systems: modification $100
10. Fire Sprinkler Systems:
a) The base permit fee to install an automatic sprinkler system is $250. This fee
is for the inspection (one rough-in, one follow-up and one final inspection) of one
building, no greater than 50,000 sq. ft with 1-2 calculations. The maximum
inspection time covered by this base permit is two and one-half hours. Additional
inspection time will be calculated at the rate of $100/hour.
Base Permit Fee $250
Installations requiring additional system elements shall be assessed the base
permit fee plus the additional permit fees indicated below (b-s):
b) Additional calculations (design areas) 12,001 sq. ft – 50,000 sq. ft. $100
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
c) Each additional 50,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof $100
d) Each additional building using the same fire protection design plan $200
e) Each additional story above or below grade $100
f) Each PRV (pressure relief valve) $ 50
g) Installation of each water-based special extinguishing system $100
Note: This does not include any associated detection or fire alarm
equipment
h) Each pre-action system $150
i) Each deluge system $150
j) Each aqueous film forming foam-water based system $200
k) Each in-rack sprinkler system $100
l) Each UL or FM fire pumps, jockey pumps, and controller $500
m) Each static water tank $200
n) Each high challenge commodity (exception: Group A Plastics) $200
0) Each standpipes per stair $150
p) Standpipe System 1-4 outlets not part of a sprinkler system $200
q) Each additional floor level outlet $ 50
r) UL or FM fire pumps, jockey pumps, and controllers not part of a sprinkler
system $500
s) Inspection of Halon, Dry Chemical, Carbon Monoxide Extinguishing Systems,
FM 200 or other Special Extinguishing Systems $250
11. Fire Sprinkler Systems Modification:
a) 1-200 heads $200
b) Each additional 1-200 heads, or fraction thereof $200
c) Each story above or below $100
12. Fire Alarm Systems:
a) The base permit fee to install a fire alarm system (including initiating/notification
devices and fire alarm panel replacement) is $250. This fee is for the inspection
(one rough-in, one follow-up and one final inspection) of one building, no greater
than 50,000 sq. ft. The maximum inspection time covered by this base permit is
two and one-half hours. Additional inspection time will be calculated at the rate of
$100/hour.
Base Permit Fee: $250
Installations requiring additional system elements shall be assessed the base
permit fee plus the additional permit fees indicated below (b-k):
b) Each additional building using the same fire protection design plan $200
c) Each additional 50,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof $200
d) Each additional story above or below grade $100
e) First 1-10 flame detection devices $100
f) Each additional 1-10 flame detection devices $100
g) First 1-10 beam detection devices $100
h) Each additional 1-10 beam detection devices $100
i) First 1-10 emergency voice/alarm communication devices (fire phone,
speakers) $100
j) Each additional 1-10 emergency voice/alarm communication devices $100
k) For area detection throughout based on sq. ft. base rate plus additional 50%
50% alarm fee
13. Fire Alarm Systems Modification:
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
a) Modify fire alarm system (1-5 devices) $100
b) Each additional 1-25 devices $100
14. Flammable or Combustible Liquids:
a) Install a single underground tank $300
b) Install a single aboveground tank $300
c) Each additional tank $150
d) Tanks with fire protection additional $200
15. Flammable Finishes/Spraying or Dipping: Installation $300
16. Flammable Finishes/Spraying or Dipping: Modification $100
17. Hazardous Materials:
a) Hazardous Materials containers and tank installation (single) $200
b) Removal (single) $200
c) Abandon, place out of service (close or modify) $100
18. Industrial Ovens $100
19. Automatic Hood Systems, Commercial $100
20. Liquefied Petroleum Gases (LP-Gas) $200
21. Private Fire Hydrants $100
22. Refrigerator Systems, Anhydrous Ammonia $200
23. Removal (of systems) permit $100
24. Remove Class I or Class II liquids from underground or aboveground tank or
Slurry fill an underground tank or abandon an underground, aboveground tank
or clean inside a tank $200
25. Smoke and heat vents $100
26. Smoke removal systems $100
27. Temporary Membrane Structures and Tents:
Temporary membrane structures and tents over 700 square feet (a detailed
site and floor plan for tents, canopies or membrane structures with an occupant
load of 50 or more shall be provided with each application for approval. The
tent, canopy or membrane structure floor plan shall indicate details of the means
of egress facilities, seating capacity, arrangement of the seating and location
of illuminated exit signs; no smoking signs, emergency lighting, type of heating,
and electrical equipment) $100
28. Underground fire lines $100
29. Underground fire lines: Each fire protection system lead-in or stub-out $100
30. Underground fire lines: modification $100
31. Permit reinstate after expiration 100% of current
fee for permit
32. Unauthorized construction, investigation fee $200
33. All other permits required by this code $100
1 Ordinance 482-10
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION 7-6-17: FIRE PREVENTION PLAN REVIEW FEES1
1. Access:
a) Install or modify automatic fire apparatus access Gates and their
appurtenances. This also includes Gates for auxiliary access openings $150
b) Install or modify manual gate $ 50
c) To install striping and signage of fire lanes $100
d) Premise identification review; fire lane marking, identification of fire
protection equipment, key boxes, stairwell identification, and pedestrian
gates. $100
e) To review the installation or modifications of address directories $ 50
2. Civil Plan Review Fees
a) The plan review minimum fee is to review plans for installation, alteration or
modification of underground fire lines which serve fire protection systems,
hydrants, or any combination thereof. $300
b) Each connection to a Town water main including up to 500 lineal feet of pipe $150
c) Each additional 500 fee or fraction thereof $100
d) Each fire protection system lead-in (or stub-out) $100
3. Fire Building Plan Review
a) To review building plans: all occupancies, including town homes (Exception:
1 and 2 family dwellings). The Fire Building Plan Review fee is to review the first
50,000 sq ft of one building. The minimum plan review time is two and one-half
Hours; additional plan review time will be calculated at the rate of $100/hr. $250
b) Each additional 50,000 sq ft or fraction thereof $100
c) Each additional building (using the same plan) $100
4. Fire Sprinkler Systems
a) The base plan review fee for an automatic sprinkler system is $250. This fee is
for the review of one building, no greater than 50,000 sq ft with 1-2 calculations.
The maximum plan review time covered by this fee is two and one-half hours.
Additional review time will be calculated at the rate of $100/hr.
Base Plan Review Fee: $250
Installations requiring additional system elements shall be assessed the base plan
review fee plus the additional review fees indicated below (b-r):
b) Additional calculations (design areas) 12,001 sq ft – 50,000 sq ft $100
c) Each additional 50,000 sq ft or fraction thereof $100
d) Each additional building using the same fire protection plan $100
e) Each additional story above or below grade $100
f) Each PRV (pressure reducing valve) $ 50
g) Installation of each water-based special extinguishing system $100
Note: This does not include any associated detection or fire alarm equipment
h) Each pre-action system $150
i) Each deluge system $150
j) Each aqueous film forming foam-water based system $200
k) Each in-rack sprinkler system $200
l) Each UL or FM fire pumps, jockey pumps, and controller $200
m) Each static water tank $200
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
n) Each high challenge commodity (exception: Group A plastics) $250
o) Each standpipes per stair $150
p) Standpipe System 1-4 outlets not part of a sprinkler system $100
q) UL or FM fire pumps, jockey pumps, and controllers not part of a sprinkler
system $200
r) Halon, Dry Chemical, Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing System, FM 200
or other Special Extinguishing Systems $200
5. Fire Sprinkler Systems Modification:
a) 1-200 heads $100
b) Each additional 1-200 heads or fraction thereof $100
c) Each story above or below $100
6. Fire Alarm Systems:
a) The base plan review fee for a fire alarm system (including initiating/notification
devices and fire alarm panel replacement) is $250. This fee is for the review of
one building, no greater than 50,000 sq ft. The maximum plan review time
covered by this fee is two and one-half hours. Additional review time will be
calculated at the rate of $100/hr.
Base Plan Review Fee: $250
Installations requiring additional system elements shall be assessed the base plan
review fee plus the additional review fees indicated below (b-k):
b) Each additional building using the same fire protection design plan $100
c) Each additional 50,000 sq ft or fraction thereof $100
d) Each additional story above or below grade $100
e) First 1-10 flame detection devices $100
f) Each additional 1-10 flame detection devices $100
g) First 1-10 beam detection devices $100
h) Each additional 1-10 beam detection devices $100
i) First 1-10 emergency voice/alarm communication devices (fire phone,
speakers) $100
j) Each additional 1-10 emergency voice/alarm communication devices $100
k) For area detection throughout based on sq ft base rate plus additional
50% 50% Alarm Fee
7. Fire Alarm Systems Modification:
a) Modify fire alarm system (1 – 10 devices) $100
b) Each additional 1-25 devices $100
8. Smoke and heat vents & smoke removal systems:
a) First 1-10 smoke and heat devices $100
b) Each additional 10 devices or fraction thereof $ 50
9. Automatic Hood Systems, Commercial:
a) Install or modify an automatic hood system, installation: these systems
include exhaust systems with built-in fire suppression capability normally
installed above commercial cooking equipment $100
b) Each additional system $100
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
10. Flammable Finishes/Spraying or Dipping:
a) Install a spray booth, spray room, spray area or powder coating booth $550
b) Modification of spray booth, spray room, spray area or powder coating booth $200
11. Motor fuel-dispensing facilities and repair garages:
a) Fuel storage tanks and dispensing $200
12. High-piled combustible storage:
a) Minimum plan review for high piled combustible storage $200
b) Each ceiling sprinkler system design area $200
c) Each in-rack sprinkler system design area $200
d) Each fire pump $200
e) Each static water tank $200
f) Each high challenge commodity (exception: Group A Plastics) $200
g) Each fire test report used as a basis for the design $200
13. Hazardous materials:
a) To install, repair, abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service, close
or substantially modify a storage facility, building or chemical drainage and
containment or other area regulated by Chapter 27 $300
b) Install or modify a hazardous material storage tank; fee is per tank $150
c) Install or modify gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures, or gas rooms $300
14. Compressed gas systems:
a) Compressed gas system (in excess of exempt quantities): Install, repair,
abandon, remove, place out of service, close or substantially modify. $300
b) Installation – this fee includes all systems and tanks installed at one site
provided plans are submitted and inspections are conducted concurrently. $300
c) Modification $300
15. Cryogenics fluids:
a) Install cryogenic fluid system $300
b) Modification of cryogenics fluid system $200
16) Flammable and combustible liquids:
a) Temporarily or permanently install an aboveground storage tank or pressure
vessel for Class I, II or III-A liquids with a nominal capacity of 125 gallons outside
a building. $400
b) Temporarily or permanently install an aboveground storage tank or pressure
vessel for Class I, II or III-A liquids with a nominal capacity of 125 gallons inside
a building. $400
c) Temporarily or permanently install an aboveground storage tank or pressure
vessel for Class III-B liquids with a nominal capacity of 1,000 gallons or more $400
d) Aboveground tank installation: This shall include all flammable/combustible
liquid tanks installed aboveground, including tanks in vaults, and any required
piping, valves and dispensing equipment. The fee is for each tank. $400
e) Underground tank installation: This shall include all flammable/combustible
liquid tanks installed underground, including tanks in vaults, and any required
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
piping, valves and dispensing equipment. The fee is for each tank. $400
f) Tanks with fixed fire protection systems additional $600
g) AG OR UG tank modification: This shall include all flammable/combustible
liquid tanks and required piping, valves and dispensing equipment. Tank
may be aboveground or underground type. Modification may include change
of contents, reconstruction, tapping, tank cutting, vent pipe relocations,
dispenser piping, tank repair or re-piping. The fee is for each tank. $250
h) Install underground tanks – this shall include all flammable/combustible
liquid tanks installed underground and any required piping valves and
dispensing equipment $200
i) Install, construct or equipment, plants, terminals, wells, fuel-dispensing
stations, refineries, distilleries and similar facilities where flammable and
combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported, stored, dispensed
or used. $100
j) Install hazardous materials containers or tank: this permit includes all
hazardous materials container and tanks, required piping, valves and
dispensing equipment. $150
17. Liquefied petroleum gases (LPG) (Exception: a permit is not required to install
alter or modify portable containers of less than 125 gallon aggregate water
capacity used exclusively for vapor service):
a) Install, alter or modify LP-gas containers with an aggregate water capacity of
125 gallons (473 l) or more used exclusively for vapor service $200
b) Systems with fixed fire protection equipment $200
c) Install, move, relocate, alter or modify racks storing 20-pound cylinders
for the purpose of conducting an LP-gas exchange program at a specific site $100
d) Install, alter or modify LP-gas containers used for liquid transfer service $200
18. Minimum Plan Review $100 per hour
19. Third and subsequent Plan Reviews 15% of Original Fire
Prevention Plan Review Fee
1Ordinance 482-10
SECTION 7-6-18 MISCELLANEOUS FIRE PREVENTION FEES1
1. Inspections after hours (minimum 2 hours) $100/hour; 2 hour
minimum
2. Re-Inspections. For each inspection or re-inspection when such portion
of work for which and inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called
for are not made (during Business Hours) $100 per hour
3. Outside Consultant Fees Actual consultant costs
4. Refund: Permit Fee prior to commencing work 80% of fee maximum
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
(No later than 30 days after permit expiration and upon written request by applicant)
5. Refund: Plan Review Fees, prior to review and upon written request by the applicant:
80% of fee maximum
6. False alarms for each that exceed 3 within one calendar year $200 fine
7. Hazardous materials abatement $300 per hour
8. Appeals – non-refundable
a) Commercial occupancy $360
b) Residential occupancy $180
9. Emergency Medical Equipment and Standby Personnel
a) Apparatus:
i. Battalion Vehicle $74.00/hr
ii. Fire Engine $144.00/hr
iii. Water Tender $113.00/hr
iv. Brush Truck $76.00/hr
b) Personnel:
i. Battalion Chief $26.03/hr
ii. Fire Captain/CEP $23.86/hr
iii. Fire Engineer/CEP $20.41/hr
iv. Fire Fighter/CEP $18.49/hr
10. Illegible or oversized plans (exceeding 24” x 36” where allowed). Permit drawing
Submitted on larger than 24” x 36” shall be subject to a premium fee, over and above
The plan review fee of $75.00 per sheet as applicable.
1Ordinance 482-10
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
Article 7-7 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE1
Sec. 7.7-1. Title
Sec. 7.7-2. Legislative intent and purpose
Sec. 7.7-3. Definitions
Sec. 7.7-4. Applicability; Repeal of Previous Ordinances
Sec. 7.7-5. Authority for Development Impact Fees
Sec. 7.7-6. Administration of Development Impact Fees
Sec. 7.7-7. Land Use Assumptions
Sec. 7.7-8. Infrastructure Improvement Plan
Sec. 7.7-9. Adoption and Modification Procedures
Sec. 7.7-10. Five-year validity of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and the Land Use
Assumptions
Sec. 7.7-11. Collection of Development Impact Fees
Sec. 7.7-12. Development Impact Fee Credits and Credit Agreements
Sec. 7.7-13. Development Agreements
Sec. 7.7-14. Appeals
Sec. 7.7-15. Refunds of Development Impact Fees
Sec. 7.7-16. Oversight of Development Impact Fee Program
Sec. 7.7-1. - Title.
This Article shall be known as the “2014 Development Impact Fee Ordinance of the
Town of Queen Creek,” and may be cited as such.
Sec. 7.7-2. - Legislative intent and purpose.
This Article is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the Town by:
A. Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs incurred
by the Town that are associated with providing Necessary Public Services to new
development.
B. Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing development
impact fees consistent with the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes
(“A.R.S.”) § 9-463.05, including requirements pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
Subsection K that, on or before August 1, 2014, the Town replace its
development impact fees that were adopted prior to January 1, 2012 with
development impact fees adopted pursuant to the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-
463.05 as amended by the state legislature in SB 1525, Fiftieth Legislature, First
Regular Session.
C. Providing for the temporary continuation of certain development impact fees
adopted prior to January 1, 2012 until otherwise replaced pursuant to this Article,
or longer where such development impact fees were pledged to support
Financing or Debt for a Grandfathered Facility as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
Subsections K, R, and S.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
D. Setting forth procedures for administering the development impact fee program,
including mandatory offsets, Credits, and refunds of development impact fees. All
development impact fee assessments, offsets, Credits, or refunds must be
administered in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
This Article shall not affect the Town’s zoning authority or its authority to adopt or amend its
General Plan, provided that planning and zoning activities by the Town may require
amendments to development impact fees as provided in Section 7.7-7 of this Article.
Sec. 7.7-3. Definitions.
When used in this Article, the terms listed below shall have the following meanings
unless the context requires otherwise. Singular terms shall include their plural.
Applicant: A person who applies to the Town for a Building Permit.
Appurtenance: Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other fixture, including
integrated hardware, software or other components, associated with a Capital Facility
that are necessary or convenient to the operation, use, or maintenance of a Capital
Facility, but excluding replacement of the same after initial installation.
Aquatic Center: A facility primarily designed to host non-recreational competitive
functions generally occurring within water, including, but not limited to, water polo
games, swimming meets, and diving events. Such facility may be indoors, outdoors, or
any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting amenities, including but
not limited to, locker rooms, offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.
Building Permit: Any permit issued by the Town that authorizes vertical construction,
increases square footage, authorizes changes to land use, or provides for the addition of
a residential or non-residential point of demand to a water or wastewater system.
Capital Facility: An asset having a Useful Life of three or more years that is a component
of one or more Categories of Necessary Public Service provided by the Town. A Capital
Facility may include any associated purchase of real property, architectural and
engineering services leading to the design and construction of buildings and facilities,
improvements to existing facilities, improvements to or expansions of existing facilities,
and associated financing and professional services. Wherever used herein,
“infrastructure” shall have the same meaning as “Capital Facilities.”
Category of Necessary Public Service: A category of Necessary Public Services for
which the Town is authorized to assess development impact fees, as further defined in
Section 7.7-8(A)(1) of this Article.
Category of Development: A specific category of residential, commercial, or industrial
development against which a development impact fee is calculated and assessed. The
Town assesses development impact fees against the following categories of
development: Industrial, Commercial, Office/Other Services, and Residential categories.
Commercial Land Use: Retail business and service establishment, professional and
governmental offices, and developed recreational uses.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
Credit: A reduction in an assessed development impact fee resulting from developer
contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications for capital facilities
included in an Infrastructure Improvements Plan pursuant to Section 7.7-12 of this Article
(or as otherwise permitted by this Article).
Credit Agreement: A written agreement between the Town and the developer(s) of
Subject Development that allocates Credits to the Subject Development pursuant to
Section 7.7-12 of this Article. A Credit Agreement may be included as part of a
Development Agreement pursuant to Section 7.7-13 of this Article.
Credit Allocation: A term used to describe when Credits are distributed to a particular
development or parcel of land after execution of a Credit Agreement, but are not yet
issued.
Credit Issuance: A term used to describe when the amount of an assessed development
impact fee attributable to a particular development or parcel of land is reduced by
applying a Credit allocation.
Developer: An individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association, municipal corporation, state agency, or other person or entity
undertaking land development activity, and their respective successors and assigns.
Development Agreement: An agreement prepared in accordance with the requirements
of Section 7.7-13 of this Article, Section 9-500.05, Arizona Revised Statutes, and any
applicable requirements of the Town Code.
Direct Benefit: A benefit to an a Service Unit (as described below), resulting from a
Capital Facility that: (a) addresses the need for a Necessary Public Service created in
whole or in part by the Service Unit; and that (b) meets either of the following criteria: (i)
the Capital Facility is located in the immediate area of the Service Unit and is needed in
the immediate area of the Service Unit to maintain the Level of Service; or (ii) the Capital
Facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need for a Capital Facility that would have
otherwise have been needed in the immediate area of the Service Unit to maintain the
Town’s Level of Service.
Dwelling Unit: A house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of rooms, or single
room occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant, intended for occupancy as
separate living quarters.
Equipment: Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not including vehicles, that
are needed by a Capital Facility to provide the Level of Service specified by the
Infrastructure Improvement Plan, but excluding replacement of the same after initial
development of the Capital Facility.
Excluded Library Facility: Library facilities for which development impact fees may not be
charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including that portion of any Library facility that
exceeds 10,000 square feet, and Equipment, Vehicles or Appurtenances associated with
Library operations.
Excluded Park Facility: Park and recreational facilities for which development impact
fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including amusement parks,
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
aquariums, Aquatic Centers, auditoriums, arenas, arts and cultural facilities, bandstand
and orchestra facilities, bathhouses, boathouses, clubhouses, community centers
greater than three thousand square feet in floor area, environmental education centers,
equestrian facilities, golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks,
water reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.
Fee Report: A written report developed for the Town pursuant to Section 7.7-9 of this
Article that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of each development
impact fee, explains the relationship between the development impact fee to be
assessed and the Plan-Based Cost per Service Units calculated in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, and which meets other requirements set forth in A.R.S. § Section 9-
463.05.
Financing or Debt: Any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund transfer, or other debt
service obligation used to finance the development or expansion of a Capital Facility.
Fire Protection: A Category of Necessary Public Services that includes fire stations, fire
Equipment, fire Vehicles and all Appurtenances for fire stations. Fire Protection does not
include Vehicles or Equipment used to provide administrative services, or helicopters or
airplanes. Fire Protection does not include any facility that is used for training firefighters
from more than one station or substation.
Grandfathered Facilities: Capital Facilities provided through Financing or Debt incurred
before June 1, 2011 for which a development impact fee has been Pledged towards
repayment as described in Section 7.7-5(C) of this Article.
General Plan: The comprehensive plan for development of the Town establishing areas
of the Town for different purposes, zones and activities, adopted pursuant to Arizona
Revised Statutes Title 9, Article 4, Article 6, as amended, including specific area plans, if
any, and including any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to
such plan, or parts thereof.
Gross Impact Fee: The total development impact fee to be assessed against a Subject
Development on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of any Credits.
Industrial Land Use: Storage, processing, and shipping of agricultural or timber products;
minerals extraction and production, storage, processing, shipping or conversion to
energy; fabrication, assembly, servicing, manufacture, storage or warehousing of other
products.
Infrastructure Improvements Plan: A document or series of documents that meet the
requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including those adopted pursuant to
Section 7.7-9 of this Article to cover any Category or combination of Categories of
Necessary Public Services.
Interim Fee Schedule: Any development impact fee schedule established prior to
January 1, 2012 in accordance with then-applicable law, and which shall expire not later
than August 1, 2014 pursuant to Section 7.7-11 of this Article.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
Land Use Assumptions: Projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and
population for the Town over a period of at least ten years as specified in Section 7.7-7
of this Article.
Level of Service: A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a Necessary Public
Service that is to be provided by the Town to development in the Town, defined in terms
of the relationship between service capacity and service demand, accessibility, response
times, comfort or convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of
measures. Level of Service may be measured differently for different Categories of
Necessary Public Services, as identified in the applicable Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.
Library Facilities: A Category of Necessary Public Services in which literary, musical,
artistic, or reference materials are kept (materials may be kept in any form of media such
as electronic, magnetic, or paper) for non-commercial use by the public in a facility
providing a Direct Benefit to development. Libraries do not include Excluded Library
Facilities, although a Library may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an
Excluded Library Facility.
Multi-Family Dwelling: A structure arranged, designed and intended to be the residence
of more than one family, with each family having independent cooking and bathing
facilities.
Necessary Public Services: “Necessary Public Services” shall have the meaning
prescribed in A.R.S. 9-463.05, subsection T, paragraph 5.
Offset: An amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of providing Necessary
Public Services to account for those capital components of infrastructure or associated
debt that have been or will be paid for by a development through taxes, fees (except for
development impact fees), and other revenue sources, as determined by the Town
pursuant to Section 7.7-8 of this Article.
Parks and Recreational Facilities: A Category of Necessary Public Services including but
not limited to parks, swimming pools and related facilities and equipment located on real
property not larger than 30 acres in area, as well as park facilities larger than 30 acres
where such facilities provide a Direct Benefit. Parks and Recreational Facilities do not
include Excluded Park Facilities, although Parks and Recreational Facilities may contain,
provide access to, or otherwise support an Excluded Park Facility.
Plan-Based Cost Per Service Units: The total future capital costs listed in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan for a Category of Necessary Public Services divided
by the total new equivalent demand units projected in the Town for that Category of
Necessary Public Services over the same time period.
Pledged: Where used with reference to a development impact fee, a development
impact fee shall be considered “pledged” where it was identified by the Town as a
source of payment or repayment for Financing or Debt that was identified as the source
of financing for a Necessary Public Service for which a development impact fee was
assessed pursuant to the then-applicable provisions of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Police Facilities: A Category of Necessary Public Services, including Vehicles and
Equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve the public peace,
prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders, protect the rights of persons and
property, regulate and control motorized and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel,
and/or provide and maintain police records, vehicles, equipment, and communications
systems. Police Facilities do not include Vehicles and Equipment used to provide
administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Police Facilities do not include any
facility that is used for training officers from more than one station or substation.
Private School: An institution of learning offering education for children which charges
students tuition, including some or all of the grades from kindergarten through 12th
grade. The site may contain athletic, dining, assembly and recreation facilities.
Public School: Elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, accommodation
schools, accommodation schools and charter schools, which are owned and operated by
a school district pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 15.
Qualified Professional: Any one of the following: (a) a professional engineer, surveyor,
financial analyst or planner, or other licensed professional providing services within the
scope of that person’s education or experience related to Town planning, zoning, or
impact development fees and holding a license issued by an agency or political
subdivision of the State of Arizona; (b) a financial analyst, planner, or other non-licensed
professional that is providing services within the scope of the person’s education or
experience related to Town planning, zoning, or impact development fees; or (c) any
other person operating under the supervision of one or more of the above.
Residential Land Use: Includes single and multi-family dwellings, hotels, motels,
dormitories, and mobile homes.
Service Area: The Town has only one Service Area, which encompasses all of the land
with the Towns corporate boundaries, as they may be expanded or otherwise amended.
Service Unit: A unit of development within a particular Category of Development, defined
in terms of a standardized measure of the demand that a unit of development in that
Category of Development generates for Necessary Public Services in relation to the
demand generated by a detached single-family Dwelling Unit. For all Categories of
Necessary Public Services, the Service Unit factor for a detached single-family Dwelling
Unit is one (1), while the Service Units factor for a unit of development within another
Category of Development is represented as a ratio of the demand for each Category of
Necessary Public Services typically generated by that unit as compared to the demand
for such services typically generated by a detached single-family Dwelling Unit.
Street Facilities: A Category of Necessary Public Services including arterial or collector
streets or roads, traffic signals, rights-of-way, and improvements thereon, bridges,
culverts, irrigation tiling, storm drains, and regional transportation facilities.
Storm Drainage: A Category of Necessary Public Services including but not limited to
storm sewers constructed in sizes needed to provide for stormwater management for
areas beyond major street projects and stormwater detention/retention basins, tanks,
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
pump stations and channels necessary to provide for proper stormwater management,
including any appurtenances for those facilities.
Subject Development: A land area linked by a unified plan of development, which must
be contiguous unless the land area is part of a development agreement executed in
accordance with Section 7.7-13 of this Article.
Substantial Nexus: A substantial nexus exists where the demand for Necessary Public
Services that will be generated by a Service Unit can be reasonably quantified in terms
of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of existing Capital Facilities, the
need it will create for new or expanded Capital Facilities, and/or the benefit to the
development from those Capital Facilities.
Town: The Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
Useful Life: The period of time in which an asset can reasonably be expected to be
used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will continue to be owned and
operated by the Town over the entirety of such period.
Vehicle: Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for transportation in the course of
providing a particular Category of Necessary Public Services at a specified Level of
Service, excluding helicopters and other aircraft.
Sec. 7.7-4. Applicability
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, from and after August 1, 2014, this Article
shall apply to all new development within the Town, provided, however, that only
the Street Development Fee shall be applied to public and private schools.
B. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all of the territory within the corporate
limits of the Town.
C. The Town manager or his/her designee is authorized to make determinations
regarding the application, administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this Article.
Sec. 7.7-5. Authority for Development Impact Fees
A. Fee Report and Implementation. The Town may assess and collect a
development impact fee for costs of Necessary Public Services, including all
professional services required for the preparation or revision of an Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, Fee Report, development impact fee, and required reports
or audits conducted pursuant to this Article. Development impact fees shall be
subject to the following requirements:
1. The Town shall develop and adopt a Fee Report that analyzes and
defines the development impact fees to be charged in the Town for each
Capital Facility Category, based on the Infrastructure Improvements Plan
and the Plan-Based Cost per Service Unit calculated pursuant to Section
7.7-8(A)(12) of this Article.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
2. Development impact fees shall be assessed against all new commercial,
residential, and industrial developments, provided that the Town may
assess different amounts of development impact fees against specific
Categories of Development based on the actual burdens and costs that
are associated with providing Necessary Public Services to that Category
of Development. No development impact fee shall exceed the Plan-Based
Cost per Service Unit for any Category of Development.
3. No development impact fees shall be charged, or Credits issued, for any
Capital Facility that does not fall within one of the Categories of
Necessary Public Services for which development impact fees may be
assessed as identified in Section 7.7-8(A)(1) of this Article.
4. Costs for Necessary Public Services made necessary by new
development shall be based on the same Level of Service provided to
existing development in the Town. Development impact fees may not be
used to provide a higher Level of Service to existing development or to
meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory
standards to the extent that these are applied to existing Capital Facilities
that are serving existing development.
5. Development impact fees may not be used to pay the Town’s
administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.
6. Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be included in
development impact fees to the extent they represent principal and/or
interest on the portion of any Financing or Debt used to finance the
construction or expansion of a Capital Facility identified in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
7. Except for any fees included on Interim Fee Schedule, all development
impact fees charged by the Town must be included in a “Fee Schedule”
prepared pursuant to this Article, included in the Fee Report, and adopted
by the Town by resolution.
8. All development impact fees shall meet the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-
463.05.
B. Costs per Service Units. The Fee Report shall summarize the costs of Capital
Facilities necessary to serve new development on a per Service Unit basis as
defined and calculated in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, including all
required Offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee structure for
adoption by the Town. The actual impact fees to be assessed shall be disclosed
and adopted in the form of impact fee schedules.
C. Carry-over of Previously-Established Development Impact Fees and
Grandfathered Facilities. Notwithstanding the requirements of this Article, certain
development impact fees adopted by the Town prior to the effective date of this
Article shall continue in effect as follows:
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
1. Until August 1, 2014 or the date a new development impact fee is
adopted for the applicable Category of Necessary Public Services in the
Town pursuant to this Article, whichever occurs first, development impact
fees established prior to January 1, 2012 shall continue in full force and
effect to the extent that the development impact fee is used to provide a
Category of Necessary Public Services that is authorized by Section 7.7-8
of this Article. Development impact fees collected prior to January 1,
2012, shall be expended on Capital Facilities within the same Category of
Necessary Public Services for which they were collected.
2. The Town may continue to collect and use any development impact fee
established before January 1, 2012, even if the development impact fee
would not otherwise be permitted to be collected and spent pursuant to
A.R.S. § 9-463.05, as amended by the state legislature in Senate Bill
1525, Fiftieth Legislature, First Regular Session, if either of the following
apply:
a. Both of the following conditions are met:
i. Prior to June 1, 2011, the development impact fee was
pledged towards the repayment of Financing or Debt
incurred by the Town to provide a Capital Facility.
ii. The applicable Capital Facility was included in the Town’s
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, or other Town planning
document prepared pursuant to applicable law, prior to
June 1, 2011.
b. Before August 1, 2014, the Town uses the development impact fee to
finance a Capital Facility in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
Subsection (S).
3. Defined terms in any previously established fee schedule shall be interpreted
according to the ordinance in effect at the time of their adoption.
Sec. 7.7-6. Administration of Development Impact Fees
A. Separate Accounts. Development impact fees collected pursuant to this Article
shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing accounts for each Capital Facility
category.
B. Limitations on Use of Fees. Development impact fees and any interest thereon
collected pursuant to this Article shall be spent to provide Capital Facilities
associated with the same Category of Necessary Public Services, including costs
of Financing or Debt used by the Town to finance such Capital Facilities and
other costs authorized by this Article that are included in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
C. Time Limit. Development impact fees collected after July 31, 2014 shall be used
within ten years of the date upon which they were collected for all Categories of
Necessary Public Services.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Sec. 7.7-7. Land Use Assumptions
The Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall be consistent with the Town’s current Land
Use Assumptions for the Town and each Category of Necessary Public Services as
adopted by the Town pursuant to A.R.S. § 463.05.
A. Reviewing the Land Use Assumptions. Prior to the adoption or amendment of an
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the Town shall review and evaluate the Land
Use Assumptions on which the Infrastructure Improvements Plan is to be based
to ensure that the Land Use Assumptions conform with the General Plan.
B. Evaluating Necessary Changes. If the Land Use Assumptions upon which an
Infrastructure Improvements Plan is based have not been updated within the last
five years, the Town shall evaluate the Land Use Assumptions to determine
whether changes are necessary. If, after general evaluation, the Town
determines that the Land Use Assumptions are still valid, the Town shall issue
the report required in Section 7.7-10 of this Chapter.
C. Required Modifications to Land Use Assumptions. If the Town determines that
changes to the Land Use Assumptions are necessary in order to adopt or amend
an Infrastructure Improvements Plan, it shall make such changes as necessary
to the Land Use Assumptions prior to or in conjunction with the review and
approval of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan pursuant to Section 7.7-10 of
this Chapter.
Sec. 7.7-8. Infrastructure Improvements Plan
A. Infrastructure Improvements Plan Contents. The Infrastructure Improvements
Plan shall be developed by Qualified Professionals and may be based upon or
incorporated within the Town’s Capital Improvements Plan. The Infrastructure
Improvements Plan shall:
1. Specify the Categories of Necessary Public Services for which the Town
will impose a development impact fee, which may include any or all of the
following:
a. Stormwater, Drainage, and Flood Control
b. Libraries
c. Street Facilities
d. Fire Protection
e. Police
f. Parks
2. Define and provide a map of the Service Area that demonstrates a
Substantial Nexus between the Capital Facilities to be provided in the
Service Area and the Service Units to be served by those Capital
Facilities. For Libraries and for Parks larger than 30 acres, the Service
Area must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a Direct Benefit
between the Capital Facilities and the Service Units to be served by those
Capital Facilities. The Town may cover more than one category of Capital
Facilities in the same Service Area provided that there is an independent
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
Substantial Nexus or Direct Benefit, as applicable, between each
Category of Necessary Public Services and the Service Units to be
served.
3. Identify and describe the Land Use Assumptions upon which the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan is based.
4. Analyze and identify the existing Level of Service provided by the Town to
existing Service Units for each Category of Necessary Public Services.
5. Identify the Level of Service to be provided by the Town for each
Category of Necessary Public Services based on the relevant Land Use
Assumptions and any established Town standards or policies related to
required Levels of Service.
6. For each Category of Necessary Public Services, analyze and identify the
existing capacity of the Capital Facilities in each Service Area, the
utilization of those Capital Facilities by existing Service Units, and the
available excess capacity of those Capital Facilities to serve new Service
Units including any existing or planned commitments or agreements for
the usage of such capacity. The Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall
additionally identify any changes or upgrades to existing Capital Facilities
that will be needed to achieve or maintain the planned Level of Service to
existing Service Units, or to meet new safety, efficiency, environmental, or
other regulatory requirements for services provided to existing Service
Units.
7. Identify any Grandfathered Facilities and the impact thereof on the need
for Necessary Public Services in each affected Service Area.
8. Estimate the total number of existing and future Service Units based on
the Town’s Land Use Assumptions and projected new Service Units.
9. Based on the analysis in paragraphs (3)-(6) above, provide a summary
table or tables describing the Level of Service for each Category of
Necessary Public Services by relating the required Capital Facilities to
Service Units in the Service Area, and identifying the applicable Service
Units factor associated with each Category of Development.
10. For each Category of Necessary Public Services, analyze and identify the
projected utilization of any available excess capacity in existing Capital
Facilities, and all new or expanded Capital Facilities that will be required
to provide and maintain the planned Level of Service, as a result of the
new projected Service Units, for a period not to exceed ten years. Nothing
in this Subsection shall prohibit the Town from additionally including in its
Infrastructure Improvements Plan projected utilization of, or needs for,
Capital Facilities for a period longer than ten years, provided that the
costs of such Capital Facilities are excluded from the calculation of the
Plan-Based Cost per Service Unit.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
11. For each Category of Necessary Public Services, estimate the total cost
of any available excess capacity and/or new or expanded Capital
Facilities that will be required to serve new Service Units, including costs
of land acquisition, improvements, engineering and architectural services,
studies leading to design, design, construction, financing, and
administrative costs, as well as projected costs of inflation. Such total
costs shall not include costs for ongoing operation and maintenance of
Capital Facilities, nor for replacement of Capital Facilities to the extent
that such replacement is necessary to serve existing Service Units. If the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan includes changes or upgrades to
existing Capital Facilities that will be needed to achieve or maintain the
planned Level of Service to existing Service Units, or to meet new
regulatory requirements for services provided to existing Service Units,
such costs shall be identified and distinguished in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
12. Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or other sources
that will be available to fund the new or expanded Capital Facilities
identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, which shall include
estimated state-shared revenue, highway users revenue, federal revenue,
ad valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar excise
taxes and the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to
development based on the approved land use assumptions. The
Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall additionally estimate the time
required to finance, construct and implement the new or expanded
Capital Facilities.
13. Calculate required Offsets by
a. Setting aside a portion of the Town’s construction sales tax to be
used exclusively for the capital costs of necessary public services
(the “Excess Portion”).
b. Calculating the Excess Portion, which shall be the portion of any
construction contracting, or similar excise tax rate that exceeds
the percentage amount of the transaction privilege tax rate that is
imposed on the majority of other transaction privilege tax
classifications in the Town.
c. Depositing the Excess Portion into a separate fund, the proceeds
of which shall be used only for the capital cost of necessary public
services.
d. Taking into account the reserved amounts when calculating
development fees.
14. Calculate the Plan-Based Cost per Service Unit by dividing the total
projected costs to provide Capital Facilities to new Service Units for each
Category of Necessary Public Services as determined pursuant to
Subsection (9) of this Section into the number of new Service Units
projected over a period not to exceed ten years, considering the specific
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
Service Units factor(s) associated with such Service Units for each
Category of Necessary Public Services and taking into account the
reserved amounts calculated pursuant to Subsection 13 of this Section.
B. Multiple Plans. An Infrastructure Improvements Plan adopted pursuant to this
Subsection may address one or more of the Town’s Categories of Necessary
Public Services in the Town’s Service Area. Each Capital Facility shall be subject
to no more than one Infrastructure Improvements Plan at any given time.
C. Reserved Capacity. The Town may reserve capacity in an Infrastructure
Improvements Plan to serve one or more planned future developments, including
capacity reserved through a Development Agreement pursuant to Section 7.7-13
of this Article. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan at the time it is adopted.
Sec. 7.7-9. Adoption and Modification Procedures
A. Adopting or Amending the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. The Infrastructure
Improvements Plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the following
procedures:
1. Major Amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as
provided in paragraph 2 of this Subsection, the adoption or amendment of
an Infrastructure Improvement Plan shall occur at one or more public
hearings according to the following schedule, and may occur concurrently
with the adoption of an update of the Town’s Land Use Assumptions as
provided in Section 7.7-7 of this Article:
a. Sixty days before the first public hearing regarding a new or
updated Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the Town shall provide
public notice of the hearing and post the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and the underlying Land Use Assumptions on
its website; the Town shall additionally make available to the
public the documents used to prepare the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and underlying Land Use Assumptions and
the amount of any proposed changes to the Plan-Based Cost per
Service Units.
b. The Town shall conduct a public hearing on the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and underlying Land Use Assumptions at
least 30 days, but no more than 60 days, before approving or
disapproving the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
2. Minor Amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
Notwithstanding the other requirements of this Section, the Town may
update the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or its underlying Land
Use Assumptions without a public hearing if all of the following apply:
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
a. The changes in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or the
underlying Land Use Assumptions will not add any new Category
of Necessary Public Services to any Service Area.
b. The changes in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or the
underlying Land Use Assumptions will not increase the Level of
Service to be provided in any Service Area.
c. Based on an analysis of the Fee Report and the Town’s adopted
development impact fee schedules, the changes in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or the underlying Land Use
Assumptions would not, individually or cumulatively with other
amendments undertaken pursuant to this Subsection, have
caused a development impact fee in any Service Area to have
been increased by more than five per cent above the development
impact fee that is provided in the current development impact fee
schedule.
d. At least 30 days prior to the date that the any amendment
pursuant to this Section is adopted, the Town shall post the
proposed amendments on the Town website.
B. Amendments to the Fee Report. Any adoption or amendment of a Fee Report
and fee schedule shall occur at one or more public hearings according to the
following schedule:
1. The first public hearing on the Fee Report must be held at least 30 days
after the adoption or approval of and Infrastructure Improvements Plan as
provided in subsection A of this Section. The Town must give at least 30
days’ notice prior to the hearing, provided that this notice may be given on
the same day as the approval or disapproval of the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
2. The Town shall make the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
underlying Land Use Assumptions available to the public on the Town’s
website 30 days prior to the public hearing described in Paragraph (1) of
this Subsection.
3. The Fee Report may be adopted by the Town no sooner than 30 days,
and no later than 60 days, after the hearing described in Paragraph (1) of
this Subsection.
4. The development fee schedules in the Fee Report adopted pursuant to
this subsection shall become effective 75 days after adoption of the Fee
Report by the Town.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
Sec. 7.7-10. Timing for the Renewal and Updating of the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan and the Land Use Assumptions
A. Renewing the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Except as provided in
Subsection B of this Section, not later than every five years the Town shall
update the applicable Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Fee Report related
to each Category of Necessary Public Services pursuant to Section 7.7-9 of this
Article. Such five-year period shall be calculated from the date of the adoption of
the Infrastructure Improvements Plan or the date of the adoption of the Fee
Report, whichever occurs later.
B. Determination of No Changes. Notwithstanding Subsection (A) of this Section, if
the Town determines that no changes to an Infrastructure Improvements Plan,
underlying Land Use Assumptions, or Fee Report are needed, the Town may
elect to continue the existing Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Fee Report
without amendment by providing notice as follows:
1. Notice of the determination shall be published at least 180 days prior to
the end of the five-year period described in Subsection A of this Section.
2. The notice shall identify the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Fee
Report that shall continue in force without amendment.
3. The notice shall provide a map and description of the Service Area(s)
covered by such Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Fee Report.
4. The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of the Town
may submit, within 60 days, a written request that the Town update the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, underlying Land Use Assumptions,
and/or Fee Report and the reasons and basis for the request.
C. Response to Comments. The Town shall consider and respond within 30 days to
any timely requests submitted pursuant to Paragraph 4 of Subsection (B) of this
Section.
Sec. 7.7-11. Collection of Development Impact Fees
A. Collection. Development impact fees, together with administrative charges
assessed pursuant to Paragraph (A)(6) of this Section, shall be calculated and
collected prior to issuance of permission to commence development; specifically:
1. Unless otherwise specified pursuant to a Development Agreement
adopted pursuant to Section 7.7-13 of this Article, development impact
fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit according to the
current development impact fee schedule for the Town, as adopted
pursuant to this Article, or according to any other development impact fee
schedule as authorized in this Article.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
2. If a building permit is not required for the development, but water or
wastewater connections are required, any and all development impact
fees due shall be paid at the time the water service connection is
purchased. If only a wastewater connection is required, the development
impact fees shall be paid prior to approval of a connection to the sewer
system.
3. No building permit, water or sewer connection, or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued if a development impact fee is not paid as directed in the
previous paragraphs.
5. If the building permit is for a change in the type of building use, an
increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an addition to a
residential or non-residential point of demand to the water or wastewater
system, the development impact fee shall be assessed on the additional
service units resulting from the expansion or change, and following the
development impact fee schedule applicable to any new use type.
6. For issued permits that expire or are voided, development impact fees
and administrative charges shall be as follows:
a. If the original permittee is seeking to renew an expired or voided
permit, and the development impact fees paid for such
development have not been refunded, then the permittee shall pay
the difference between any development impact fees paid at the
time the permit was issued and those in the fee schedule at the
time the permit is reissued or renewed.
b. If a new or renewed permit for the same development is being
sought by someone other than the original permittee, the new
permit Applicant shall pay the full development impact fees
specified in the fee schedule in effect at the time that the permits
are reissued or renewed. If the original permittee has assigned its
rights under the permits to the new permit Applicant, the new
permit Applicant shall pay development impact fees as if it were
the original permittee.
B. Exceptions. Development impact fees shall not be owed under either of the
following conditions:
1. Development impact fees have been paid for the development and the
permit(s) which triggered the collection of the development impact fees
have not expired or been voided.
2. The approval(s) that trigger the collection of development impact fees
involve modifications to existing residential or non-residential
development that do not: (a) add new Service Units, (b) increase the
impact of existing Service Units on existing or future Capital Facilities, or
(c) change the land-use type of the existing development to a different
category of development for which a higher development impact fee
would have been due. To the extent that any modification does not meet
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
the requirements of this paragraph, the development impact fee due shall
be the difference between the development impact fee that was or would
have been due on the existing development and the development impact
fee that is due on the development as modified.
C. Temporary Exemptions from Development Impact Fee Schedules. New
developments in the Town shall be temporarily exempt from increases in
development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or modified
development impact fee schedules as follows:
1. Residential Uses. On or after the day that the first building permit is
issued for a single-family residential development, the Town shall, at the
permittee’s request, provide the permittee with an applicable development
impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months
beginning on the day that the first building permit is issued, and which
shall expire at the end of the first business day of the 25th month
thereafter. During the effective period of the applicable development
impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same single-family
residential development shall not be subject to any new or modified
development impact fee schedule.
2. Commercial, Industrial and Multifamily Uses. On or after the day that the
final approval, as defined in A.R.S. 9-463.05(T)(4), is issued for a
commercial, industrial or multifamily development, the Town shall provide
an applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a
period of 24 months beginning on the day that final development approval
of a site plan or final subdivision plat is given, and which shall expire at
the end of the first business day of the 25th month thereafter. During the
effective period of the applicable development impact fee schedule, any
building permit issued for the same development shall not be subject to
any new or modified development impact fee schedule.
3. Other Development. Any Category of Development not covered under
paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Subsection shall pay development impact fees
according to the fee schedule that is current at the time of collection as
specified in Subsection (A) of this Section.
4. Changes to Site Plans and Subdivision Plats. Notwithstanding the other
requirements of this Subsection, if changes are made to a development’s
final site plan or subdivision plat that will increase the number of service
units after the issuance of a grandfathered development impact fee
schedule, the Town may assess any new or modified development impact
fees against the additional service units. If the Town reduces the amount
of an applicable development impact fee during the period that a
grandfathered development impact fee schedule is in force, the Town
shall assess the lower development impact fee.
D. Option to Pursue Special Fee Determination. Where a development is of a type
that does not closely fit within a particular Category of Development appearing on
an adopted development impact fee schedule, or where a development has
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
unique characteristics such that the actual burdens and costs associated with
providing Necessary Public Services to that development will differ substantially
from that associated with other developments in a specified Category of
Development, the Town may require the Applicant to provide the Town Director
of Development Services or authorized designee with an alternative development
impact fee analysis. Based on a projection of the actual burdens and costs that
will be associated with the development, the alternative development impact fee
analysis may propose a unique fee for the development based on the application
of an appropriate Service Unit factor to the applicable Plan-Based Cost per
Service Unit, or may propose that the development be covered under the
development impact fee schedule governing a different and more analogous
Category of Development. The Director of Development Services or authorized
designee shall review the alternative impact fee analysis and shall make a
determination as to the development impact fee to be charged. Such decision
shall be appealable pursuant to Section 7.7-14 of this Article. The Director or
authorized designee may require the Applicant to pay an administrative fee to
cover the actual costs of reviewing the special fee determination application.
Sec. 7.7-12. Development Impact Fee Credits and Credit Agreements
A. Eligibility of Capital Facility. All development impact fee Credits must meet the
following requirements:
1. One of the following is true:
a. The Capital Facility, or the financial contribution toward a Capital
Facility that will be provided by the developer and for which a
Credit will be issued, must be identified in an adopted
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Fee Report as a Capital
Facility for which a development impact fee was assessed; or
b. The Applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town
that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject Capital
Facility should have been included in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan in lieu of a different Capital Facility that was
included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and for which a
development impact fee was assessed. If the subject Capital
Facility is determined to be eligible for a Credit in this manner, the
Town shall amend the Infrastructure Improvements Plan to (i)
include the subject replacement facility and (ii) delete the Capital
Facility that will be replaced.
2. Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure provided by a
developer if the cost of such infrastructure will be repaid to the developer
by the Town through another agreement or mechanism. To the extent
that the developer will be paid or reimbursed by the Town for any
contribution, payment, construction, or dedication from any Town funding
source including an agreement to reimburse the developer with future
collected development impact fees pursuant to Section 7.7-13 of this
Article, any Credits claimed by the developer shall be: (a) deducted from
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
any amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the Town; or (b) reduced by the
amount of such payment or reimbursement.
B. Calculation of Credits. Credits will be based on that portion of the costs for an
eligible Capital Facility identified in the adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan
for which a development fee was assessed pursuant to the Fee Report. If the
Gross Impact Fee for a particular category of Necessary Public Service is
adopted at an amount lower than the Plan-Based Cost per Service Unit, the
amount of any Credit shall be reduced in proportion to the difference between the
Plan-Based Cost per SU and the Gross Impact Fee adopted. A Credit shall not
exceed the actual costs the Applicant incurred in providing the eligible Capital
Facility.
C. Allocation of Credits. Before any Credit can be issued to a Subject Development
(or portion thereof), the Credit must be allocated to that development as follows:
1. The Developer and the Town must execute a Credit Agreement including
all of the following:
a. The total amount of the Credits resulting from provision of an
eligible Capital Facility.
b. The estimated number of Service Units to be served within the
Subject Development.
c. The method by which the Credit values will be distributed within
the Subject Development.
2. It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation of
development impact fee Credits through an application for a Credit
Agreement (which may be part of a Development Agreement entered into
pursuant to Section 7.7-13 of this Article).
3. If a building permit is issued or a water/sewer connection is purchased,
and a development impact fee is paid prior to execution of a Credit
Agreement for the Subject Development, no Credits may be allocated
retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits may be allocated to any
remaining permits for the Subject Development in accordance with this
Article.
4. If the entity that provides an eligible Capital Facility sells or relinquishes a
development (or portion thereof) that it owns or controls prior to execution
of a Credit Agreement or Development Agreement, Credits resulting from
the eligible Capital Facility will only be allocated to the development if the
entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to its successor(s) in
interest for the Subject Development.
5. If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible Capital Facility, both entities
must enter into a single Credit Agreement with the Town, and any request
for the allocation of Credit within the Subject Development(s) must be
made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible Capital Facility.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
6. Credits may only be reallocated from or within a Subject Development
with the Town’s approval of an amendment to an executed Credit
Agreement, subject to the following conditions:
a. The entity that executed the original agreement with the Town, or
its legal successor in interest and the entity that currently controls
the Subject Development are parties to the request for
reallocation.
b. The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any
Credits already issued for the Subject Development.
7. A Credit Agreement may authorize the allocation of Credits to a noncontiguous
parcel only if all of the following conditions are met:
a. The entity that executed the original agreement with the Town or
its legal successor in interest, the entity that currently controls the
Subject Development, and the entity that controls the noncontiguous
parcel are parties to the request for reallocation.
b. The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any
Credits already issued for the Subject Development.
c. The non-contiguous parcel is in the same Service Area as that
served by the eligible Capital Facility.
d. The non-contiguous parcel receives a Necessary Public Service
from the eligible Capital Facility.
e. The Credit Agreement specifically states the value of the Credits
to be allocated to each parcel and/or Service Unit, or establishes a
mechanism for future determination of the Credit values.
f. The Credit Agreement does not involve the transfer of Credits to
or from any property subject to a Development Agreement.
D. Credit Agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a Credit Agreement
executed in accordance with Subsection C of this Section. The Town Manager or
Authorized Designee is authorized by this Article to enter into a Credit Agreement
with the controlling entity of a Subject Development, subject to the following:
1. The Developer requesting the Credit Agreement shall provide all
information requested by the Town to allow it to determine the value of
the Credit to be applied.
2. An application for a Credit Agreement shall be submitted to the Town by
the Developer within one year of the date on which ownership or control
of the Capital Facility passes to the Town.
3. The Developer shall submit a draft Credit Agreement to the Town
Manager or authorized designee(s) for review in the form provided to the
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
Applicant by the Town. The draft Credit Agreement shall include, at a
minimum, all of the following information and supporting documentation:
a. A legal description and map depicting the location of the Subject
Development for which Credit is being applied. The map shall
depict the location of the Capital Facilities that have been or will
be provided.
b. An estimate of the total Service Units that will be developed within
the Subject Development depicted on the map and described in
the legal description.
c. A list of the Capital Facilities associated physical attributes, and
the related costs as stated in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.
d. Documentation showing the date(s) of acceptance by the Town, if
the Capital Facilities have already been provided.
e. The total amount of Credit to be applied within the Subject
Development and the calculations leading to the total amount of
Credit.
f. The Credit amount to be applied to each Service Unit within the
Subject Development for each Category of Necessary Public
Services.
4. The Town’s determination of the Credit to be allocated is final.
5. Upon execution of the Credit Agreement by the Town and the Applicant,
Credits shall be deemed allocated to the Subject Development.
6. Any amendment to a previously approved Credit Agreement must be
initiated within two years of the Town’s final acceptance of the eligible
Capital Facility for which the amendment is requested.
7. Any Credit Agreement approved as part of a Development Agreement
shall be amended in accordance with the terms of the Development
Agreement and Section 7.7-13 of this Article.
F. Issuance of Credits. Credits allocated pursuant to Subsection (D) of this Section
may be issued and applied toward the Gross Impact Fees due from a
development, subject to the following conditions:
1. Credits issued for an eligible Capital Facility may only be applied to the
development impact fee due for the applicable Category of Necessary
Public Services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another
Category of Necessary Public Services.
2. Credits shall only be issued when the eligible Capital Facility from which
the Credits were derived has been accepted by the Town or when
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
adequate security for the completion of the eligible Capital Facility has
been provided in accordance with all terms of an executed Development
Agreement.
3. Where Credits have been issued pursuant to paragraph (2) of this
Subsection, an impact fee due at the time a building permit is issued shall
be reduced by the Credit amount stated in or calculated from the
executed Credit Agreement. Where Credits have not yet been issued, the
Gross Impact Fee shall be paid in full, and a refund of the Credit amount
shall be due when the Developer demonstrates compliance with
Paragraph (2) of this Subsection in a written request to the Town.
4. Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or reallocated to another
permit or parcel, except that Credits may be released for reuse on the
same Subject Development if a building permit for which the Credits were
issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund
under Section 7.7-15(A)(2)(a) of this Article.
5. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section 7.7-12, Credits issued
prior to January 1, 2012 may only be used for the Subject Development
for which they were issued. Such Credits may be transferred to a new
owner of all or part of the Subject Development in proportion to the
percentage of ownership in the Subject Development to be held by the
new owner.
Sec. 7.7-13. Development Agreements
Development Agreements containing provisions regarding development impact fees,
development impact fee Credits, and/or disbursement of revenues from development
impact fee accounts shall comply with the following:
A. Development Agreement Required. A Development Agreement is required to
authorize any of the following:
1. To issue Credits prior to the Town’s acceptance of an eligible Capital
Facility.
2. To allocate Credits to a parcel that is not contiguous with the Subject
Development and that does not meet the requirements of Subparagraph
(D)(7) of Section 7.7-12 of this Article.
3. To reimburse the developer of an eligible Capital Facility using funds from
development impact fee accounts.
4. To allocate different Credit amounts per Service Unit to different parcels
within a Subject Development.
5. For a single family residential Dwelling Unit, to allow development impact
fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building permit as
provided in this Section.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
B. General Requirements. All Development Agreements shall be prepared and
executed in accordance with A.R.S. 9-500.05 and any applicable requirements of
the Town Code. Except where specifically modified by this Section, all provisions
of Section 7.7-12 of this Article shall apply to any Credit Agreement that is
authorized as part of a Development Agreement.
C. Early Credit Issuance. A Development Agreement may authorize the issuance of
Credits prior to acceptance of an eligible Capital Facility by the Town when the
Development Agreement specifically states the form and value of the security
(i.e. bond, letter of Credit, etc.) to be provided to the Town prior to issuance of
any Credits. The Town shall determine the acceptable form and value of the
security to be provided.
D. Non-Contiguous Credit Allocation. A Development Agreement may authorize the
allocation of Credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of the following
conditions are met:
1. The non-contiguous parcel is in the same Service Area as that served by
the eligible Capital Facility.
2. The non-contiguous parcel receives a Necessary Public Service from the
eligible Capital Facility.
3. The Development Agreement specifically states the value of the Credits
to be allocated to each parcel and/or Service Units, or establishes a
mechanism for future determination of the Credit values.
E. Uneven Credit Allocation. The Development Agreement must specify how
Credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per- Service Units basis,
if the Credits are not to be allocated evenly. If the Development Agreement is
silent on this topic, all Credits will be allocated evenly amongst all parcels on a
per- Service Units basis.
F. Use of Reimbursements. Funds reimbursed to developers from impact fee
accounts for construction of an eligible Capital Facility must be utilized in
accordance with applicable law for the use of Town funds in construction or
acquisition of Capital Facilities, including A.R.S. § 34-201, et seq.
G. Deferral of Fees. A Development Agreement may provide for the deferral of
payment of development impact fees for a residential development beyond the
issuance of a building permit; provided that a development impact fee may not be
paid later than the 15 days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for
that Dwelling Unit. The Development Agreement shall provide for the value of
any deferred development impact fees to be supported by appropriate security,
including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond.
H. Waiver of Fees. If the Town agrees to waive any development impact fees
assessed on development in a Development Agreement, the Town shall
reimburse the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount that
was waived.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
I. No Obligation. Nothing in this Section obligates the Town to enter into any
Development Agreement or to authorize any type of Credit Agreement permitted
by this Section.
Sec. 7.7-14. Appeals
A development impact fee determination by Town staff may be appealed in accordance
with the following procedures:
A. Limited Scope. An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the calculation of
the development impact fees for a specific development and/or permit and
calculation of Service Units for the development.
B. Form of Appeal. An appeal shall be initiated on such written form as the Town
may prescribe, and submitted to the Director of the Development Services
Department.
C. Department Action. The Director of Development Services shall act upon the
appeal within 30 calendar days of the filing of the appeal with the Development
Services Department, and the Applicant shall be notified of the Director’s
decision in writing.
D. Appeal to Town Manager. The Applicant may further appeal the decision of the
Director of Development Services to the Town Manager, within 14 calendar days
of the Director’s decision pursuant to Sec. 7.7-14.C. The Town Manager may
designate the Assistant Town Manager to hear such appeals.
E. The Town Manager or authorized designee shall act upon the appeal within 14
calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and the Applicant shall be notified of the
decision in writing.
F. Final Decision. The decision of the Town Manager (or Assistant Town Manager)
is final.
G. Fees During Pendency. Building permits may be issued during the pendency of
an appeal if the Applicant (1) pays the full impact fee calculated by the Town at
the time the appeal is filed or (2) provides the Town with financial assurances in
the form acceptable to the Town Manager or authorized designee equal to the
full amount of the impact fee. Upon final disposition of an appeal, the fee shall
be adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered, and a refund paid if
warranted. If the appeal is denied by the Town Manager or authorized designee,
and the Applicant has provided the Town with financial assurances as set forth in
clause (2) above, the Applicant shall deliver the full amount of the impact fee to
the Town within ten days of the Town Manager or designee’s final decision on
the appeal. If the Applicant fails to deliver the full amount of the impact fees
when required by this Subsection, the Town may draw upon such financial
assurance instrument(s) as necessary to recover the full amount of the impact
fees due from the Applicant.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
Sec. 7.7-15. Refunds of Development Impact Fees
A. Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any current owner of property
within the Town who submits a written request to the Town and demonstrates
that:
1. The permit(s) that triggered the collection of the development impact fee
have expired or been voided prior to the commencement of the
development for which the permits were issued and the development
impact fees collected have not been expended, encumbered, or Pledged
for the repayment of Financing or Debt; or
2. The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor in interest paid a
development impact fee for the applicable Capital Facility on or after
August 1, 2014, and one of the following conditions exists:
a. The Capital Facility designed to serve the subject real property
has been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject real
property and any development for which there is reserved
capacity, and the service which was to be provided by that Capital
Facility has not been provided to the subject real property from
that Capital Facility or from any other infrastructure.
b. After collecting the fee to construct a Capital Facility the Town fails
to complete construction of the Capital Facility within the time
period identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, as it may
be amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise
unavailable to the subject real property from that Capital Facility or
any other infrastructure.
c. For a Category of Necessary Public Services other than Water or
Wastewater Facilities, any part of a development impact fee is not
spent within ten years of the Town’s receipt of the development
impact fee.
d. Any part of a development impact fee for Water or Wastewater
Facilities is not spent within 15 years of the Town’s receipt of the
development impact fee.
e. The development impact fee was calculated and collected for the
construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific Capital
Facility serving the subject real property and the actual
construction costs for the Capital Facility are less than the
construction costs projected in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan by a factor of 10% or more. In such event, the current owner
of the subject real property shall, upon request as set forth in this
Section A, be entitled to a refund for the difference between the
amounts of the development impact fee charged for and
attributable to such construction cost and the amount the
development impact fee would have been calculated to be if the
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
actual construction cost had been included in the Fee Report.
The refund contemplated by this Subsection shall relate only to
the costs specific to the construction of the applicable Capital
Facility and shall not include any related design, administrative, or
other costs not directly incurred for construction of the Capital
Facility that are included in the development impact fee as
permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
B. Earned Interest. A refund of a development impact fee shall include any interest
actually earned on the refunded portion of the development impact fee by the
Town from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds shall be made
to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid.
C. Refund to Government. If a development impact fee was paid by a governmental
entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.
Sec. 7.7-16. Oversight of Development Impact Fee Program
A. Annual Report. Within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year, the Town shall file
with the Town Clerk an unaudited annual report accounting for the collection and
use of the fees for each service area and shall post the report on its website in
accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05, Subsections N and O, as amended.
B. Biennial Audit. In addition to the Annual Report described in Subsection A of this
Section, the Town shall provide for a biennial, certified audit of the Town’s Land
Use Assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan and development impact
fees.
1. An audit pursuant to this Subsection shall be conducted by one or more
Qualified Professionals who are not employees or officials of the Town
and who did not prepare the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
2. The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of development
fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments describing
the amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and spent
on capital facilities.
3. The audit shall describe the Level of Service in each Service Area, and
evaluate any inequities in implementing the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan or imposing the development impact fee.
4. The Town shall post the findings of the audit on the Town's website and
shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within 60 days of the release
of the audit to the public.
5. For purposes of this Section a certified audit shall mean any audit
authenticated by one or more of the Qualified Professionals conducting
the audit pursuant to paragraph (1) of this Subsection.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
1Ordinance 372-06 and amended by 373-06; 547-14
ARTICLE 7-8 FIREPLACE REGULATIONS1
7-8-1 Definitions
7-8-2 Installation Restrictions
7-8-3 Fireplace or Woodstove Alterations Prohibited
7-8-4 Permits Required
7-8-5 Exemptions
Section 7-8-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
A. “Fireplace” means a built-in-place hearth and fire chamber or a factory-built appliance,
designed to burn solid fuel or to accommodate gas or electric log insert or similar device,
and which is intended for occasional recreational or aesthetic use, not for cooking,
heating, or industrial processes.
B. “Solid fuel” includes but is not limited to wood, coal or other nongaseous or nonliquid fuels,
including those fuels defined by the Maricopa County Air Pollution Control Office as
“inappropriate fuel” to burn in residential woodburning devices.
C. “Woodstove” means a solid-fuel burning heating appliance including a pellet stove, which
is either freestanding or designed to be inserted into a fireplace.
Section 7-8-2 Installation Restrictions
No person, firm or corporation shall construct or install a fireplace or a woodstove, and the
building official shall not approve or issue a permit to construct or install a fireplace or a
woodstove, unless the fireplace or woodstove complies with one of the following:
A. A fireplace which has a permanently installed gas or electric log insert.
B. A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning appliance which has been certified by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency as conforming to 40 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 60, Subpart AAA as in effect on July 1, 1990.
C. A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning appliance which has been tested and
listed by a nationally recognized testing agency to meet performance standards equivalent
to those adopted by 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 60, Subpart AAA as in effect on
July 1, 1990.
D. A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning appliance which has been determined by
the Maricopa County Air Pollution Control Office to meet performance standards
equivalent to those adopted by 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 60, Subpart AAA as
in effect on July 1, 1990.
1Ordinance 157-99
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
E. A fireplace which has permanently installed woodstove insert which complies with
subsections B, C or D above.
Section 7-8-3 Fireplace or Woodstove Alterations Prohibited
A. No person, firm or corporation shall alter or remove a gas or electric log insert or a
woodstove insert from a fireplace for purposes of converting the fireplace to directly burn
wood or other solid fuel.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall alter a fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning
appliance in any manner that would void its certification or operational compliance with the
provisions of this Article.
Section 7-8-4 Permits Required
In addition to the provisions and restrictions of this Article, construction, installation or alteration
of all fireplaces, woodstoves and other gas, electric or solid-fuel burning appliances and
equipment shall be done in compliance with provisions of the Construction Code and shall be
subject to the permits and inspections required by the Construction Code.
Section 7-8-5 Exemptions
The following installations are not regulated by this Article and are not prohibited by this Article:
A. Furnaces, boilers, incinerators, kilns and other similar space heating or industrial process
equipment.
B. Cookstoves, barbecue grills and similar appliances designed primarily for cooking.
C. Fire pits, barbecue grills, and other outdoor fireplaces.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 7-9 PAVEMENT CUT REQUIREMENTS1
7-9-1 General
7-9-2 Permit Requirements
7-9-3 Cash Bond Requirements
7-9-4 Backfill and Pavement Replacement
7-9-5 Inspection
7-9-6 Unauthorized Pavement Cuts
Section 7-9-1 General
It is the Town’s desire to require all utility crossings to be bored. If the Town Engineer approves
an application for a street cut, the procedures outlined in this ordinance shall apply. Street cuts
will generally not be approved unless they meet the following conditions:
A. Major street maintenance or improvements to the road are scheduled within the next two
years;
B. The road was constructed, resurfaced or surface treated at least three (3) years ago;
C. The road is in poor structural condition and has been approved for open cuts by the Town
Engineer;
D. There is no feasible alternative to cutting the street.
Section 7-9-2 Permit Requirements
The contractor directly responsible for the trench backfill and pavement replacement shall obtain
and sign for the permit.
A. The applicant shall call Arizona Blue Stake to identify any potential conflicts.
B. The applicant shall submit the signed permit application, proof of liability insurance, two
copies of detailed drawings and traffic control plans, and a certificate of quantities detailing
and dimensioning the items being placed in the right-of-way.
C. A completion date will be indicated on the permit. The contractor shall notify the Town
Engineer 48 hours prior to start of construction. The permit may place restrictions on the
time of day that work can be performed.
D. Permit fees must be paid before the permit can be issued. In addition to processing and
inspection fees specified in Chapter 7, Article 7-6 of the Town Code, pavement cuts
require the deposit of a cash bond when the permit is issued.
Section 7-9-3 Cash Bond Requirements
1Ordinance 171-99
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
A cash bond shall be required for all permits issued for cuts on arterial or collector streets. The
amount of the cash bond will be established by the Town based on $16.00 per square foot of
pavement replacement plus $1000.00. The cash bond will have a maximum amount of
$10,000.00. Separate cash bonds will be required for each utility requiring a street cut. Utility
companies may be exempt from the cash bond if there is a franchise agreement in place that
exempts these requirements.
The permit holder may recover the bond after completion and acceptance of the work. If the
work is not completed by the time designated on the permit or is not acceptable, the Town will
notify the permit holder in writing. After five working days of the receipt of the notice, the Town
may complete or correct the work, and the permit holder will forfeit the bond.
Section 7-9-4 Backfill and Pavement Replacement
A. A Traffic Control Plan shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for approval at least 72
hours prior to initiating work in the right-of-way.
1. The pavement shall be removed such that the edge of the pavement cut is outside of the
wheel path.
2. Backfill shall be in accordance with MAG Standard Detail 200, or as specified by the Town
Engineer in the permit. Backfill shall begin immediately following completion of the utility
work.
3. Following completion of backfill, the trench shall be steel-plated or temporarily patched
and the street opened to traffic. A permanent patch shall be placed within three (3)
working days.
4. The final pavement replacement shall be flush with the existing edges of the trench. The
grade from one end of the trench to the other shall be smooth and straight with no more
than one-quarter of an inch plus or minus deviation, but not both, measured in the
direction of traffic flow.
5. Pavement replacement shall match the existing street. The permit may require an overlay
if the existing pavement surface is less than one year old.
6. Where concrete slurry is used for backfill it shall be a one sack mix and paving may not
begin until the moisture in the slurry has dissipated.
Section 7-9-5 Inspection
All work must be inspected and approved by the Town Engineer. The applicant shall guarantee
all permitted work against defects in materials and quality for two years from the date it is
accepted by the Engineering Department.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section 7-9-6 Unauthorized Pavement Cuts
A permit to work in the right-of-way is not authorization to remove pavement, unless the street
cut is specified in the permit. Street cuts made without prior approval are subject to having the
entire street overlaid to a length specified by the Town Engineer at the contractor’s expense.
ARTICLE 7-10 Penalty
Notwithstanding any provision of any building construction code adopted by reference herein,
any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor.
ARTICLE 7-111 Plan Review By Independent Public Service Providers
A. There is herby established an Independent Provider Fee (the “ISP” Fee), to be charged by
the Town for the review of plans by Independent Service Providers.
B. The Council will by resolution establish, and may from time to time amend the amount of the
ISP Fee (including any administrative fees to be retained by the Town to defray the Town’s
expenses to coordinate the plan review process and collect the fee.)
C. The ISP Fee established hereby shall be collected in the same manner and time as fees
collected pursuant to Section 7-6 of the Town Code, and shall be transmitted (less an
administrative fee to be retained by the Town to defray the Town’s expenses to coordinate the
plan review process and collect the fee) to the Independent Public Service Provider pursuant to
the terms of an agreement approved by the Mayor and Common Council.
1 Ordinance 346-06
Revised 6/2010
Revised 11/2015
CHAPTER 8 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 8-1 BUSINESS LICENSE1
8-1-1 License Required
8-1-2 Application and Issuance
8-1-3 Term of Licenses
8-1-4 Number of Licenses
8-1-5 License to be Exhibited
8-1-6 Inspector of Licenses
8-1-7 Duties and Powers of Inspectors
8-1-8 Transfer of License
8-1-9 Prorating Prohibited
8-1-10 Business License Fees
8-1-11 Restrictions; Suspension; Revocation
8-1-12 Appeals
Section 8-1-1 License Required
A. It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, either personally or for another
person, or for any corporation, or as a member of any firm or co-partnership, to
commence, practice, transact or carry on any trade, calling, profession, occupation or
business within the town limits without first having procured a license from the town to do
so and without complying with all regulations of such trade, calling, profession, occupation
or business as specified or required by the United States Government or the State of
Arizona and its political subdivisions. No license shall be issued without proof by the
applicant of such compliance and verification by the clerk that no violation of the town's
zoning regulations will occur by such issuance.
B. The practicing or carrying on of any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business by
any person, corporation or partnership without first having procured a license from the
town to do so, or without complying with any and all regulations of such trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business, as required by other law or by this article shall
constitute a separate violation of this article for each and every day that such trade,
calling, profession, occupation or business is practiced, carried on or conducted within the
town.
C. Upon submission of valid proof the following individuals or groups may obtain from the
town clerk a written exemption from the provisions of this chapter.
1. Non-profit educational institutions, fraternal and service clubs, bona fide religious
organizations, and agencies of any federal, state or local governments.
2. Non-profit private clubs where a basic membership fee covers the cost of the use of
facilities.
3. Fund raising projects of non-profit and bona fide religious organizations, not
conducted on a regular basis.
1Ordinance 43-94
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
4. Special event permits issued at the direction of the council upon application by the
organizers sponsoring the event.
Section 8-1-2 Application and Issuance2
A. It shall be the duty of the clerk upon receipt of a properly completed application for a
business license and verification of the data contained thereon, to prepare and issue a
license under this article for every person, corporation or partnership required to pay a
license fee hereunder and to state in each license the amount charged for the same, the
period of time covered thereby, the name of the person, corporation or partnership for
whom issued and the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business licensed and the
location or place of business where the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business
is to be carried on, transacted or practiced.
B. It shall be the duty of the clerk upon receipt of a properly completed application for a
liquor license and verification of the data contained thereon, to prepare and issue a
license under this article for every person, corporation or partnership required to pay a
license fee hereunder and to state in each license the amount charged for the same,
the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person, corporation or partnership for
whom issued and the location or place of business
C. In no case, shall any mistake made by the clerk in issuing any license or collecting the
amount of fee for any license or the amount actually due from any person required to pay
for a license as provided herein, prevent, prejudice or stop the town from collecting the
correct amount of fee or charge for any license or the amount actually due from any
person required to pay for a license as provided herein, or revoking any license
erroneously issued and refunding the fee collected.
D. No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received by the clerk for any
license than is provided for in this article, and no license shall be issued for any period of
time other than as provided herein.
E. All charges for a license required by this article shall be paid in advance and in lawful
money of the United States of America at the office of the clerk.
Section 8-1-3 Term of Licenses
A. The renewal charge for annual licenses provided herein shall become due and payable on
the anniversary date of the issuance of the license and every anniversary date thereafter,
except that any new license charge shall become due and payable and be paid on or
before the day of commencing to carry on, transact or practice the trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business for which a license is required by this article.
B. The charge for quarterly licenses provided herein shall become due on the first day of
each calendar quarter, for which required.
C. The charge for weekly licenses provided for in this article shall become due and payable
and be paid on or before the first day of each week for which required.
D. The charge for daily licenses required by this article shall become due and payable and
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
be paid before each day for which required.
Section 8-1-4 Number of Licenses
A. A separate charge for a license shall be paid for each branch establishment or separate
place of business in which any person, corporation or partnership shall carry on, transact
or practice a trade, calling, profession, occupation or business.
B. When more than one trade, calling, profession, occupation or business is carried on,
transacted or practiced by the same person, corporation or partnership at one fixed place
of business, only one license shall be required and the charge for such license shall be
the highest charge applicable to any of the activities, and all activities shall be listed on the
license issued.
C. When more than one trade, calling, profession, occupation or business shall be carried
on, transacted or practiced by the same person, corporation or partnership without any
fixed place of business, a separate license shall be required and a separate appropriate
charge be paid for each activity for which a license is required by this article.
Section 8-1-5 License to be Exhibited
A. Each person, corporation or partnership having a license and having a fixed place of
business shall keep said license, while in force, at some conspicuous place or location
within the place of business.
B. Each person, corporation or partnership having a license and having no fixed place of
business shall carry such license with them at all times, while engaged in any activity for
which the license was issued, except that a person acting for any such corporation, firm or
company and not being the only person acting for such corporation, firm or company may
carry with them a copy of the license which has been issued by the clerk and plainly
marked or stamped "Duplicate".
C. Each person, corporation or partnership having a license shall produce and exhibit the
same whenever requested to do so by any designated officer of the town or by the clerk.
Section 8-1-6 Inspector of Licenses
A. The clerk shall be inspector of licenses and may appoint, with approval of the manager,
such assistant inspectors as may be required to enforce these regulations.
B. Each assistant inspector of licenses, immediately upon the facts coming to their
knowledge, shall report to the clerk the name of any person, corporation or partnership
carrying on, transacting or practicing any trade, calling, profession or business within the
town without first having obtained a license as required by this article.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
2Ordinance 457-09, Ordinance 554-14, 580-15 Revised 11/2015
Section 8-1-7 Duties and Powers of Inspectors
A. The inspector of licenses and the assistant inspectors, each in the discharge and
performance of their duties, shall have and exercise the following powers:
1. To file a complaint for any violation of the provisions of this chapter with the town
magistrate.
2. To enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of business for which
a license is required by this article and to demand exhibition of the license for the
current period of time from any person, corporation or partnership engaged in
carrying on, transacting or practicing any trade, calling, profession, occupation or
business at such place of business and, if such person, corporation or partnership
shall fail then and there to exhibit such license, such person, corporation or
partnership shall be liable to the penalties provided for violation of this article.
B. When the charge for any license required hereunder shall remain unpaid for ten days from
and after the due date, such charge shall be delinquent and the clerk, on the day upon
which said charge becomes delinquent, shall add thereto an amount equal to twenty-five
percent of said charge as a penalty and no receipt or license shall be issued thereafter by
the clerk until the charge and penalty shall be paid in full.
Section 8-1-8 Transfer of License
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be assigned or transferred to any
other person, corporation or partnership without first obtaining permission from the town.
Section 8-1-9 Prorating Prohibited
No license fee herein provided shall be prorated, except that annual licenses issued after the
first of December shall be valid for all of the subsequent year and shall reflect an appropriate
expiration date.
Section 8-1-10 Business License Fees2
Initial application for providers of services, wholesalers and manufacturers with
a fixed place of business within the town limits
$60
Initial application for retail merchants, restaurants, bars, contractors and rental
of real and personal property with a fixed place of business within the town limits
and persons engaging in the sale or rental of real estate
$60
Initial application for Wholesalers, manufacturers and providers of services
without a fixed place of business within the town limits
$60
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
Initial application for Retail merchants, etc. (as above) without a fixed
place of business within the town limits
$60
Renewal fee for all businesses within the town limits $40/year
Renewal fee for all businesses without a fixed place of business within
the town limits $60/year
Liquor license – all license types (issued January) $200/calendar
year
Peddlers and mobile merchants as defined in this chapter $250/calendar
quarter or
fraction thereof
Promoters of entertainments, circuses, bazaars, etc., who $100/week
receive a percentage of receipts or other consideration
for their services. Each such promoter shall also obtain
liability insurance of a minimum of $1 million naming the
town as insured.
Animal Show $100/week
Circus Parade Only $50/day
Handbill Distributor $10/day
Amusement Company, such as ferris wheel, merry-go-round, etc., $100/day
not part of a circus
Tent Show $100/day
Wrestling Exhibition $100/day
Road Show, Carnival or Circus $100/day
Practice of palmistry, phrenology, astrology, fortune telling, mind $50/day
reading, clairvoyancy, magic or any healing practices not licensed
by the State of Arizona, or any similar calling without a fixed
place of business
Section 8-1-11 Restrictions; Suspension; Revocation
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be restricted, suspended or revoked
by the town clerk, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, for any of the following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the
business.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
E. Conducting business in violation of any town ordinance, county ordinance or state law
relating to the public health, safety and welfare.
Section 8-1-12 Appeals
A. Notice of the hearing for restrictions, suspension or revocation of a license shall be given
in writing, by the town clerk, setting forth specifically the grounds for the restrictions,
suspension or revocation and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
mailed to the licensee at the address listed on the business license application at least ten
days prior to the date set for the hearing. The mailing of such notice shall constitute
proper notice to the licensee.
B. Any person aggrieved by the denial of an application for license or by the restrictions
placed upon the license or by the suspension or revocation of such license shall have the
right of appeal to the council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the town clerk,
within fourteen days after such denial, restriction, suspension or revocation, a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and a
place for hearing of such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
appellant in the same manner as provided for notice of a hearing on suspension or
revocation. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final.
ARTICLE 8-2 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS1
8-2-1 License Required
8-2-2 Definitions
8-2-3 Exemptions from Article
8-2-4 Application for License and Permit
8-2-5 Investigation of Applicant for License and Permit; Issuance and Contents of
License
8-2-6 Solicitation by Charitable, Religious, Patriotic or Philanthropic Organizations
8-2-7 Posting of License; Issuance of Identification Cards
8-2-8 Location for Transaction of Business Regulated
8-2-9 Creation of Undue Noise Prohibited
8-2-10 Enforcement of Article; Record of Licenses Issued and Violations Reported
8-2-11 Revocation of License and Permit
8-2-12 Appeal from Denial or Revocation of License
8-2-13 Peddling, Etc., on Posted Premises or Refusal to Leave Premises Upon
Request Prohibited
1Ordinance 43-94; Ordinance 504-15
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-2-1 License Required
It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or itinerant vendor, as the same are
defined in this chapter, to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the town
without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, provided,
However, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the producers of agricultural
products as defined in state law, or to any member of the family or agents or persons in the
service of the producer, when the agricultural products are sold or disposed of on behalf of the
producer.
Section 8-2-2 Definitions
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Solicitor" means any person, corporate or individual, or firm, whether resident of the town
or not, who travels, or whose agents travel, either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck
or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, from street to
street or business to business, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares
and merchandise, edible foodstuffs, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether collecting
advance payments on such sales or not; provided that such definition shall include any
person or firm who, for themself or itself, or for another person or firm, hires, leases, uses
or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house,
apartment, shop or any other place within the town for the sole purpose of exhibiting
samples and taking orders for future delivery.
B. "Peddler" means any person, individual or corporate, or firm, whether a resident of the
town or not, who travels, or whose agents travel, by foot, wagon, automobile or any other
type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, from street to street or
business to business, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
edible foodstuffs or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales
and delivering articles to purchasers or who, without traveling from place to place, shall
sell or offer the same from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other conveyance,
and further provided, that persons or firms who solicit orders and as a separate
transaction make delivery to purchasers as a part of the scheme of design to evade the
provisions herein contained shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions herein
contained. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster".
C. "Transient merchant", "itinerant merchant" or "itinerant vendor" means any person,
corporate or individual, or firm, whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident of the
town or not, who engages, or whose agents engage, in a temporary business of selling
and delivering goods, wares, merchandise, edible foodstuffs or provisions, within the
town, and who in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, public room in a hotel,
lodging house, apartment, shop, or any street, alley or other place within the town for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, merchandise and edible foodstuffs, either
privately or at public auction. The person or firm so engaged shall not be relieved from
complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily
with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such transient
business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any such local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-2-3 Exemptions from Article
In addition to the provisions of subsection C of Section 8-1-1, the terms of this article do not
include the acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles,
nor to newspaper deliverers, students on school class projects, nor to acts of merchants or their
employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business. Nothing contained in this
article prohibits any sale required by statute or by order of any court or prevents any person
from conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
Section 8-2-4 Application for License and Permit
A. Individual Applicants. Individual applicants for the permit and license under this article
must comply with the licensing requirements of Article 8-1 as well as this article. An
applicant shall supply the following information to the town clerk in addition to the
information required by Article 8-1:
1. Name and description of the applicant; date of birth; social security number.
2. Address (legal and local); state sales tax number.
3. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
4. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with evidence
establishing the exact relationship.
5. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
6. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or
other means of identification.
7. A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty days immediately prior to the date of
filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
8. The names of at least two reliable property owners of the town who will certify as to
the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of
references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant.
9. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor (except minor traffic violations) or violation of any municipal laws, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
10. Applicants proposing to sell edible foodstuffs shall file with the application a
statement by a reputable physician of the town, dated not more than ten days prior
to the submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be free of infectious,
contagious or communicable disease or, in lieu thereof, a Maricopa County health
card.
11. At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty-five dollars shall be paid to the
clerk to cover the costs of the investigation.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
B. Corporate or Firm Applicants. Corporate or firm applicants must furnish the following
information upon duplicate applications sworn to by an appropriate officer of the firm or
corporation authorized so to do:
1. Name of applicant; date of birth; social security number.
2. Address (legal and local); state sales tax number.
3. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods, etc., to be sold.
4. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
5. If vehicles are to be used, the quantity and description of same, together with the
license numbers or other means of identification.
6. A list of all of the agents or representatives who will be operating within the town,
including their addresses. In this connection, such firm or corporation shall furnish at
the time of application the following information and material pertaining to such
representatives or agents:
a. A photograph of each agent or representative taken within sixty days
immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall
be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the agent or
representative in a clear and distinguishing manner.
b. The names of at least two reliable property owners of the town who will certify
as to each person's good character and business responsibility or, in lieu of
the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good
character and business responsibility of the agents or representatives
concerned.
c. A statement as to whether each agent or representative has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor (except minor traffic violations) or violation of any
municipal laws, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
d. A statement by a reputable physician of the town, dated not more than ten
days prior to the submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be
free of infectious, contagious or communicable disease or, in lieu thereof, a
health certificate or card issued by Maricopa County.
e. A fee of twenty-five dollars per agent or representative shall be paid to the
clerk to cover the cost of investigation.
C. No license issued hereunder shall be transferable, but corporate or firm licensees may
change, substitute or alter the list of their agents or representatives furnished to the clerk
at any time; provided, however, that for each newly named agent or representative on
such list, the information and material required in subsection B, paragraph 6 of this section
must be provided to the town clerk. A newly named agent or representative will not be
deemed in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance until an identification card
has been issued to such agent or representative pursuant to Section 8-2-7 of this
ordinance.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-2-5 Investigation of Applicant for License and Permit; Issuance and
Contents of License
Upon receipt of such application, the clerk shall cause such investigation of such person's
business responsibility or moral character to be made as is deemed necessary to the protection
of the public good. No license shall be issued until ten working days have passed or completion
of the required investigation, whichever is the longer. If, as a result of such investigation, the
applicant's or their agents' or representatives' business responsibility and character are found to
be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. If, as a result of the investigation, the
character and business reputation appear to be satisfactory, the clerk shall so certify in writing,
and a license shall be issued by the clerk. The clerk shall keep a full record of all licenses
issued. Such license shall contain the number of the license, the date the same is issued, the
nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the
expiration date of such license, the place where such business may be carried on under such
license and the name of the person authorized to carry on the same.
Section 8-2-6 Solicitation By Charitable, Religious, Patriotic or Philanthropic
Organizations
A. Any organization, society, association or corporation desiring to solicit or have solicited in
its name money, donations of money or property or financial assistance of any kind or
desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise to persons other than
members of such organization upon the streets, in office or business buildings, by door-todoor
contact, or in public places for a charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic
purpose exclusively shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 8-2-1, 8-2-3 and 8-2-
10 of this article; provided, there is filed a sworn application in writing on a form to be
furnished by the town clerk which shall give the following information:
1. Name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.
2. Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization.
3. Period during which the solicitation is to be carried on.
4. Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or emoluments are to be expended in
connection with such solicitation and the amount thereof.
B. Upon being satisfied that such organization, association or corporation is a religious,
charitable, patriotic or philanthropic organization, but no later than ten working days after
receipt of the application, the clerk shall issue a permit without charge to such
organization, association or corporation to solicit in the town. Such organization,
association or corporation shall furnish all of its members, agents or representatives
conducting solicitations identification cards stating the name of the organization, name of
agent and purpose of solicitation which must be displayed upon demand.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-2-7 Posting of License; Issuance of Identification Cards
The license issued to the individual or corporate licensees hereunder shall be posted in a
conspicuous place if such licensees are using a vehicle or building. The clerk shall issue an
identification card to each individual licensee having upon it the pertinent information contained
in such license. Agents and representatives of corporate and firm applicants shall be issued
similar identification cards. All such cards shall be shown upon request and no licensee or such
licensee’s agent or representative may undertake the activities regulated by this chapter until
such identification card has been issued.
Section 8-2-8 Location for Transaction of Business Regulated
No licensee hereunder shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public street, nor
shall any licensee be permitted a stationary location, nor shall they transact business within
three hundred feet of a public school ground, nor shall they be permitted to operate in any
congested area where the operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the
purpose of this article, the judgment of the clerk or the clerk's representative, exercised in good
faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
Section 8-2-9 Creation of Undue Noise Prohibited
No licensee nor any person in their behalf shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell
or use any sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or sound-amplifying system, upon
any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the town or upon any private premises
in the town where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of
being plainly heard upon the public thoroughfares for the purpose of attracting attention to any
goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
Section 8-2-10 Enforcement of Article; Record of Licenses Issued and Violations
Reported
It shall be the duty of the law enforcement agency of the town to enforce this article. The law
enforcement agent shall report to the clerk all convictions for violation of this article, and the
clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violations therein.
Section 8-2-11 Revocation of License and Permit
Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the clerk
after notice and hearing, as provided in Article 8-1 of this code, for any of the following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on their
business.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
E. Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
Section 8-2-12 Appeal From Denial or Revocation of License
An appeal from denial or revocation of license shall be controlled by the provisions of Article 8-1
of this chapter, pertaining to appeal regarding business licenses.
Section 8-2-13 Peddling, etc., on Posted Premises or Refusal to Leave Premises Upon
Request Prohibited
A. It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, their agents or
representatives, to come upon any premises whereon a sign bearing the words "no
peddlers," "no solicitors," “no transient merchants,” “no “door-to-door salesmen,” or any
combination of such terms or terms similar thereto is exposed to public view.
B. It is also unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, their agents or
representatives to remain on any premises after having been requested to leave by the
owner or occupant thereof whether such premises are posted as specified above or not.
Article 8-3 YARD SALES1
8-3-1 Definitions
8-3-2 Regulations
8-3-3 License
Section 8-3-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Miscellaneous merchandise” means those items offered for retail sale at a yard sale
which merchandise has not been purchased for the purpose of resale.
B. “Yard sales” means the resale by the resident of a specific address of miscellaneous
merchandise occurring without regularity.
Section 8-3-2 Regulations
1Ordinance 99-97
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
A. Yard sales shall only be conducted by the owner or resident of a specific residential
address and only for the purposes of selling miscellaneous merchandise at retail.
B. Yard sales shall be limited to no more than four times per calendar year per address and
shall not exceed forty-eight hours in total length for each of the four permitted times.
C. At no time shall any yard sale be permitted to operate if, in the judgment of the town
manager, such operation is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the
surrounding neighbors or the community.
D. All yard sales shall be conducted during the daylight hours only, and all miscellaneous
merchandise as well as the tables or stands that they are displayed on shall be removed
from the sight at the conclusion of each permitted forty-eight hour period.
Section 8-3-3 License
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity or for any agent, servant or employee of
any person or other entity to engage in, carry on or conduct a yard sale without first
obtaining a license to do so.
B. There shall be a charge of one dollar for a license which shall be issued for each fortyeight
hour period of a yard sale.
ARTICLE 8-4 PARIMUTUEL WAGERING1
8-4-1 Definitions
8-4-2 Purpose; Effect on Other Regulations
8-4-3 Administration
8-4-4 Teletrack Operator, Teletrack Wagering Establishment, License Required
8-4-5 Information Required for Teletrack Operator License Applications
8-4-6 Teletrack Wagering Establishment License; Application
8-4-7 Location of Teletrack Wagering Establishment
8-4-8 Additional Information
8-4-9 Payment of Fee and Taxes
8-4-10 Fingerprinting, Criminal History Investigation, Exemption
8-4-11 Issuance and Display of License Identification Card; Nontransferability
8-4-12 Fees
8-4-13 Term of License
8-4-14 Public Hearing on Teletrack Wagering Establishment License; Notice
8-4-15 Information Update
8-4-16 Special Provisions
8-4-17 Renewal
8-4-18 Inspection of Premises, Property and Records
8-4-19 Revocation; Grounds
8-4-20 Teletrack Operator License Suspension
1Ordinances 105-97 and 125-98
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-4-1 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
A. “Person” means any individual, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation or
association of any kind.
B. “Racing program” means the live races conducted at an authorized track and any
simulcast races shown to the public in conjunction with live racing on which parimutuel
wagering is allowed.
C. “Teletrack operator” means any person who holds an Arizona Racing Commission permit
for dog or horse racing events within Arizona and who accepts bets or wagers on the
results of any parimutuel race at a location other than the race track and who regularly
conducts dog or horse racing events for at least thirty days in the course of a calendar
year.
D. “Teletrack wagering” means parimutuel wagering conducted at an off-track teletrack
facility on a dog or horse racing program which is authorized within Arizona.
E. “Teletrack wagering establishment” means any establishment at which a teletrack
operator accepts bets or wagers on the results of a dog or horse racing program
conducted by a teletrack operator at an authorized track within Arizona.
F. “Teletracking” means the telecast of live audio and visual signals of dog or horse racing
programs conducted at an authorized enclosure within Arizona to an authorized additional
wagering facility within Queen Creek for the purpose of parimutuel wagering.
Section 8-4-2 Purpose; Effect on Other Regulations
This article is enacted for regulatory purposes. Persons required to obtain a license for any
activity covered by this article remain subject to all other applicable regulatory, tax or fee
ordinances of the town.
Section 8-4-3 Administration
A. The town manager shall administer this article, except as otherwise specifically provided,
and shall develop appropriate forms for this purpose. The county sheriff’s department
shall assist in connection with license applications and enforcement.
B. License applications made pursuant to this article shall be submitted to the town manager
or designee, who may issue, deny, suspend or revoke licenses in accordance with this
Article, provided that the decision whether or not to issue a teletrack wagering
establishment license shall be made by the town council following the hearing provided for
in Section 8-4-14.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-4-4 Teletrack Operator, Teletrack Wagering Establishment, License
Required
A. It is unlawful for any person to function in the town as a teletrack operator or operate a
teletrack wagering establishment without first obtaining the appropriate license under this
article.
B. The licenses required by this section shall be in addition to any other licenses or permits
required by any governmental authority.
C. A separate teletrack wagering establishment license is required for each teletracking
location within the town.
D. A separate teletrack operator license is required for each teletrack operator located at a
teletrack wagering establishment.
E. A person desiring to operate a teletrack wagering establishment and to function as a
teletrack operator shall obtain a license for each activity.
F. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable.
Section 8-4-5 Information Required for Teletrack Operator License Applications
Applications for a teletrack operator license under this chapter shall include the following
information:
A. The applicant's business name, business location, business mailing address and business
telephone number.
B. The full legal name, date of birth and residence address of all persons who participate in
management, control or policy direction of the teletrack operator, including, with respect to
a corporation, the corporation's officers, directors and shareholders holding ten percent or
more of the outstanding shares of the corporation's stock.
C. Information with respect to any of the persons identified pursuant to section B of this
section shall include a full disclosure as to (1) any felony conviction of such person within
the preceding five years; (2) any judicial or administrative finding of violation of any law or
regulation relating to racing, wagering or gaming, in any jurisdiction; and (3) revocation or
suspension of any license or permit relating to parimutuel betting or teletracking activities.
D. Proof that the applicant holds a valid permit from the Arizona Racing Commission to
conduct parimutuel races within the State of Arizona.
E. Proof that a teletrack wagering establishment license has been issued or applied for with
respect to the facility in which the teletrack operator license will be utilized, and proof of an
agreement for use of the establishment by the applicant for teletrack wagering purposes.
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Revised 11/2015
F. A plan of operation in accordance with the specifications of Arizona Administrative Code,
Title 19, Chapter 2, Section R19-2-404.
Section 8-4-6 Teletrack Wagering Establishment License; Application
Applicants for a teletrack wagering establishment license shall provide the following information
as part of the application:
A. The applicant's name, date of birth, residence address and telephone number.
B. The applicant's business name, business location, business mailing address and business
telephone number.
C. The full legal name, date of birth and residence address of all persons who participate in
management, control or policy direction of the establishment, including, with respect to a
corporation, the corporation's officers, directors and stockholders holding ten percent or
more of the outstanding shares of the corporation's stock.
D. Information with respect to any of the persons identified pursuant to subsection C of this
section shall include full disclosure as to (1) any felony conviction of such person within
the preceding five years; (2) any judicial or administrative finding of violation of any law or
regulation relating to racing, wagering or gaming, in any jurisdiction; and (3) revocation or
suspension of any license or permit relating to parimutuel betting or teletracking activities.
E. Proof of a current license for the site if the establishment serves liquor.
F. Accurate drawings to scale indicating the floor plan of all buildings on the premises and
the precise location of all teletracking facilities and activities.
G. A site plan for all buildings and associated parcel lines, including evidence of compliance
with Section 8-4-7 of this article.
H. A vicinity ownership map showing and labeling all parcels within five hundred feet of the
exterior boundaries of the parcel, not including public property or right-of-way.
I. A vicinity ownership list and mailing labels properly addressed, containing names and
mailing addresses, with correct zip codes, of owners of all parcels shown on the vicinity
ownership map.
J. A parking plan showing all parking spaces available for the site and traffic flow patterns.
K. A security plan which may include security guards and other appropriate measures for the
protection of patrons, employees and the public.
L. Proof that a teletrack operator license has been issued or applied for with respect to each
operator who will conduct teletrack wagering activities at the establishment, and proof of
an agreement between the applicant and each operator for use of the establishment by
the operator for teletrack wagering purposes.
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-4-7 Location of Teletrack Wagering Establishment
A. No license shall be granted for any teletrack wagering establishment unless all of the
following standards are met:
1. No teletrack wagering establishment shall be located within one thousand feet of any
other teletrack wagering establishment.
2. No teletrack wagering establishment shall be located within five hundred feet of any
public or private school, public park or day nursery or preschool.
3. The applicant for teletrack wagering establishment located within five hundred feet of
any of the following zoning district boundaries: Rl-43, Rl-35, Rl-18, Rl-8, Rl-6, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-5, MHR, C-S, C-O, C-1 or C-2 has posted the property and sent notice
of the proposed teletrack use to each household on the vicinity ownership map
required in Section 8-4-6 (I). Such notice shall be sent and shall indicate that the
resident shall file any protest to the application in writing with the town manager or
designee within thirty days or the application will be administratively approved. If
any protests are received, a public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section
8-4-14 prior to issuance unless a petition requesting waiver of this requirement,
signed by fifty-one percent of those persons residing thirty days or more within a five
hundred-foot radius of the proposed location is received and verified by the town
manager or designee. In such case, the town council may waive the requirements of
this paragraph.
B. For purposes of this section, streets, alleys and other thoroughfares adjacent to the
zoning district boundaries specified in subsection (A)(3) shall themselves be considered
within such district boundaries. With respect to any such street, alley or other
thoroughfare, measurements to determine whether the teletrack wagering establishment
is within five hundred feet of such boundary shall be taken to the edge of such alley
nearest to the teletrack wagering establishment, or from the centerline of such street or
thoroughfare, or to the property line of said public or private school, public park or other
teletrack wagering establishment. Measurement from the teletrack wagering
establishment shall be taken from that portion of the teletrack wagering establishment,
including projections therefrom, that is closest to said residential district, public or private
school, public park or other teletrack wagering establishment.
C. These provisions shall not be construed as permitting any use or activity which is
otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.
Section 8-4-8 Additional Information
In addition to the information specified above an applicant shall provide such supplemental
information as the town manager or designee reasonably determines to be necessary to fully
evaluate the application.
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-4-9 Payment of Fees and Taxes
No application for a license under this chapter will be processed with respect to an applicant
who is delinquent in payment of any town taxes, fees or other payments due.
Section 8-4-10 Fingerprinting, Criminal History Investigation, Exemption
Applicants for any license under this chapter, and all other persons required to be identified in
connection with an application shall be subject to background and criminal history investigation
and fingerprinting, provided that, fingerprinting and criminal history investigation will not be
required for a teletrack operator if:
A. The applicant, within twelve months prior to filing the application for a town teletrack
operator license, has supplied the required information to the Arizona Racing Commission
or to the Arizona Department of Racing or updated such information previously supplied
as to any material changes and a criminal history investigation has been conducted at the
state level on the basis of said information; and
B. The information described in subsection A and the result of the criminal investigation are
available to the county sheriff.
Section 8-4-11 Issuance and Display of License Identification Card; Nontransferability
A. At the election of the town manager or designee, the license identification card may
constitute the actual license issued.
B. The license identification card shall be displayed on an outer garment, on the front of the
body above the waist, with photograph visible while the holder is on the teletrack wagering
establishment premises.
Section 8-4-12 Fees
An application for a teletrack operator or teletrack wagering establishment shall include a
nonrefundable application fee of two hundred dollars and other fees required by this article.
A. The fee for a teletrack operator license shall be:
1. One thousand two hundred dollars per year for up to four parimutuel betting windows
or tote machines.
2. Five hundred dollars per year for each parimutuel window or tote machine in excess
of four.
B. The fee for a teletrack wagering establishment license shall be one hundred dollars per
year.
C. A twenty-five dollar fee for criminal history investigation and fingerprinting shall be paid at
Revised 11/2015
the time of application with respect to each applicant and person required to be identified
in connection with an application under this article, unless exempt from Section 8-4-10.
D. A ten dollar fee shall be paid for a replacement license identification card if required
because of loss of the original.
Section 8-4-13 Term of License
The term of a teletrack wagering establishment and teletrack operator license issued pursuant
to the provisions of this article is one year, commencing at the same time as the teletrack permit
issued by the State of Arizona for the establishment.
Section 8-4-14 Public Hearing on Teletrack Wagering Establishment License; Notice
A. The town council shall hold a public hearing on an application for a teletrack wagering
establishment license except as provided in Section 8-4-7(A)(3). Notice of the hearing
shall be given at least thirty days prior to the hearing in the following manner:
1. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
town.
2. Notice shall be posted on the subject property in such a manner as to be legible from
the public right-of-way.
3. Notice shall be mailed by first class mail to each owner and tenant as listed on the
vicinity ownership list.
B. Within five working days of the public hearing the applicant shall be notified in writing of
the council's decision to approve or deny the application. The town manager or designee
shall communicate this decision to the state racing commission.
C. The council may approve or deny the application or may approve subject to conditions for
any reason deemed appropriate by the council in order to provide optimum protection for
the public health, safety and welfare.
Section 8-4-15 Information Update
An applicant or licensee shall give written notice to the town manager or designee of any
material changes in information submitted in connection with an application, within ten days of
such change.
Section 8-4-16 Special Provisions
A. A person under the age of eighteen years may not be present on the premises of a
teletrack wagering establishment during any time when teletrack wagering is being
conducted, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
B. The owner or operator of the teletrack wagering establishment shall take all reasonable
measures, including but not limited to requiring identification from persons entering or
Revised 11/2015
present in a teletrack wagering establishment, to prevent unlawful gambling by minors.
C. Wagering pay-offs in a single amount of five hundred dollars or more shall be made by
check or similar instrument other than cash. Notice to this effect shall be posted
conspicuously near all betting windows.
D. Teletrack wagering establishments shall maintain security in accordance with the security
plan approved during licensing of the establishment by the town.
E. Teletrack wagering may be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m.
F. Revocation or suspension of a state operator license or permit will constitute automatic
revocation or suspension of the corresponding town license.
Section 8-4-17 Renewal
A. Sixty days prior to the license expiration date, a licensee may apply to the town manager
or designee for renewal of the license. Application shall be made and reviewed as an
original application, except that an application fee payment is not required on a renewal
application. All other applicable fee payments are required.
B. Criminal history investigations and fingerprinting shall be completed each year as part of
the renewal process, unless Section 8-4-10 applies.
C. Granting of a license under this article does not confer an entitlement to or presumption of
renewal of the license. Renewal may be denied for any reason deemed sufficient by the
town council.
Section 8-4-18 Inspection of Premises, Property and Records
The business premises of any person required to be licensed under this article, including any
property on the premises and any and all ledgers, books, records or memoranda, including
information maintained on computer disks, tapes and terminal memory shall be open to
inspection by representatives of the town upon request, at any time during the licensee's regular
business hours.
Section 8-4-19 Revocation; Grounds
A. The town manager or designee may revoke a license in accordance with the procedures
on any of the grounds for revocation stated in Article 8-1 of this chapter, and for any of the
following additional grounds:
1. Violation of the laws governing wagering within the State of Arizona or the sale of
liquor within the State of Arizona.
2. Repeated acts of violence or disorderly conduct.
3. False or misleading testimony by the licensee in an investigation or other
proceeding.
Revised 11/2015
4. Delinquency for more than thirty days in the payment of any applicable taxes or fees
to the town.
5. Failure to operate a teletrack wagering establishment in compliance with plans
submitted and approved pursuant to Section 8-4-6 (F), (J) and (K) of this article.
6. Violation of any of the provisions of this article.
B. Revocation of a teletrack wagering establishment license shall constitute revocation of the
teletrack operator license(s) issued for the same location.
Section 8-4-20 Teletrack Operator License Suspension
The teletrack operator license will be suspended in the event the teletrack wagering
establishment location is no longer licensed due to ownership change or expiration of teletrack
wagering establishment license.
ARTICLE 8-5 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES1
8-5-1 Purpose and Findings
8-5-2 Definitions
8-5-3 Classification
8-5-4 License Required
8-5-5 Issuance of License
8-5-6 Fees
8-5-7 Inspection
8-5-8 Expiration of License
8-5-9 Suspension
8-5-10 Revocation
8-5-11 Transfer of License
1Ordinance 123-98
8-5-12 Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses
8-5-13 Additional Regulations for Adult Motels
8-5-14 Additional Regulations for Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films, Videos or Live
Entertainment in Viewing Rooms
8-5-15 Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies
8-5-16 Additional Regulations for Nude Model Studios
8-5-17 Additional Regulations Concerning Public Nudity
8-5-18 Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business
8-5-19 Hours of Operation
8-5-20 Exemptions
8-5-21 Penalty; Injunction
Section 8-5-1 Purpose and Findings
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order
Revised 11/2015
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and
to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this
article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
B. Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on
the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the council, and on
findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S.
41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976) and Barnes v. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not
limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland,
Ohio and Beaumont, Texas and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney
General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6,
1989, State of Minnesota), the council finds:
1. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy
activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further,
there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible
for the activities that occur on their premises.
2. Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this article as adult
theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior
than employees of other establishments.
3. Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually
oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or
cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows.
4. Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates
unhealthy conditions.
5. Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other sexually oriented
businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually
oriented businesses.
6. At least fifty communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in
sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human
immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B
amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections.
7. Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of
reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United
States -- 600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through
December 31, 1992.
8. As of June 26, 1996, there have been 4,377 reported cases of AIDS in the State of
Arizona.
Revised 11/2015
9. The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States
reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 through
November of 1990.
10. The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at
a high level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990.
11. The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has
advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through
sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood
components, and from an infected mother to her newborn.
12. According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis
and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
13. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part,
because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the
unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the
facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities.
14. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of
sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films.
15. The findings noted in paragraphs number 1 through 14 raise substantial
governmental concerns.
16. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be
reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns.
17. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden
of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented
businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent
incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner
consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the
citizens of the town. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the
premises and activities occurring therein.
18. Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with
adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and
unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
19. Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding
current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain
types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or
suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments.
20. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the
day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such
information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation
of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
21. It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a
Revised 11/2015
limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the
conduct which this article is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such
activity.
22. The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually
related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that
conduct in contravention of this article.
23. The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of
years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of
sexually transmitted diseases.
24. The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the Town will be
promoted by the enactment of this article.
Section 8-5-2 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coinoperated,
slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc
players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."
B. “Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store” means a commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration any one or more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
2. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
"specified sexual activities."
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is
the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
C. “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment
which regularly features:
Revised 11/2015
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical
areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."
D. “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
1. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons
with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction
or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or
3. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of
time that is less than ten hours.
E. “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
F. “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude,
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."
G.
Revised 11/2015
“Employee” means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or
not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said
business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to
the premises.
H. “Escort” means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion,
guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to
privately perform a striptease for another person.
I. “Escort agency” means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish,
or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or
other consideration.
J. “Establish” or “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
1. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business; or
2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business,
to any sexually oriented business; or
3. The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually
oriented business; or
4. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
K. “Licensee” means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a
license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.
L. “Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state
of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons
who pay money or any form of consideration. “Nude model studio shall not include a
proprietary school licensed by the State of Arizona or a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure:
1. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising
that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and
2. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in
advance of the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
Revised 11/2015
M. “Nudity” or a “state of nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the
showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
N. “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
O. “Semi-nude” or in a “semi-nude condition” means the showing of the female breast below
a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male
or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female
breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
P. “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite
sex; or
2. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when
one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Q. “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
R. “Specified anatomical areas” means:
1. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered; or
2. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
S. “Specified criminal activity” means any of the following offenses:
1. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution
or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession
or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency
with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to
those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries
for which:
a. Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; or
b. Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense; or
Revised 11/2015
c. Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the
date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or
combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four month
period.
2.
Revised 11/2015
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
T. “Specified sexual activities” means any of the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus
or female breasts; or
2. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or
sodomy; or
3. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in
paragraphs 1 and 2 above.
U. “Substantial enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor
area occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent, as the floor area exists
on the date this article takes effect.
V. “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business means and includes any
of the following:
1. The sale, lease or sublease of the business; or
2. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
3. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the
ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other
operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
Section 8-5-3 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
1. adult arcades
2. adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores
3. adult cabarets
4. adult motels
5. adult motion picture theaters
6. adult theaters
7. escort agencies
8. nude model studios
9. sexual encounter centers
Section 8-5-4 License Required
A. It is unlawful:
1.
Revised 11/2015
For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually
oriented business license issued by the town pursuant to this article.
2. For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to
work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented
business employee by the town pursuant to this article.
3. For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without
having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this
article.
B. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the town.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application
may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to
enable the town to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this article.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person
must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a
sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten
percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following section and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
E. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the
following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
1. If the applicant is:
a. An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and
submit proof that he/she is eighteen years of age;
b. A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names
of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the
partnership agreement, if any;
c. A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its
incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the
laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers,
directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate
agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.
2. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other
than that of the applicant; he or she must state the sexually oriented business'
fictitious name and submit the required registration documents.
3. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of
a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
4. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous
license under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from
Revised 11/2015
another municipality or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation,
and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner
in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
licensed under this article whose license has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which
the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation.
5. Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other
licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from
another municipality or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other
licensed businesses.
6. The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing.
7. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description
of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if any.
8. The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
9. A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
10. The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number and/or his/her state
or federally issued tax identification number.
11. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram
need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus six inches.
12. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty days prior to
application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the
structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within one thousand
feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within one thousand
feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is
submitted.
13. If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult
motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than
one hundred-fifty square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video
reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application
requirements set forth in Section 8-5-14.
F. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the
applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the town the following information:
1. The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used
Revised 11/2015
by the individual
2. Age, date, and place of birth
3. Height, weight, hair and eye color
4. Present residence address and telephone number
5. Present business address and telephone number
6. Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other identification card
information
7. Social Security number
8. Proof that the individual is at least eighteen years of age
G. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as
provided above, shall be the following:
1. A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face and the
applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Maricopa County Sheriff”s Office.
Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
2. A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether
such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other
county, city, state or country has ever had a license, permit or authorization to do
business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational
license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension.
A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
3. A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
as defined in this article and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place and jurisdiction of each.
Section 8-5-5 Issuance of License
A. Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the
town clerk shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be
referred to the appropriate town departments for an investigation to be made on such
information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be
completed within thirty days from the date the completed application is filed. After the
investigation, the town clerk shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
1. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of
the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
Revised 11/2015
application form; or
2. The applicant is under the age of eighteen years; or
3. The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in this
article; or
4. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a
business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by
a particular provision of this article; or
5. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the
town within two years of the date of the current application. If the sexually oriented
business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is
immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license
issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in Section
8-5-10.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the
written application of the applicant and a finding by the town that the applicant has not
been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this article or committed any
act during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial
license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee
as set forth in Section 8-5-6.
C. Within thirty days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the
town clerk shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The town clerk
shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
1. An applicant is under eighteen years of age.
2. An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to
the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her
in relation to any business.
3. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of
the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form.
4. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a
license by the town to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding
twelve months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been
revoked within the preceding twelve months.
5. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity defined in this article.
6. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved
by the Maricopa County health department, Rural Metro fire department and the
building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
7. The license fee required by this article has not been paid.
Revised 11/2015
8. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance
with any of the provisions of this article.
D. The license, if, granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom
it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the
classification for which the license is issued pursuant to Section 8-5-3. All licenses shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that they may be easily read at any time.
E. The health department, fire department and the building official shall complete their
certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within twenty days of
receipt of the application by the town.
F. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as found in
Section 8-5-3.
Section 8-5-6 Fees
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for
renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a five hundred dollar nonrefundable
application and investigation fee.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented
business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the town an annual nonrefundable
license fee of five hundred dollars within thirty days of license issuance or
renewal.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new
license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual one
hundred dollar non-refundable application, investigation and license fee.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the town clerk.
Section 8-5-7 Inspection
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Maricopa County Sheriff’s
Office, the Maricopa County Health Department, Rural Metro Fire Department, Town
Zoning Department, or other town departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a
sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time
it is occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a
misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it
is open for business.
Section 8-5-8 Expiration of License
Revised 11/2015
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by
making application as provided in Section 8-5-4. Application for renewal shall be made at
least thirty days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty days before
the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
B. When the town clerk denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a
license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the town clerk finds
that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date denial
became final.
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-5-9 Suspension
The town clerk shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty days if a licensee or an
employee of a licensee has:
C. violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article;
D. refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by
this article.
Section 8-5-10 Revocation
A. The town clerk shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 8-5-9 occurs and
the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve months.
B. The town clerk shall revoke a license if:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the
application process; or
2. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances
on the premises; or
3. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; or
4. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time
when the licensee's license was suspended; or
5. Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur
in or on the licensed premises; or
6. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town, county or state for any taxes or fees
past due.
C. When the town clerk revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the
licensee shall not be issued any sexually oriented business license for one year from the
date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the town clerk finds
that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date the revocation
became effective.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or
revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of
such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative
action shall be promptly reviewed by the court.
Section 8-5-11 Transfer of License
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually
Revised 11/2015
oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address
designated in the application.
Section 8-5-12 Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses
A. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business in any zoning district not permitted in the Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance.
B. A person commits a misdemeanor if the person operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business within one thousand feet of:
1. A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for
religious worship and related religious activities; or
2. A public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care
facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private
schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools,
vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools, junior colleges and universities; school includes the school grounds, but
does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as
a school; or
3. A boundary of a residential district as defined in the Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance;
or
4. A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational
activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool,
reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths,
wilderness areas or other similar public land within the town which is under the
control, operation or management of the town park and recreation authorities; or
5. The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the Queen Creek
Zoning Ordinance; or
6. An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family
entertainment; or
7. A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations
of the State.
C. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation,
establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually
oriented business within one thousand feet of another sexually oriented business.
D. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation,
establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same
building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented
business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business.
Revised 11/2015
E. For the purpose of subsection B of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business
is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection B.
Presence of a town, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for
purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
F. For purposes of subsection C of this section, the distance between any two sexually
oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening
structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure
in which each business is located.
Section 8-5-13 Additional Regulations for Adult Motels
A. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar commercial establishments
has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten
hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that
term is defined in this article.
B. A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a
hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented
business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours
from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
C. For purposes of subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of
permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
Section 8-5-14 Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films, Videos or
Live Entertainment in Viewing Rooms
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than
an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred
fifty square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
1. An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a
diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or
more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and
designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manager's station may not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area. The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented
to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches. The town clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
Revised 11/2015
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made
without the prior approval of the town clerk.
4. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed
employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any
patron is present inside the premises.
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which
any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms
may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured
in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station.
6. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in
paragraph 5 of this subsection remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subsection.
7. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity
to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of
not less than five foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
9. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
10. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or
booths.
11. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing
booths or rooms.
12. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between
the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
13. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous,
easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
14. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to
be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material.
No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within
forty eight inches of the floor.
Revised 11/2015
B. A person having a duty under subsection A of this section commits a misdemeanor if he
knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
Section 8-5-15 Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen years.
B. A person commits a misdemeanor if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an
escort for any person under the age of eighteen years.
Section 8-5-16 Additional Regulations for Nude Model Studios
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen years.
B. A person under the age of eighteen years commits a misdemeanor if the person appears
semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a
defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen years was in a
restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person.
C. A person commits a misdemeanor if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly
allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises
which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
Section 8-5-17 Additional Regulations Concerning Public Nudity
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually
oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities.
Revised 11/2015
B. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually
oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee
who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a
stage at least two feet from the floor.
C. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented
business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or
customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude
in a sexually oriented business.
D. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a customer or the
clothing of a customer.
Section 8-5-18 Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business
A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of
eighteen years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
Section 8-5-19 Hours of Operation
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between
the hours of one o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one
o'clock A.M. and noon P.M. on Sundays.
Section 8-5-20 Exemptions
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 8-5-17 that a person appearing in a state of nudity
did so in a modeling class operated:
A. By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Arizona; a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely
or partly by taxation; or
C. In a structure:
1. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising
that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
2. Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in
advance of the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Revised 11/2015
Section 8-5-21 Penalty; Injunction
A. Violation of any requirement or prohibition stated in this article is a class one
misdemeanor. With respect to a violation that is continuing in nature, each day that the
violation occurs is a separate offense.
B. In addition to other penalties, a sexually oriented business which operates without a valid
license shall constitute a public nuisance, which, in addition to any other enforcement
mechanisms in this Code, may be abated by a suit for injunctive relief.
January 2008
CHAPTER 8A TAX CODE
ARTICLE 8A-1 ADOPTION OF TAX CODE1
That certain document known as "The Tax Code of the Town of Queen Creek, Arizona",
three copies of which are on file in the office of the town clerk of the Town of Queen
Creek, Arizona is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this chapter.
ARTICLE 8A-2 TOWN CENTER CODE
In addition to the taxes assessed pursuant to the Tax Code referenced in Section 8A-1,
Sales subject to a transaction privilege tax pursuant to the Tax Code, and which are
generated on property located in the Town Center (as defined and depicted in
Ordinance No. 402-07) shall pay an additional tax of one-fourth percent (.25%).
Revised 12/2016
CHAPTER 9 OFFENSES
ARTICLE 19-1 OFFENSES
9-1-1 Dangerous Constructions
9-1-2 Excavations to be Covered
9-1-3 Fireworks and Explosives2
9-1-4 Littering
9-1-5 Curfew Hours for Minor
9-1-6 Noise
9-1-7 Noise Regulations During Construction
9-1-8 Obstruction of View
9-1-9 Offensive Business
9-1-10 Offensive Premises
9-1-11 Prostitution
9-1-12 Searchlights
9-1-13 Signs and Banners
9-1-14 Spitting
9-1-15 Water - Flow Upon Streets Prohibited
9-1-16 Weapons
Section 9-1-1 Dangerous Constructions
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards, awnings and other similar
structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so
situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
Section 9-1-2 Excavations to be Covered
A. It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any
highway or thoroughfare in the town without providing a sufficient light at night and a
temporary fence or suitable obstruction around such excavation to protect the public
during the day.
B. It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other excavation of more than
two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot, without substantial curbing, covering or
protection.
Section 9-1-3 Explosives2
A. DEFINITIONS: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
1. “Consumer Firework” means those fireworks defined by Arizona Revised
Statutes Section 36-1601.
2. “Display Firework” means those fireworks defined by Arizona Revised Statutes
Section 36-1601.
3. “Fireworks” means any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing
1Amended by Ordinance 272-03 and Ordinance 282-04
2Amended by Ordinance 489-10; 578-15
Revised 12/2016
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation,
that is a consumer firework, display firework or permissible consumer firework as
defined by Arizona Revised Statute Section 36-1601.
4. “Novelty Items” means federally deregulated novelty items that are known as
glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices, sparklers, and certain toys as defined in
Arizona Revised Statute 36-1601.
5. “Permissible Consumer Fireworks” means those fireworks as defined by Arizona
Revised Statute Section 36-1601 that may be sold within the Town of Queen
Creek even where the use of those items has been prohibited.
6. “Supervised Public Display” means a monitored performance of display fireworks
open to the public and authorized by permit by the Chief of the Fire Department,
Town Fire Marshal, or designee.
7. “Public Facilities” means any building or real property, other than public right of
way, which is owned, leased or otherwise operated by a governmental entity.
B. Fireworks Prohibited; Exceptions1.
1. The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the Town Of Queen Creek
corporate boundaries is prohibited except as provided for in this section:
a) The use, discharge or ignition of permissible consumer fireworks is limited
to June 24 through July 6 and December 24 through January 3 each year
on private property with the owner’s permission
b) The use discharge or ignition of fireworks is prohibited on all public
property including in all public parks, public retention areas, public rightsof-
way and public facilities.
2. Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use,
discharge or ignition of novelty items as defined herein or the occurrence of a
supervised public display of fireworks.
3. Permits may be granted by the Chief of the Fire Department, Town Fire Marshal
or designee for conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks.
Every such public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located,
discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does not
endanger persons, animals, or property. A permit shall not be issued, and may
be revoked, during time periods of high fire danger warnings. The Chief of the
Fire Department, the Fire Marshal or his designee have authority to impose
conditions on any permits issued, including, but not limited to, those
requirements contained in Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 36, the Fire Code
adopted by the Town and any other applicable law. Permit conditions may
include obligations by permittee for insurance, bonds and indemnity along with
other measures.
______________
1Amended by Ordinance 548-14
Revised 12/2016
4. Failure to comply with any permit requirements and conditions issued by the
Chief of the Fire Department, the Fire Marshal or his designee is a violation of
this Section.
C. Sale of Fireworks1.
1. No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer
fireworks to a person who is under sixteen years of age.
2. No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer
fireworks in conflict with state law.
3. The sale of permissible consumer fireworks shall be allowed from May 20
through July 6 and December 10 through January 3 each year.
D. Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks; civil penalty1.
1. Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in
such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the following:
a) The use of fireworks except novelty items as defined by Town Code,
including permissible consumer fireworks is limited to June 24 through
July 6 and December 24 through January 3 each year on private property
with the owner’s permission.
b) Permissible consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state law may
not be sold to persons under the age of 16.
2. Signs required under this section shall be placed at each cash register and in
each area where fireworks are displayed for sale.
3. The Chief of the Fire Department, the Fire Marshal or his designee shall develop
regulations concerning the size and color of the required signs and shall develop
a model sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on
the Town’s website and filed with the Clerk’s Office.
4. Signs shall be posted that are eight and one-half inches by eleven inches in size,
that are on cardstock paper in landscape orientation with letters not less than
four (4) inches in height and contains the following language on a contrasting
background: “Fireworks - No Smoking”.
E. Authority to enforce violations of this section; means of enforcement.
1. In addition to the enforcement officers specified in section 9-4 herein, the Chief of
the Fire Department or designee and Fire Marshal or designee may issue civil
citations to enforce violations of this Section 9-1-3.
_________________________
1Amended by Ordinance 548-14
Revised 12/2016
2. A person violating a provision of this Section 9-1-3 is subject to a civil penalty of
$1,000.00.
3. Any person authorized to issue a civil citation or a complaint for violation of this
section may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the
time in which they are to be taken to avoid a civil penalty.
F. Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks; definitions.
1. A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer fireworks,
fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode
or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable for the expenses of
any emergency response that is required by such use, discharge or ignition. The
fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation(s) of this Article
is prima facie evidence of liability under this section.
2. The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person liable
for those expenses pursuant to Subsection 1 above. The charge constitutes a
debt of that person and may be collected by entities proportionately by the public
agencies, for- profit or not-for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The
person’s liability for the expense of an emergency response shall not exceed
$15,000.00 for a single incident. The liability imposed under this section is in
addition to and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.
3. For the purposes of this section:
a) “Expenses of an Emergency Response” means reasonable costs directly
incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that
make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.
b) “Reasonable Costs” includes the costs of providing police, fire fighting,
rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the
salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.
G. Explosives.
It is unlawful for any person, other than a law enforcement officer in the performance of
his duty, within the limits of the Town to blast, use powder or other explosives without a
permit issued by the Chief of the Fire Department, Town Fire Marshal, or designee.
Section 9-1-4 Littering
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any litter in or upon any street, alley, public
grounds, school grounds, church grounds or property of other persons.
“Litter” includes any rubbish, refuse, waste material, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, organic or
inorganic trash, debris, filthy or odoriferous objects, dead animals or any foreign substance of
whatever kind or description, including junked or abandoned vehicles, whether or not any of
these items are of value.
Revised 12/2016
Section 9-1-5 Curfew Hours for Minor1
A. Definitions. In this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. "Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action
2. "Guardian" means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by an
authorized agency or court; or a person at least 21 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
3. "Insufficient control" means failure to exercise reasonable care and diligence in the
supervision of the juvenile.
4. "Minor" means any person less than eighteen years of age.
5. "Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of
another person.
B. Offenses.
1. It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen years to be in, about or upon any
place in the town away from the property where the youth resides between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
2. It is unlawful for any minor sixteen years of age or older and under the age of
eighteen years, to be in, about or upon any place in the town away from the property
where the child resides between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
3. It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient
control, allow a minor to violate paragraphs 1 or 2 of this subsection.
4. It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or
supervision of the minor to fail or refuse to take custody of the minor after such
demand is made upon him by a law enforcement officer who arrests the minor for
violation of paragraphs 1 or 2 of this subsection.
C. Defenses/Exceptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B, including paragraph 3 of subsection B,
of this section that the minor was:
1. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian.
2. With prior permission of the parent or guardian, in a motor vehicle involved in
interstate travel.
3. With prior permission of the parent or guardian, in an employment activity or going to
or returning home from an employment activity without any detour or stop by the
1Ordinance 72-95
Revised 12/2016
most direct route.
4. Involved in an emergency.
5. With prior permission of the parent or guardian, was engaged in reasonable,
legitimate and specific business and/or activity. Examples include, but are not
limited to, a juvenile, with prior permission of the parent or guardian, attending an
official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults who take
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults who take responsibility for
the minor.
6. With prior permission of the parent or guardian, engaged in a reasonable and
legitimate exercise of First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution.
7. Married and sixteen years of age or over, or in the military.
8. On the sidewalk abutting their residence or on the next door neighbor's property with
the consent of the neighbor.
D. Enforcement.
1. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall
attempt to ascertain the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the
officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based upon the
circumstances, the minor's responses and minor's conduct, no defense as provided
in subsection C of this section is probably present.
2. In addition to any other powers he/she may have, any law enforcement officer who
arrests a minor for violating any of the provisions of paragraphs 1 or 2 of subsection
B of this section is also hereby empowered to demand of the parent, guardian or
other person having the care, custody or supervision of the minor that such parent,
guardian or other person come and take the minor into custody. The law
enforcement officer is also empowered to take the minor to a designated location
where arrangements can be made for a parent, guardian or other appropriate party
to take the minor into custody. Should there be a failure of the parent, guardian or
other person to take custody of such minor, the officer may then be empowered to
take the minor home.
E. Each violation of the provisions of subsection B of this Section shall constitute a separate
offense.
F. A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor. This offense is designated an incorrigible offense for minors under the
jurisdiction of the juvenile court.
Revised 12/2016
Section 9-1-6 Noise1
A. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation owning or operating or in control of any restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show,
store or any place of public amusement, entertainment or accommodation, to play or
permit to be played any music or musical instrument or instruments whether played by
individuals, orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box or other mechanical device or means
in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the senses, or so as to disturb the
slumber, peace and quiet, or otherwise interfere with or annoy the comfortable enjoyment
of life or property of any person and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the
annoyance inflicted is unequal.
B. It is unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a sound truck, loud speaker or
sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with loud speaker or sound amplifier or any
instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached
to and upon any vehicle unless such person in charge of such vehicle shall have first
applied to and received permission from the chief of police to operate any such vehicle so
equipped.
C. It is unlawful for any person:
1. To operate a motor vehicle, that is not at all times equipped with a muffler upon the
exhaust system. This muffler must be in good working order and in constant
operation so as to prevent excessive or unusual noise. It is unlawful for any person
operating any motor vehicle to use a cut-out, by-pass or similar muffler elimination
appliance.
2. To operate a truck or other motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause the engine to
emit additional noise from its exhaust or muffler system through deceleration or
through a practice commonly known as jake braking.
D. It is unlawful for any person, establishment, corporation or institution to allow or cause
excessive, loud, or unusual noise to emit from real or personal property that they own or
control, regardless of the instrument, device, or source of the noise, between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall be prima facie evidence that a noise is loud, excessive
or unusual if it can be heard by a person, who has normal hearing ability, for a distance of
two hundred feet or more from its source.
E. Exemptions from noise level regulations:
1. Safety signals and alarm devices, storm warning sirens or horns and the authorized
testing of such equipment, authorized emergency vehicles engaged in an emergency
activity and emergency pressure-relief valves.
2. A vehicle operated by a gas, electric, communications, or water utility company, or
governmental entity while being operated for official business.
3. When the sound amplification system is being operated to request assistance of an
emergency nature or to warn of a hazardous situation.
1Amended by Ordinance 272-03; Ordinance 330-06 & 611-16
Revised 12/2016
4. Noises from the normal operation of railroad trains.
5. A vehicle used for advertising in a parade or in a political or other special event as
authorized by the town.
6. Church chimes or bells.
7. Crowd noises resulting from activities such as those planned for school, government,
or community groups or duly authorized by such groups.
8. Organized sporting events.
9. Noises created by any aircraft operated in conformity with or pursuant to federal law,
federal air regulations, or air traffic control instructions issued pursuant to or within
duly adopted federal air regulations, together with any noise created by aircraft
operating under or pursuant to declaration of any emergency under federal air
regulations.
10. Heating and cooling equipment when it is functioning in accordance with
manufacturer’s specifications and is in proper operating condition.
11. Landscape maintenance equipment when it is functioning in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications and with all mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in
use and in proper operating condition between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
F. Unnecessary Noise
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it
shall be unlawful for any person without justification to make or continue, or cause or
permit to be made or continued, any unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise,
which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or
annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.
2. The factors which will be considered in determining whether a violation of the
provisions of this section exists will include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a.) The volume of the noise;
(b.) The intensity of the noise;
(c.) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
(d.) Whether the nature of the noise is natural or unnatural;
(e.) The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
(f.) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
(g.) The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
(h.) The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
Revised 12/2016
(i.) The duration of the noise;
(j.) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant;
(k.) Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity;
(l.) Whether it is an impulse noise.
G. Animal noise Ordinance 624-16
1. It is unlawful to keep or harbor any animal which by frequent, habitual or
continued barking, yelping or howling, crowing or the making of any noise
disturbs the peace of the neighborhood. A first violation of this subsection shall
be a civil offense, a second violation shall be a petty offense, and a third violation
shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no summons or complaint shall be issued unless
there are at least two complaining witnesses from separate households who shall
have signed such complaint. In the absence of such a signed complaint, no civil
fine may be assessed nor any conviction made.
3. For purposes of this subsection, a Town Code Enforcement Officer or law
enforcement officer may be a complaining witness if, but only if, there are no
residences within 1500 feet of the lot from which the noise is alleged to have
arisen other than the original complainant, measured from property line to
property line. There is no requirement that the original complainant live within
1500 feet of the property line in order to sign a complaint.
Revised 12/2016
Section 9-1-7 Noise Regulations During Construction1
A. During the times hereinafter set forth, no construction activities of any kind, including but
not limited to the making of an excavation, clearing of surface land and equipment or
supplies, or the operation of mechanically powered tools anywhere in the town limits,
shall be permitted, when such activities result in the generation of mechanically or
electrically created noise that can be heard by a person with normal hearing within an
occupied residential building, the windows of which are closed, if such building is located
within five hundred feet of the construction site.
B. Start/stop time periods of construction. Abovementioned construction activities are
prohibited during the following time periods, unless a permit is obtained as described in
subsection C of this section:
1. Prior to 5:00 am and after 7:00 pm Monday through Friday from May 15 through
September 15.
2. Prior to 6:00 am and after 7:00 pm Monday through Friday during the remainder of
the year.
3. Prior to 7:00 am and after 5:00 pm on Saturdays throughout the year.
4. At all times on Sundays and Legal Holidays as defined by the town.
C. Permit. Construction work may be conducted at different times than otherwise permitted
herein if, upon written application, a permit is obtained from the community development
department, building safety division. A permit may be obtained for a single project, or for
multiple projects under construction, by the same applicant, within 600 feet,
approximately two blocks, of each other. In granting such permit, the building official
shall consider whether construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed work site would
be less objectionable at night than during the daytime because of the different population
levels or different neighborhood activities; whether obstruction and interference with
traffic, particularly on streets of major importance, would be less objectionable at night
than during the daytime; whether the kind of work to be performed emits noises at such a
low level as to not cause significant disturbance of the reasonable peaceful enjoyment of
the surrounding neighbors in the vicinity of the work site; whether the neighborhood of the
proposed work site is primarily residential in character wherein sleep would be disturbed;
whether great economic hardship would occur if the work were spread over a longer time;
whether the work will abate or prevent hazard to life or property; whether the proposed
early morning or night work is in the general public interest. The building official shall
prescribe such conditions, working times, types of construction equipment to be used and
permissible noise emissions as the official deems appropriate in the public interest. No
permit shall be required to perform emergency work necessary to restore property to a
safe condition following a public calamity, work required to protect the health, safety or
welfare of persons or property or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility
service.
D. Revocation of permits; appeal. The building official may revoke any permit granted
hereunder upon complaints based upon substantial evidence that the construction work
causes significant disturbance of the reasonable peaceful enjoyment of the surrounding
neighbors in the vicinity of the work site. Any person aggrieved by the granting of a
permit or the refusal to grant a permit by the building official, or authorized representative,
may appeal the decision to the community development director. Appeals to the
community development director’s decisions may be made to the town manager, with
1Amended by Ordinance 272-03; Ordinance 282-04
Revised 12/2016
final appeal to the town council at a future meeting date.
E. Stop orders. Whenever any work on a construction project is in violation of the provisions
of this section, the building official may order the construction project stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons responsible for the project, and any such persons shall
forthwith stop work on the project until a permit is obtained.
F. The following activities shall be excluded from such prohibition:
1. Noise generated by work being performed by a resident of a building or structure
may continue until 10:00 pm but may not begin earlier than the times set forth in
subsection B of this section.
2. Noise resulting from emergencies, including but not limited to, repair of roofs,
windows, doors, electrical, plumbing and mechanical (HVAC) shall be permitted
whenever necessary. An emergency shall be defined as any situation where work
must be performed in order to prevent serious injury to persons or property.
3. Noise generated by sod delivery equipment, and vehicles.
4. Loading/unloading construction material, such as lumber, tile, and similar materials.
5. Termite pre-treatment.
Section 9-1-8 Obstruction of View
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstruction
which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
Section 9-1-9 Offensive Business
It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any slaughterhouse or make a practice of
slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep or any other kind of animal, or establish or maintain any soap
factory, render tallow, or pursue, maintain or carry on any other business or occupation
offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health within the limits of the town.
Section 9-1-10 Offensive Premises
It is unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any premises belonging to or occupied by him,
or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, sewer or private drain therein to become nauseous, foul or
offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort.
Section 9-1-11 Prostitution
It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution, to patronize a prostitute or to solicit any
person to visit or patronize a prostitute or place of prostitution.
Section 9-1-12 Searchlights
It is unlawful for any person to operate within the town any incandescent or arc-type searchlight,
beacon light or similar lighting device designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light into
Revised 12/2016
the sky for a distance in excess of one-half mile unless permission is obtained from the council.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency searchlights or beacons operated
pursuant to public authority.
Section 9-1-13 Signs and Banners
It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any streetlight pole, traffic signal
pole or utility pole within the town without first obtaining authorization from the town and the
owner of the pole.
Section 9-1-14 Spitting
It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the public sidewalks or crosswalks in the town or
upon any public path, by-way or highway, or in or on any public ground or park in the town, or
upon the floor or interior of any public building in the town.
Section 9-1-15 Water - Flow Upon Streets Prohibited
A. It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of
water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to
create a hazardous condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of
the town.
B. It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of
irrigation water in such quantity as to cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public
streets of the town through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any
irrigation structure, delivery ditch or waste ditch in which said person has a vested right or
interest or through the willful or negligent failure of said person to accept irrigation water
after it has been ordered by him.
Section 9-1-16 Weapons
A. It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the town to fire or discharge any firearm,
B-B gun, air gun, pellet gun, dart gun, slingshot, gas-operated gun or other similar gun or
instrument except:
1. As allowed pursuant to the provisions of Title 13, Chapter 4 of the Arizona Revised
Statutes.
2. By a law enforcement officer in necessary performance of his duty.
3. On a properly supervised range that is any of the following:
(a.) Operated by a club affiliated with the National Rifle Association Of America,
the Amateur Trap Shooting Association, the National Skeet Association or
any other nationally recognized shooting organization, or by any public or
private school.
(b.) Approved by any agency of the federal government, this state or a county or
city within which the range is located.
(c.) Operated with adult supervision for shooting air or carbon dioxide gas
Revised 12/2016
operated guns, or for shooting in underground ranges on private or public
property.
4. By special permit of the Town’s chief of police.
5. To lawfully take wildlife during an open season, pursuant to rules established by
Arizona Game and Fish Department. Hunting areas approved by the Arizona Game
and Fish Department may be closed when deemed unsafe by the director of the
department. However, a person shall not discharge a firearm within one-fourth mile
of an occupied structure without the consent of the owner or occupant of the
structure. For purposes of this paragraph only:
(a.) “occupied structure” means any building in which, at the time of the firearm’s
discharge, a reasonable person from the location where a firearm is
discharged would expect a person to be present.
(b.) “open season” means the time during which wildlife may be lawfully taken
(see A.R.S. 17.101(a)(15).
(c.) “wildlife” means all wild mammals, wild birds and the nests or eggs thereof,
reptiles, amphibians, mollusks, crustations and fish, including their eggs or
spawn, as further qualified by A.R.S. 17-101(b).
6. To control nuisance wildlife by permit from the Arizona Game and Fish Commissioner
the United States Fish and Wildlife Service [and the taking of such animals or birds
is properly supervised by The Arizona Game and Fish Department or the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service or a person designated by the receptive agency to
assure the safety of surrounding property owners].
7. As required by an animal control officer in the performance of duties pursuant to
A.R.S. §9-499.04.
8. Using blanks.
9. More than one mile from any occupied structure. For the purpose of this paragraph
only:
“Occupied structure” means any building, object, vehicle, watercraft, aircraft or place
with sides and a floor that is separately securable from any structure attached to it,
that is used for lodging, business, transportation, recreation or storage and in which
one or more human beings either are or are likely to be present or so near as to be in
equivalent danger at the time the discharge of a firearm occurs. Occupied structure
includes any dwelling house, whether occupied, unoccupied or vacant.
10. In self-defense or defense of another person against an animal attack if a reasonable
person would believe that deadly physical force against the animal is immediately
necessary and reasonable under the circumstances to protect oneself or the other
person.
B. Any person, other than a peace officer on duty carrying a weapon, upon entering any
public place or attending a public event, may be required by the operator of the
establishment or the sponsor of the event to remove his weapon and place it in the
Revised 12/2016
custody of the operator of the establishment or the sponsor of the event.
C. It is unlawful for any person to sell or give to a minor under the age of eighteen years,
without written consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian, a weapon, ammunition or
toy pistol by which dangerous and explosive substances may be discharged.
ARTICLE 9-2 GRAFFITI1
9-2-1 Definitions
9-2-2 Prohibition
9-2-3 Penalty
9-2-4 Removal of Graffiti by the Town
Section 9-2-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. The term “graffiti” includes any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched,
scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of
the nature of the material of that structural component, to the extent that the same was
not authorized in advance by the owner thereof or, despite advanced authorization, is
otherwise deemed by the council to be filth and debris and vandalism.
B. The term “graffiti instruments” includes any tool, instrument, article, substance, solution or
other compound designed or commonly used to make graffiti under circumstances
evidencing intent to place graffiti upon such property.
Section 9-2-2 Prohibition
A. No person shall make graffiti of any type on any building, public or private, or any other
property real or personal, owned by any person, corporation, association, partnership or
any public agency or instrumentality without the expressed written permission of the
owner, manager, tenant or other person responsible for said property.
B. No person shall possess graffiti instruments in such a manner as to give rise to an
inference of intent to make graffiti; and, no person shall possess a spray paint can in any
public place including any building, park, facility or alley or on any private property where
that person has no right to be unless possession is authorized or required as a part of a
legitimate business or activity.
Section 9-2-3 Removal of Graffiti by the Town1
The town having determined that graffiti constitutes both vandalism and filth and debris does
hereby compel the owner, lessee or occupant of buildings, grounds or lots to remove graffiti on
the basis that its presence constitutes a hazard to public health and safety. The removal of the
graffiti shall be accomplished according to the following provisions.
A. Upon determining that graffiti has been applied to any building or structure whether public
or private within the town limits, the town shall cause a written notice to be sent to the
1Ordinance 51-94; Ordinance 425-08
Revised 12/2016
owner, occupant or lessee. The written notice shall set forth the condition observed and
shall give seven (7) days for compliance by removal of the graffiti from the building or
structure.
B. Notice shall be by either personal service or certified or registered mail and if the building
or premises is not occupied by the owner then notice shall be provided to the owner as
indicated on the Maricopa County or Pinal County tax rolls, as appropriate.
C. If after seven (7) days from actual notice the owner or occupant or lessee has failed to
remove the graffiti, the town may cause the graffiti to be removed and assess the costs of
removal against the owner of the real property upon which the building or structure is
located.
D. Notice of intent to go upon private property and to remove or abate the graffiti shall be
given in the same manner as notice set forth in subsection A of this section. The notice
of intent to go upon private property and remove graffiti shall also include the town's
estimate as to the cost for the removal or abatement of the graffiti and that the actual
amount of the cost shall be certified by the town and recorded in the office of the county
recorder as a lien against the real property. Any owner, occupant or lessee who receives
written notice to remove or abate graffiti or written notice that the town intends to enter
upon private property to remove or abate the graffiti may appeal to the town council for a
hearing on either the notice or the amount of the assessment. The appeal must be in
writing and acts as a stay of all proceedings until such time as the council schedules a
time, place and date certain for the hearing.
E. A prior assessment or lien for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar to
a subsequent assessment or assessments for such purposes and any number of liens on
the same lot or track of land may be enforced in the same action.
F. The lien upon real property authorized herein shall be subject and inferior to the lien for
general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages, liens and encumbrances of record. A
sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of the article shall be
made upon judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The town reserves the right to
bring an action to enforce the lien in superior court in the county in which the property is
located at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the lien
by legal action shall not affect its validity.
G. The recorded assessment and lien shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all of the
matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording
thereof.
ARTICLE 9-3 STORAGE AND DISPLAY OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS1
9-3-1 Definitions
9-3-2 Violations
Section 9-3-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed
thereto:
1Ordinance 132-98
Revised 12/2016
A. “Person” means the state, the county, a political subdivision of the state, other
governmental entities, a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any
other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. Person also includes a trustee,
receiver, an assignee or similar representative.
B. “Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco,
snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation
or other manner of ingestion.
Section 9-3-2 Violations
A. No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a business where tobacco
products are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for sale tobacco products, shall
store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, such tobacco products in an area or
manner that is accessible to the public without employee assistance.
B. A person is exempt from the requirements of this section if both:
1. The business where tobacco products are sold prohibits entry of individuals under
the age of eighteen at all times; and
2. Photographic identification is required from any individual who appears to be twentysix
years of age or younger prior to entering the business where tobacco products
are sold.
ARTICLE 9-4 PENALTIES
9-4-1 Enforcement Officers
9-4-2 Civil Offenses
9-4-3 Procedures
9-4-4 Criminal Penalties
9-4-5 State Law Penalties
Section 9-4-1 Enforcement Officers
Except as otherwise specifically provided in Chapter 9, any code enforcement officer,
peace officer, or the town attorney or town prosecutor, may issue civil citations or
complaints to enforce violations of this chapter.
Section 9-4-2 Civil Offenses
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any person who fails to comply
with requirements of Sections 9-1-1, 9-1-2, 9-1-7, 9-1-8, 9-1-9, 9-1-10, 9-1-12, 9-1-13, 9-
1-15 or Article 9-3 of this chapter, or violates any of its provisions is guilty of a civil
offense. Except as otherwise specifically provided, civil offenses shall be punished by
imposition of a civil penalty in the amount of $250.00 for the first offense; $500.00 for a
second offense in a 12-month period, and $2,000.00 for a third offense in said 12-month
period. For purposes of calculating the 12-month period, such period shall begin on the
date of the first offense.
Revised 12/2016
Section 9-4-3 Procedures
Civil matters shall be tried before the civil hearing officer in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 5, Section 7 of this code. When appropriate, civil matters may also
be tried before a justice of the peace or a county hearing officer.
Section 9-4-4 Criminal Penalties
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, any person who violates a provision of
this chapter for which a civil penalty is not prescribed upon first conviction shall be
considered guilty of a petty offense and upon subsequent convictions shall be guilty of a
class 1 misdemeanor.
Section 9-4-5 State Law Penalties
Nothing in this chapter 9 regarding civil penalties shall be interpreted or applied to prevent
a law enforcement officer from imposing criminal penalties as provided by state law.
ARTICLE 9-5 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION1
9-5-1 Definitions
9-5-2 Prohibited Acts
9-5-3 Penalty
Section 9-5-1 Definitions
In this article, unless the context requires otherwise:
A. “Aggressive manner” means and includes either individually or as a group:
1.Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another
person in the course of the solicitation without the person’s consent; or
1Ordinance 574-15
2. Approaching or following the person being solicited, if the conduct is:
a. Intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent
bodily harm to oneself or another, or damage to or loss of property, or the
commission of a criminal act upon the person or property in the person’s
possession; or
b. Intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate a reasonable person
being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or
c. Continuing to solicit within five (5) feet of the person being solicited
after the person has made a negative response to such solicitation; or
d. Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly obstructing the safe or free
passage of the person being solicited, or requiring the person, or the
driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with
the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of
one’s constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized
Revised 12/2016
by a permit issued by the town, shall not constitute obstruction of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
e. Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or
gestures:
(1) Intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the
person or property in the person’s possession; or
(2) Intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate a reasonable
person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
B. “Automated teller machine” means a device, linked to a financial institution’s account
records, which is able to carry out transactions including, but not limited to: account
transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan
payments.
C. “Automated teller machine facility” means the area comprised of one or more
automated teller machines and any adjacent space which is made available to banking
customers after regular banking hours. It shall be presumed that any automobile parking
space within twenty-five (25) feet of an automated teller machine is part of the
automated teller machine facility to provide access to bank customers.
D. “Bank” means a bank, credit union, or other similar financial institution.
E. “Public area” means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has
access and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking
lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, and
the doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings, and the grounds enclosing
them.
F. “Public transportation vehicle” means any vehicle used for the transportation of
passengers on scheduled routes on an individual passenger fare-paying basis.
G. “Solicit” means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value
from another person, regardless of the solicitor’s purpose or intended use of the money
or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written
or printed word, or by other means of communication.
Section 9-5-2 Prohibited Acts
It shall be unlawful for any person or group to solicit money or other things of value, or to
solicit the sale of goods or services:
A. In an aggressive manner in a public area; or
B. In any public transportation vehicle or from any persons within fifteen (15) feet of any
transit stop, bus stop, taxi stand, train station platform or the inside of the train station,
except that the operator of a public transportation vehicle may request or accept
payment of a fare; or
Revised 12/2016
C. Within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or automated teller
machine facility, without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession
of such facility; or
D. Immediately adjacent to the entrance of a business in a manner that physically
interferes with ingress or egress to that business entrance.
Section 9-5-3 Penalty
A violation of this Section 9-5 shall be a class 1 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
CHAPTER 10 HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 10-1 PURPOSE, SCOPE AND ENFORCEMENT
10-1-1 Purpose
10-1-2 Jurisdiction
Section 10-1-1 Purpose
A. The purpose of this Chapter 10: Health and Sanitation and the regulations contained
herein is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the Town of Queen Creek and its
residents, and to protect neighborhoods against physical, visual and economic
deterioration. To that end, it is a violation of this chapter to erect, maintain, use, place,
deposit, cause, allow, leave or permit to remain on any property any conditions that:
1. Contribute to or cause injury or endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of
others;
2. Are contrary to community standards of decency;
3. Are offensive to the senses of any reasonable person or normal sensitiveness;
4. Unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous the
free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any stream, public park,
parkway, square, sidewalk, trail, path, street or highway in the Town;
5. Obstruct the free use of property so as to essentially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the public;
6. Damage or contribute to the deterioration of property or improvements in the
community; or
7. Are nuisances as defined in this chapter, including but not limited to, Article 10-2
Nuisance Procedures and Removal of Rubbish, Trash, Weeds, Filth, Debris and
Dilapidated Structures and/or Article 10-3 Litter; Nuisances;
Or that otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter.
B. Except as otherwise specifically provided, this chapter shall apply to all land within the
Town of Queen Creek without regard to the use or occupancy or date of construction,
improvement, acquisition or annexation.
Section 10-1-2 Jurisdiction
A. Unless otherwise specified, the Queen Creek Municipal Court, a Justice Court or other
court of competent jurisdiction (hereinafter “court”) shall have jurisdiction of all
proceedings to enforce this chapter.
B. Civil actions to enforce this chapter may be adjudicated by a judge or a Civil Hearing
Officer.
C. The court shall have jurisdiction to issue orders permitting the town to abate conditions
that constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. The court may retain
jurisdiction over any matter to abate conditions that constitute a violation of this chapter
until the violation is abated in full.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
ARTICLE 10-2 NUISANCE PROCEDURES AND REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, TRASH,
WEEDS, FILTH, DEBRIS AND DILAPIDATED STRUCTURES
10-2-1 Reserved
10-2-2 Authority to Enforce Nuisance Standards
10-2-3 Rules and Regulations
10-2-4 Recording a Notice of Violation
10-2-5 Inspections
10-2-6 Nuisance Enforcement Procedure
10-2-7 Denial, Suspension or Revocation of Business License
10-2-8 Withholding of Permits
10-2-9 Court-Ordered Nuisance Abatement and Injunction
10-2-10 Rubbish, Trash, Weeds, Filth, Debris and Dilapidated Structures on
Property
10-2-11 Owner to Maintain Premises
Section 10-2-2 Authority to Enforce Nuisance Standards
A. The Town Manager or designee shall enforce the provisions of this article. The Town
code enforcement officer, in coordination and cooperation with such other town officials
as have been designated by the Town Manager or by code or regulation adopted by the
Town, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this article.
B. In enforcing this article, the code enforcement officer, or other designated town official,
may take one(1) or more of the following actions:
1. Informal intervention with the responsible party.
2. Where the violation is on public property, such as noncompliant posting of signs
in a public right-of-way, take summary action to remove the violation and, may,
serve notice of the action or written warning, issue a citation and/or prepare and
serve a long-form complaint on the responsible party.
3. Issue a notice of violation to the responsible party in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this article.
4. Issue a criminal or civil citation to the responsible party in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this article.
5. File a long-form complaint for criminal or civil penalties with the Court in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this article.
6. In the case of an imminent hazard or a building or structure which is unfit for
human habitation, with the concurrence and approval of the Town Manager, or
as otherwise specifically provided by law, take emergency remedial action or
issue an order to vacate the property in accordance with the procedures set forth
in the Queen Creek Town Code and/or applicable Building Codes.
C. No person shall, by threat or use of violence or physical force, or by threatening to do or
doing any other act that can be reasonably anticipated to cause physical harm to any
person including the perpetrator, intentionally obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the Town who is lawfully
and constitutionally engaged in the enforcement or execution of the provisions of this
article.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
D. The code enforcement officer, or other designated town officer, may expand the scope
of any inspection to include other Town Code violations noted during inspection.
E. All inspections shall be conducted in compliance with the Constitutions of the United
States and the State of Arizona.
F. The authority of the code enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this article is
independent of and complementary to the authority of other town officials to enforce the
provisions of any other statute, code or regulation. The remedies provided for in this
article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies established by law, and this
chapter shall not be interpreted as limiting the penalties, actions or abatement
procedures which may be taken by the Town or other officials under other laws,
ordinances, or rules.
Section 10-2-3 Rules and Regulations
The Town Manager, or designee, is authorized to make reasonable and necessary
administrative rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this article.
Section 10-2-4 Recording a Notice of Violation
The town may record a Notice of Violation with the Office of the County Recorder. A recorded
Notice of Violation shall run with the land and shall constitute notice, for all purposes of this
article, to all persons or entities thereafter acquiring an interest in the property. Failure to record
a Notice of Violation shall not affect the validity of the Notice as to persons who receive the
Notice. When the property is brought into compliance, if a notice of violation was recorded, a
satisfaction of notice of violation shall be recorded.
Section 10-2-5 Inspections
A. The code enforcement officer or other town official as designated by the Town Manager,
or by code or regulation adopted by the town, is hereby authorized to make inspections
for violations of this article in the normal course of the job duties or in response to a
citizen complaint when there is reason to believe that a violation of this article has been
or is being committed and where necessary to certify compliance with an enforcement
action.
B. In order to investigate possible violations or to determine compliance with this article,
private property may only be entered with the consent of the owner or occupant. If
consent is denied or cannot be obtained, private property may be entered with an
administrative warrant/order issued by a court.
Section 10-2-6 Nuisance Enforcement Procedure
A. Nuisance Enforcement –In General
As more fully described in this article and hereafter, and after appropriate or necessary
investigation, documentation and inspection, the code enforcement officer, or other
designated town official, may take one (1) or more of the following actions:
1. Informal mediation or intervention with the responsible party
2. Summary action to remove the violation, accompanied by appropriate notice,
warning or enforcement action.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
3. Issue a notice of violation.
4. Issue a criminal or civil citation.
5. File a long-form complaint for criminal or civil penalties.
6. Take action for abatement or vacation of premises.
B. Informal Mediation or Intervention and Summary Action
1. Informal mediation or intervention. Whenever in the judgment of the code
enforcement officer, or other designated official, action short of formal citation or
notice of violation is likely to achieve satisfactory and timely compliance, informal
intervention, including written and verbal communication, may be used. The
Town Manager and code enforcement officer shall promulgate criteria for
informal intervention and procedures for documentation and recordkeeping.
2. Summary action. Where obvious and elemental violations occur and entry onto
private property is not necessary for enforcement, e.g., in the case of illegal
posting of advertising in public rights-of-way, the code enforcement officer, or
other designated official, may remove or summarily abate the violation. In such
cases, evidence of the violation shall be forwarded to the code enforcement
officer, or other appropriate official for identification of the responsible party and
additional enforcement.
C. Notice of Violation
1. Upon reasonable belief that a violation of this article has occurred, the code
enforcement officer, or other designated official, shall notify the owner, owner’s
agent, or responsible party, through the issuance of a written notice, that a
violation of this article has occurred and must be corrected and/or removed from
the property.
2. The notice of violation shall set forth the following information:
a. Identification of property in violation. If the notice includes an abatement
action, it shall include a legal description of the property and street
address, if known, and if unknown, then by book, map and parcel
number;
b. Statement of violation in sufficient detail to allow an owner or responsible
party to identify and correct the problem along with legal citation(s) of
applicable code, statutory or regulatory provision(s);
c. The period of time, not less than thirty (30) days from the mailing of the
notice, the responsible party is given to comply;
d. Name, business address and business phone number of the code
enforcement officer and/or other town official who issued the notice;
e. Proposed reinspection date, if any;
f. If the notice includes an abatement action, a cost estimate to correct the
violations and legal description of the property;
g. A warning statement that if the violations are not corrected within the
period stated, the town may abate the nuisance itself or by private
contractor, assess the owner or responsible party for the cost of such
abatement including an administrative charge of ten (10%) percent, and
record a lien on the property for assessment; and
h. Notice of the right and procedure for appealing the action.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
3. Any notice given for any purpose under this chapter shall be provided, in writing,
to the owner, the owner’s authorized or statutory agent, any lien holder, and to
the occupant or lessee of the property. The notice given for any purpose under
this article shall be deemed effective on the date when written notice is
personally served in the same manner as provided by the Arizona Rules of Civil
Procedure or mailed certified mail return receipt requested. If notice is served by
certified mail, the notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner,
the owner’s authorized agent or the owner’s statutory agent and to the address to
which the tax bill for the property was last mailed. The notice shall be given not
less than thirty (30) days before the day set for compliance and shall include the
legal description of the property and the cost of such removal to the town if the
owner, occupant or lessee does not comply. The owner shall be given not less
than thirty (30) days to comply. Nothing herein shall preclude the town from
giving additional verbal or written notice at its discretion and the Town Manager
and code enforcement officer may promulgate criteria for informal intervention
and procedures for documentation and recordkeeping.
4. Nothing in this section shall require the issuance of a notice of violation prior to
commencement of other enforcement proceedings, including civil or criminal
proceedings.
5. Thirty (30) calendar days after service of the notice as provided herein, the owner
or responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable for any and all reasonable
charges incurred by reason of the Fire Department being required to respond to
the property not abated as required by the notice. When incurred, such charges
shall be treated in the same manner and be subject to the same rights of appeal
as charges incurred in bringing the property into compliance.
6. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit the code enforcement officer
or other Town official from engaging in the informal mediation, intervention, or
summary action set forth in Section 10-2-6(B).
D. Nuisance Abatement.
1. Civil Hearing Officer Authorized. When a person is served with a notice to abate
in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-499 to comply with the provisions of this article
concerning matters within the scope of A.R.S. § 9-499 and neglects, fails or
refuses to abate a violation for more than thirty (30) days from the effective date
of the notice, a Civil Hearing Officer may hold an administrative hearing pursuant
to the notice regarding whether an order should be entered authorizing the Town
Manager or designee to abate any condition that constitutes a violation. The
Civil Hearing Officer, after the hearing (or time for hearing should the person fail
to appear) shall enter such rulings and orders which it determines to be
appropriate including an order authorizing the town to abate the condition,
including the authorization of multiple abatements for a period not to exceed one
hundred eighty (180) days from the previous abatement order. Decisions by the
hearing officer shall be based upon a preponderance of the evidence. The
hearing officer shall issue findings in writing, upholding, modifying or reversing
the notice.
2. Order of Abatement. A copy of the order of abatement shall be posted upon the
subject property. The order shall be sent by certified mail to the owner, lien
holder, occupant or lessee at their last known address or most recent address to
which a tax bill was mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, a
duplicate order shall also be sent to the owner at the owner’s last known
address.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
3. Notice Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Civil Hearing Officer
regarding the notice may appeal to the Town of Queen Creek Board of
Adjustment. The aggrieved person(s) may appeal by delivering a written
statement of appeal to the Town Clerk within ten (10) business days, excluding
weekends and legal holidays, after service of the notice and order to abate is
complete. The town shall take no action to abate a nuisance while an appeal is
pending. The appeal shall be heard and a determination made by the Board of
Adjustment at its next regular meeting or within five (5) days, whichever time is
greater. The Board may affirm, vacate, or modify the notice and order to abate.
The decision of the Board is final and binding. If the notice and order to abate is
affirmed and the Board does not modify the time for compliance, the time for
compliance as set forth in the original notice shall run from the time service of the
notice was first completed. If no timely statement of appeal is made, then the
notice and order to abate becomes effective when the time for appeal lapses.
The town is authorized to record the notice and order to abate with the
appropriate County Recorder’s Office and proceed with abatement. This appeal
process does not apply if the removal or abatement is ordered by a court.
4. Abatement by the Town and Final Notice. When the time for compliance as set
forth in the notice and order to abate, or as set by the Town Board of Adjustment
on appeal, has lapsed, the town may abate the nuisance or cause it to be
abated. A final notice giving the responsible party five (5) days to abate the
nuisance shall be delivered in the same manner as set forth in this section. If the
responsible party has not complied within five (5) days, the town may proceed
with abatement. After five (5) days have elapsed from the date of issuance of the
Order of Abatement, the town, its employees or contractors are authorized to
enter upon the property and remove all rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris, blight
or dilapidated structures or other violations under this chapter from any lot, parcel
or tract.
5. Order of Assessment.
a. Within thirty (30) days after the town, its employees or contractors have
removed, enjoined or abated the rubbish, trash, weeds, filth,
accumulations, debris, blight or dilapidated structures or other violations
under this chapter from any lot, parcel or tract, the town shall issue a
written order of assessment on the property. The order shall list the date,
common address, legal description of the property, tax parcel number of
the property and that the Town of Queen Creek is the authority issuing
the assessment. The order shall also list the date and actual cost of
assessment, an inspection fee levied by the Town at $300.00, any
incidental connected costs, and the total cost of assessment, including
the cost of removal, abatement or injunction and associated legal costs
for abatement or injunctions. The order shall be signed by the Town
Manager or her/his designee and shall be recorded in the office of the
County Recorder in which the property is located.
b. The order of assessment shall also contain the following notice in bold
face print: NOTICE: THIS ORDER OF ASSESSMENT PURSUANT TO
A.R.S.§ 9-499 SHALL CONSTITUTE A LIEN UPON THE PROPERTY
DESCRIBED IN THIS ORDER IN FAVOR OF THE TOWN OF QUEEN
CREEK, ARIZONA. THE TOWN MAY TAKE LEGAL ACTION TO
FORECLOSE THE LIEN AND SELL THE PROPERTY DESCRIBED TO
RECOVER THE COSTS INDICATED IN THE ORDER OF
ASSESSMENT.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
c. Assessment Appeal. The order of assessment shall indicate that the
owner, lessee or occupant shall have ten (10) business days, excluding
weekends and legal holidays, from the date of issuance to appeal the
amount of the assessment levied by the town by delivering a written
statement of appeal to the Town Clerk. The date of mailing the order
shall be the date of issuance. All appeals of order of assessments shall
be in writing and shall specify the grounds for appeal of the assessment.
Only the amount of the assessment may be appealed. The appeal may
be filed with the appeal fee provided in the Town Code, and failure to pay
the required fee shall result in the appeal not being filed and deemed
invalid. This appeal process does not apply if the removal or abatement
is ordered by a court.
d. The Civil Hearing Officer shall hear the appeal within fifteen (15) days
after receipt. Written notice of the hearing shall be provided to the
appropriate town departments and to the owner, occupant or lessee.
The Civil Hearing Officer, after the hearing (or time for hearing should the
person fail to appear) shall enter such rulings and orders, which it
determines to be appropriate upholding or modifying the amount of the
assessment. The hearing officer’s decision shall determine, based upon
a preponderance of the evidence, whether the assessment was made in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and whether the amount
assessed actually covers the costs incurred by the town.
e. The owner, lessee or occupant may appeal a decision of the Civil Hearing
Officer to the Town of Queen Creek Town Council pursuant to the same
process of appeal for a notice and order to abate as set forth in this
section above. The decision of the council, if a valid appeal is filed, is
final and binding.
f. The order of assessment shall provide that any delinquent assessments
shall bear interest in the same manner as delinquent utility bills at a rate
prescribed by A.R.S. § 44-1201, as amended from time to time.
g. A prior assessment under this chapter is not a bar to subsequent
assessments under this chapter and any number of liens imposed
pursuant to this chapter may be enforced in the same action.
h. If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an appeal
is taken and the assessment is affirmed, the original assessment or the
assessment as so modified shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder and, from the date of its recording, shall be a lien on said lot or
tract of land until paid. Such liens shall be prior and superior to all other
liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for
general taxes. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the
provisions of this chapter shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or
order of sale. The town shall have the right to bring an action to enforce
the lien in the Superior Court at any time after the recording of the
assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by such action shall not affect
its validity. The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the
truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings
prior to the recording thereof. A prior assessment for the purposes
provided in this chapter shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or
assessments for such purposes, and any number of liens on the same lot
or tract of land may be enforced in the same action.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
i. Assessments that are imposed as set forth herein run against the
property until paid and are due and payable in equal annual installments
as follows:
a) Assessments of less than five hundred dollars shall be paid within
one year after the assessment is recorded.
b) Assessments of five hundred dollars or more but less than one
thousand dollars shall be paid within two years after the
assessment is recorded.
c) Assessments of one thousand dollars or more but less than five
thousand dollars shall be paid within three years after the
assessment is recorded.
d) Assessments of five thousand dollars or more but less than ten
thousand dollar shall be paid within six years after the assessment
is recorded.
e) Assessments of ten thousand dollars or more shall be paid within
ten years after the assessment is recorded
E. Nuisance; abatements; assessments; lien enforcement. The Finance Division shall
maintain a list of all delinquent assessments made pursuant to this ordinance.
1. All assessments sixty (60) days delinquent shall be forwarded to the Town
Manager and Town Attorney for review. If the Town Manager and Town Attorney
determine that the value of the assessment(s), surcharges and interest, together
with the value of all other liens having priority over the assessment, does not
exceed the value of the property, the Town Attorney may commence legal action
to foreclose the lien and request the Superior Court to order the property sold
and the proceeds used to pay off all liens having priority, the assessment,
surcharges and interest.
2. If the Town Manager and Town Attorney determine that the value of the
assessment, surcharge and interest, together with the value of all other liens
having priority over the assessment, exceeds the value of the property, the Town
Attorney need not commence legal action to foreclose the lien. The Town
Manager may negotiate on the Town’s behalf with parties holding liens on the
property. Any agreement waiving part or all of an assessment, surcharge and
interest shall be approved by the Town Council.
3. Upon payment in full of an assessment, surcharge and interest or upon waiving
of an assessment, surcharge and interest in full by the Town Council, the town
shall record a notice of satisfaction of assessment in the Office of the County
Recorder in which the property is located. The notice shall contain the name of
the owner of the property, the tax parcel number of the property, the common
street address, and the legal description of the property. The notice shall refer to
the date of the order of assessment and the docket and page number in the
Office of the County Recorder where such order is recorded.
F. Collection of assessments. The Town Manager shall be authorized to collect
assessments imposed pursuant to this chapter in the same manner and method as
delinquent utility bills and license taxes. No utility service shall be commenced on any
property having delinquent assessments, surcharges and interest from an assessment
levied pursuant to this chapter until the assessment, surcharges and interest have been
paid in full. No business license or sales tax license shall be issued for a business on
any property having delinquent assessments, surcharges and interest from an
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
assessment levied pursuant to this chapter until the assessment, surcharges and
interest have been paid in full.
G. Public services revolving account. The public services revolving account within the
town’s general fund is established, consisting of monies collected from payments on
assessments levied under this chapter, surcharges on fines, and such other funds as the
town council may appropriate. The finance director shall administer the account. All
expenditures from the account shall comply with provisions of this code and any
administrative regulations and policies governing expenditures of the town. The public
services revolving account may be used to advance the costs for the removal of rubbish,
trash, weeds, filth, accumulations, debris, blight or dilapidated structures, or other
violations of this chapter, from any lot, parcel or tract pursuant to this chapter.
H. Nuisance; transfer of property after notice. The transfer of any and all property interest
in any manner including but not limited to sale, trade, lease, gift or assignment of any
real property against which a notice of violation has been issued shall not relieve the
party(s) served unless the legal entity assuming an ownership interest in the property, in
writing assumes responsibility for compliance with the notice of violation and a copy of
such writing is provided to the town. If a violation of this chapter exists on the property at
the time legal ownership has been transferred and the entity assuming an ownership
interest in the property is provided with notice of the violation, such entity shall also be
liable for violation as a successor owner of the property.
Section 10-2-7 Denial, Suspension or Revocation of Business License
A business license application shall be denied where it is determined that a nuisance exists on
the property for which the application is made and the applicant fails to abate the nuisance
within five (5) days after verbal or written notice thereof.
The Town Manager is authorized to suspend or revoke any business license issued pursuant to
the Queen Creek Town Code if it is determined that the licensee causes, permits or maintains
or allows the creation or maintenance of a nuisance under this chapter upon the licensed
property. Suspension or revocation of the business license shall be in addition to any other
remedy available to the town.
Section 10-2-8 Withholding of Permits
From the date a notice and order to abate expires without compliance by the responsible party
until the nuisance is abated or the city’s costs of abatement are reimbursed (whichever occurs
later), the Town may withhold or suspend any permit or approval of any alteration, repair, or
construction of any existing or new structure or sign on the property, as well as any permit or
approval pertaining to the use or development of the property; provided, however, that no permit
or approval necessary to correct the nuisance conditions shall be withheld.
Section 10-2-9 Court-Ordered Nuisance Abatement and Injunction
A. In addition to any other abatement procedure provided in this chapter, the Town
Manager or designee, Town Attorney or Town Prosecutor, in the name of the Town of
Queen Creek, may apply to the court for an order permitting the Town to abate any
condition that constitutes a violation of this chapter. The Town may also seek injunctive
relief.
B. After notice to the owner and any responsible party, the judge or court hearing officer
shall conduct a hearing. The hearing shall be informal, open to the public, and the Rules
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
of Evidence shall not apply. Evidence may be taken from any interested party and
considered in determining whether a condition in violation of this chapter exists and
what, if any, abatement action should be permitted. Any person who fails to appear after
notice of the hearing may be deemed to have waived any right to introduce evidence.
The court shall order the requested relief if it finds by a preponderance of the evidence
that a violation exists and that abatement is appropriate.
C. Upon finding that abatement and/or injunctive relief is appropriate, the court may order
demolition, board-up, clean-up or any other action the court deems reasonably
necessary to correct or enjoin the violation.
D. The reasonable costs of any abatement, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and
associated legal costs, permitted by the court’s order shall be the responsibility of the
owner and responsible party and may be collected by the Town.
Section 10-2-10 Rubbish, Trash, Weeds, Filth, Debris and Dilapidated Structures on
Property
It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, maintain or allow to be maintained, any rubbish,
trash, weeds, filth, debris or dilapidated structures on any occupied or unoccupied private or
public property within the town, whether owned by such person or not. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, and debris in such a manner that rubbish, trash,
weeds, filth, and debris will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any public place. In addition to any criminal penalty which may be imposed for violation of any
provisions of this article, such person shall be liable for all costs which may be assessed
pursuant to this article for the removal of said rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris and dilapidated
structures.
A. Any person who violates this section on private property shall be guilty of a civil offense
as defined in Section 10-11-2 unless that person immediately removes the rubbish,
trash, filth, or debris from the property.
B. Any person who violates this Section on public property shall be guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor unless that person immediately removes the rubbish, trash, filth, or debris
from the property.
Section 10-2-11 Owner to Maintain Premises
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises
free of rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris and dilapidated structures; provided that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of rubbish, trash, weeds, filth and debris in suitable containers.
Section 10-2-12 Abatement of Public Nuisances
Any public nuisance committed under this article may be abated in any manner provided by law
including the method set forth in this Article 10-2.
ARTICLE 10-3 LITTER; NUISANCES
10-3-1 Definitions
10-3-2 Public Nuisances Defined
10-3-3 Litter in Public Places; Construction Debris
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
10-3-4 Depositing Litter in Gutters
10-3-5 Litter Thrown from Vehicles
10-3-6 Littering from Trucks
10-3-7 Littering in Parks
10-3-8 Deposit of Commercial Handbills on Public Property
10-3-9 Handbills: Commercial and Non-Commercial
10-3-10 Dropping Litter from Aircraft
10-3-11 Deposit of Litter on Occupied Private Property
10-3-12 Maintenance of Litter-Free Premises
10-3-13 Vacant Lots
10-3-14 Business Establishments - Receptacles
10-3-15 Unsightly Premises
10-3-16 Abatement of Nuisances
10-3-17 Penalties
Section 10-3-1 Definitions
In this Chapter, unless expressly noted or the context otherwise requires:
A. “Aircraft” means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for
navigation or for flight in the air, and includes, but is not limited to, helicopters and
lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
B. “Abandoned Structure” means a vacant structure, characterized by blight, the ownership
responsibilities of which have been surrendered or relinquished, whether intentionally or
by failure to occupy and maintain such property.
C. “Animal” means any and all types of animals, domestic and wild, male and female,
singular and plural.
D. “Authorized private receptacle” means a litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized in this article.
E. “Blight or Blighted” means unsightly conditions including accumulation of debris; fences
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling or rusting; landscaping
that is dead, characterized by uncontrolled growth, lack of maintenance or damage;
buildings, structures, whether main or accessory characterized by holes, breaks, rot,
crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or any other evidence of physical decay, neglect,
excessive use or lack of maintenance; other similar conditions of disrepair and
deterioration regardless of the condition of other properties in the neighborhood.
F. “Building” means any structure designed for occupancy including mobile homes,
manufactured homes, factory-built buildings, and like property for which taxes may be
assessed.
G. “Commercial handbill” means any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed, or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter or literature:
1. Which is not defined as in this chapter as either a newspaper or a noncommercial
handbill; and
2. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or
3. Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly
promoting the interests thereof by sales; or
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
4. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the
purpose of private gain or profit. The terms of this paragraph shall not apply
when an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind, when in either of the same is held, given or takes
place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted
under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good
order. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be derived to authorize the
holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition
or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required
by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this town; or
5. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated
for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so
engaged as advertiser or distributor.
H. “Debris” means junk, abandoned broken or neglected lumber, furniture, furniture parts,
stoves, sinks, cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators, vehicles, car parts, equipment
or the remains of something of little or no apparent economic value.
I. “Deteriorated or deterioration” means a lowering in quality of the condition or
appearance of a building, structure or premises, characterized by holes, breaks, rot,
crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or any other evidence of physical decay, neglect,
damage or lack of maintenance.
J. “Dilapidated structure” means any unsightly and dangerous structure as defined by the
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1994 edition Section 302 or
any unsafe building or structure defined by the Uniform Building Code, 1994 edition,
Section 102, or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed structure, or any structure
commenced and abandoned.
K. “Filth” means any accumulation of garbage, junk or litter, or any condition which
constitutes a breeding place for flies, rodents, mosquitoes and other insects or animals
which are capable of carrying and transmitting disease-causing organisms to any person
or persons, any spoiled or contaminated food or drink intended for human consumption,
or all sewage, human or animal excreta, wastewater, garbage or other organic wastes
deposited, stored, discharged or exposed so as to be a potential instrument or medium
in the transmission of disease to or between any person or persons.
L. “Fowl” means any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and
plural.
M. “Garbage” means the accumulation of spoiled or discarded animal or vegetable material
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food for humans or
animals as well as other organic waste material subject to rapid decomposition.
N. “Graffiti” means initials, slogans, designs or drawings, written, spray-painted, etched,
sketched or otherwise applied on a sidewalk, wall, building, fence, sign, or any other
structure or surface without consent of the owner and visible from a public right-of-way.
O. “Grass” includes, but is not limited to, Barnyard grass, Bermuda grass, Bluegrass,
Brome grasses, Crab grass, Foxtail, Johnson grass, Ragweed, Rye grass, wild oats, or
hybrids thereof.
P. “Handbill” means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
any matter or literature which advertises for sale any business, product, commodity or
thing; directs attention to any business or establishment for the purpose of either directly
or indirectly promoting the interest thereof; or which directs attention to or advertises any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind.
Q. “Hazard” means any condition that presents a risk to the safety of any person or
adversely affects or jeopardizes the health or well-being of any person or endangers
property. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, occupancy without adequate
water or sanitation facilities, accumulation of human or animal waste, presence of
medical or biological waste, sharps, gaseous or combustible materials, radioactive
waste, dangerous or corrosive chemicals or liquids, flammable or explosive materials,
friable asbestos, offal or decay matter.
R. “Hazardous wastes” means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article
which is identified or listed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
appropriate agency of the State to be “hazardous waste” as defined in 40 Code of
Federal Regulations Section 261.1 through 261.33, as and if amended, except that, for
purposes of this ordinance hazardous waste shall include household waste as defined in
40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 261.4B.1.
S. “Junk” means items that in their present state are of little or no apparent economic
value, that are not confined within an industrial area in compliance with the zoning
ordinance, including, but not limited to an accumulation of the following materials:
discarded or scrapped furniture; glass, metal, paper or machinery parts; inoperative
machinery or appliances; building material wastes; litter or discarded or empty
containers. Junk also includes all types of solid waste described in the Town of Queen
Creek Town Code.
T. “Land” means all real property in the Town of Queen Creek, whether improved or
unimproved.
U. “Litter” means any filth, debris and weeds which constitute a hazard to public health and
safety and shall include, without limitation, any deposit, accumulation, pile or heap of
brush, grass, debris, weeds, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings
or other unsightly and unsanitary matter of any kind whatsoever, any other matter
defined as “refuse” in this chapter, and any growth of weeds higher than six inches.
V. “Major repair” means the removal from any vehicle of a major portion thereof, including,
but not limited to, the differential, transmission, head, engine block or oil pan.
W. “Newspaper” means a publication regularly issued for dissemination of current news,
matters of general interest and local happenings at stated short intervals of time whether
such publication is distributed by paid subscription or for free. Such publication shall be
from a known office of publication and shall bear the dates of issue and shall be
numbered consecutively.
X. “Non-commercial handbill” means any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, magazine paper booklet, or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the definitions of
a commercial handbill or a newspaper.
Y. “Owner” means a person, persons or legal entity listed as current title holder as recorded
in the official records of the County Recorder’s Office.
Z. “Owner’s agent” means a statutory agent designated pursuant to A.R.S.§ 33-1902 as
and if amended.
AA. “Park” means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area
in the town owned or used by the town and devoted to public recreation.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
BB. “Person” means a human being, enterprise, corporation, association, partnership, firm or
society.
CC. “Pond” means an in-ground body of water that is at least eighteen inches deep and eight
feet or greater in any dimension. This does not apply to Town-approved retention basins
as a whole except for portions of retention basins creating, contributing to or causing
injury or endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of the community.
DD. “Private property” or “private premises” means any dwelling, house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes but
is not limited to any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mail box
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
EE. “Property” means and includes buildings, grounds, lots and tracts of land.
FF. “Property used for agricultural purposes” means property of not less than ten contiguous
acres which:
1. The primary use of the property is as agricultural land and the property has been
in active production in conformance with generally accepted agricultural practices
for at least two of the five prior years; and
2. There is a reasonable expectation of operating profit, exclusive of land cost, from
the agricultural use of the property.
GG. “Public place” means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, rights-of-ways or
other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
HH. “Refuse” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals, abandoned, wrecked or junked
vehicles or parts thereof and solid market and industrial wastes.
II. “Responsible Party” means any owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee, or
other person having control over a structure or parcel of land; and in the case where the
demolition of a structure is proposed as a means of abatement, any lienholder whose
lien interest is recorded in the official records of the County Recorder’s Office.
JJ. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible
wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, metal cans, yard
clippings, leaves, metal, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
KK. “Streets or road” means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel, and includes the whole right-of-way of the public entity maintaining said
way, whether such right-of-way is paved or not.
LL. “Structure” means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or
any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some
definite manner and includes buildings, improvements and other structures that are
constructed or placed on land.
MM. “Trash” means any accumulation of refuse, rubbish, litter or garbage.
NN. “Unsecured structure” means any structure that is vacant with a damaged or open door,
window, or other opening not secured in accordance with Town standards to prevent
unauthorized entry.
OO. “Vacant structure” means any unoccupied or an illegally occupied structure or any
occupied structure without adequate facilities/utilities which is empty or remains empty
and is not continuously maintained for twenty-one (21) consecutive days or longer by
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
occupants having custody or legal right of entry to said property; or any structure which
exhibits dilapidated walls, windows, roof or doors which will fail to prevent the entry of a
trespasser.
PP. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which, any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks, except for a device propelled solely by human power.
QQ. “Weeds” means a useless and troublesome plant generally accepted as having no value
and frequently of uncontrolled growth. Any vegetation which is, or is likely to be,
detrimental, destructive or unsightly and difficult to control or eradicate, including but not
limited to bull thistle, cocklebur, foxtail, horseweed, lambsquarters, london rocket,
mallow, milkweed, pigweed, mustards, prickly lettuce, ragweed, Russian thistle,
shepardspurse, sow thistle, white horse nettle, willow weed and those types of plant
growth defined as noxious weeds by A.R.S.§ 3-201 regardless of whether a particular
property owner or occupant who is the subject of enforcement action under this Chapter
regards the growth as desirable.
Section 10-3-2 Public Nuisances Defined
In combination with Article 10-2, acts, omissions, conditions and things in or upon any land,
property, private lot, building, structure or premises, or in or upon any public right-of-way, wash,
street, avenue, alley, park, parkway or other public or private place in the town which are
injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare, which interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property by any person, or which unlawfully obstruct the free passage or use
of any public park, wash, square, alley, sidewalk, street or highway are hereby declared to be
public nuisances, including, but not limited to the following:
A. Privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected
from insects or rodents, or which are foul or malodorous, or which are not securely
closed and protected or, if necessary, illuminated so as to prevent persons or objects
from falling therein. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit uses named
herein when such are necessary and incidental to an agricultural use on land defined in
this chapter as “property used for agricultural purposes.”
B. Filthy, littered or trash-covered exterior areas, including all buildings and structures
thereon and areas adjacent thereto.
C. Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from insects and the
elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any ordinance of the town or
Maricopa County. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit uses named
herein when such are necessary and incidental to an agricultural use on land defined in
this chapter as “property used for agricultural purposes.”
D. Poison oak, poison ivy, or any noxious or toxic weeds or uncultivated plants (whether
growing or otherwise), weeds, tall grass, uncultivated shrubs or growth higher than six
inches or which present a fire hazard. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from
dry vegetation, tumbleweeds, weeds, bushes and tall grass and trees which present a
visual blight upon the area, which may harbor insect or rodent infestations and dry
vegetation, or which may likely become a fire hazard, or result in a condition which may
threaten the health and safety or the economic welfare of adjacent property owners or
occupants.
E. Accumulations of bottles, glass, cans, ashes, scrap iron, wire metal articles, bric-a-brac,
broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster and all other
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
trash and abandoned material, unless the same be kept in covered bins or metal
receptacles approved by this code or any town ordinance. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to prohibit uses named herein when such are necessary and incidental
to an agricultural use on land defined in this chapter as “property used for agricultural
purposes.”
F. Accumulations of trash, litter, rags, empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases,
mattresses, bedding, packing straw, packing hay or other packing material, lumber,
scrap iron, tin and other metal, or anything whatsoever in which insects may breed or
multiply or which provides harborage for rodents or which may create a fire hazard.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit uses named herein when such are
necessary and incidental to an agricultural use on land defined in this chapter as
“property used for agricultural purposes.”
G. Any unsightly and dangerous building, billboard or other structure, or any old abandoned
or partially destroyed building or structure, or any building or structure commenced and
abandoned.
H. All places used or maintained as junk yards or dumping grounds, or for the wrecking,
dissembling, repair or rebuilding of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any
kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles,
trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing
or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other
persons, which said places are kept or maintained so as to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment or the quality of life or property by and of others; provided, however, that
nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit any automobile
wrecking yard or other junk yard where the same is otherwise permitted by the town
zoning ordinance and amendments thereto, which is operated in conformity therewith.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit uses named herein when such are
necessary and incidental to an agricultural use on land defined in this chapter as
“property used for agricultural purposes.”
I. Any putrid, unsound or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, or the whole or any part
of any dead animal, fish or fowl, butcher's trimmings and offal, or any waste vegetable or
animal matter in any quantity, garbage, human or animal excreta, sewage or other
offensive substances accumulated on private or public property; provided, however,
nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in
the manner provided by a county health officer, this code or ordinance of the town.
J. The erection, continuance or use of any building, room or other place in said town for the
exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture which, by noxious exhalations,
including, but not limited to, smoke, soot, dust, fumes or other gases, offensive odors or
other annoyances, which is discomforting or offensive or detrimental to the health of
individuals or of the public, except for normal exhalation or smoke produced by normal
heating devices. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit uses named
herein when such are necessary and incidental to an agricultural use on land defined in
this chapter as “property used for agricultural purposes.”
K. Causing, allowing or permitting any artificial illumination of such intensity as to interfere
substantially and unnecessarily with the use and enjoyment of public or private property
by any considerable number of people, with the lawful use of any school, public place or
public street, with any governmental or public function of the town, or as to constitute a
hazard or threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the town;
provided, however, this subsection shall not apply where the person responsible for said
artificial illumination is authorized by the town manager, any school within the town, this
code or any ordinance of the town. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
prohibit uses named herein when such are necessary and incidental to an agricultural
use on land defined in this chapter as “property used for agricultural purposes.”
L. Burning of refuse. No outside burning is allowed except when such burning is necessary
and incidental to an agricultural use on land defined in this chapter as “property used for
agricultural purposes.”
M. Any unguarded or abandoned excavation, pit, well or hole which is dangerous, injurious
or harmful to life or property.
N. To leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within
any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under the control of
any person and in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or
discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap
lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, unless such
icebox, refrigerator or other container is properly stored by first removing said door or lid,
snap lock or other locking device from said icebox, refrigerator or container.
O. The doing of any act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any
condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or other thing either:
1. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous
the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any stream, public park,
parkway, square, sidewalk, street or highway in the town and is no less a
nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted is unequal.
2. Obstructs the free use of property so as to essentially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property by an entire community or
neighborhood or by a considerable number of persons.
P. To leave or permit to remain overnight in the front yard of any private premises,
construction equipment whether free standing or on one or more axles; or to store
overnight in the front yard of any private premises, any building materials whether free
standing or on pallets or skids, when such equipment or materials are not for use at the
premises or stored pursuant to a valid and current building permit issued by the town for
work at that premises. Equipment and materials may be stored in the side yard area of
any private premises so long as they are screened from public view by an opaque wall,
fence or other permitted screen. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit
uses named herein when such are necessary and incidental to an agricultural use on
land defined in this chapter as “property used for agricultural purposes.”
Q. Any dangerous, deteriorated, abandoned, partially destroyed or unfinished building,
addition, appendage or other structure, or any building or structure in violation of the
uniform building codes as adopted by the town, and any vacated or abandoned building
not securely closed at all times; any abandoned structure, unsecured structure or vacant
structure; any wood, metal or other material used for securing structures and buildings
must be compatible with the color of the building or structure.
R. All land shall be maintained so as to prevent a pond or the accumulation of stagnant
water when such pond or water causes a hazardous or unhealthy condition, becomes a
breeding area for insects, or which is causing soil erosion or damage to foundation walls.
This does not apply to Town-approved retention basins as a whole except for portions of
retention basins creating, contributing to or causing injury or endangerment to the health,
safety or welfare of the community.
S. Any condition defined or deemed to be a nuisance or hazard to the public health, safety,
or welfare by any statute of the State of Arizona or any code or ordinance adopted by
the Town of Queen Creek. These include but are not limited to the Queen Creek Town
Code, the Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance, the Uniform Fire Code, International Building
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Code, Uniform Housing Code, and similar codes or any provision of any State statute or
code or ordinance adopted by the Town of Queen Creek and intended to protect the
character, safety or attractiveness of a neighborhood or area.
T. Any landscaping, visible from public property, that is substantially dead, damaged, or
characterized by uncontrolled growth, or presents a deteriorated or blighted appearance;
uncultivated plants, weeds, tall grass, uncultivated shrubs or growth (whether growing or
otherwise) higher than six (6) inches; or any dead trees, bushes, shrubs or portions
thereof, including stumps; or any palm or similar type tree having dead or dry fronds
descending downward from the base of the lowest living frond more than eight (8) feet or
dry fronds longer than five (5) feet and closer than eight (8) feet to the ground.
U. Any wall or fence that is missing blocks, boards or other material, or is otherwise
deteriorated so as to constitute a hazard to persons or property. This includes but is not
limited to, leaning or damaged fences, fences missing slats or blocks or any other
materials that are otherwise broken or damaged in such amounts as to present a
deteriorated or blighted appearance. All replacement materials shall be uniform,
compatible and consistent with the design thereof.
V. To leave or permit to remain on any property, areas infested with insects or rodents
including, but not limited to: bees, wasps, hornets, yellow jackets, mice, rats, or roaches,
in an amount that may become a hazard to public health or safety.
W. All exposed exterior surfaces, windows and doors shall be maintained so as to be free of
deterioration that is a threat to health and safety, impervious to moisture and weather
elements, or shall not otherwise present a deteriorated or blighted appearance.
Windows, doors, locks on doors, and hinges must be present and installed properly.
These items must be free from deterioration or blighting conditions. Any temporary
boarding of structures and buildings must be done in accordance with Town
specifications.
Examples of such deterioration and blight include but are not limited to:
1. Improperly anchored canopies, metal awnings, stairways, exhaust ducts and
overhead extensions;
2. Chimneys that are structurally unsafe;
3. Exterior windows, doors, garage doors, door hardware and door frames that are
not maintained in sound condition, that are not fitted securely in their frames and
are not substantially weather tight or have inoperable locks, holes, breaks or
cracks; Any exterior door incapable of functioning as intended by design;
4. Paint that is deteriorated, indicated by peeling, flaking, cracked, blistering or
mildew, resulting in exposed bare unprotected surfaces;
5. Window screening, if present, shall be maintained in good condition;
6. Boarded window or door openings on an occupied structure;
7. Boarded window or door openings on an unoccupied or vacant structure for more
than one hundred eighty days in any two-year period;
8. Broken, rotted, split, curled or missing roofing material in such amounts as to
present a deteriorated or blighted appearance;
9. Exterior painted surfaces with loose, cracked, scaling, chipping or peeling paint,
visible from a public area, in such amounts as to present a deteriorated or
blighted appearance;
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
10. Any wood surfaces unprotected from the elements by paint or other protective
treatment, except those naturally resistant to decay;
11. The existence of hazards, hazardous waste, junk or graffiti on Property.
X. All vacant, unsecured or abandoned buildings and structures shall be secured against
unauthorized entry at all times.
1. Notice Posting.
a. The owner of record of a vacant, unsecured or abandoned structure or
building is required to post a notice at the front of the structure or building,
in a conspicuous location protected from the weather, that provides the
current name, address, and phone number of the owner of record, if the
owner of record resides locally, or the current name, address, and phone
number for a local authorized agent.
b. If a notice of default or foreclosure has been recorded for the real
property on which the vacant, unsecured or abandoned structure or
building is constructed, the lender’s name, address, and telephone
number must also be provided on the notice posted.
c. The posted notice shall be no smaller than 8 ½ inches by 11 inches.
2. Security.
The owner of a vacant, unsecured or abandoned structure or building, or
responsible party, is responsible for securing that building or structure and its
property against unauthorized entry in accordance with the following provisions:
a. For the first ninety (90) consecutive days during which the structure or
building remains vacant, unsecured or abandoned, any doors, including
garage doors, windows, and other opening of the structure or building
may be secured with painted plywood panels that match the exterior
appearance of the structure or building.
b. After the expiration of ninety (90) consecutive days, the owner, or
responsible party, shall restore and maintain the structure or building to
an occupied appearance, with all doors, including garage doors, windows,
and other openings of the structure or building in good repair. The owner,
or responsible, shall also install and maintain a security fence around the
structure or building and maintain a commercially-serviced, 24-hour
burglar alarm system to prevent unauthorized entry into the structure or
building or onto the property.
Y. Any condition which poses a substantial risk to the health or safety of any person or of
the public, including, but not limited to, an unsafe, unsanitary or structurally unsound
condition.
Z. Construction debris uncontained for more than twenty-four hours or not contained upon
the premises under construction.
Section 10-3-3 Litter in Public Places
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within
the town except in public receptacles, or in authorized private receptacles for collection.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-3-4 Depositing Litter in Gutters
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town
the accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway or any building or lot.
Persons owning or occupying property or places of business shall keep the sidewalk and
parkway in front of their premise free of litter.
Section 10-3-5 Litter Thrown from Vehicles
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street
or other public place within the town or upon private property.
Section 10-3-6 Littering From Trucks
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town unless such vehicle is
so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited
upon any street, alley or other public place.
Section 10-3-7 Littering in Parks
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town except in public receptacles
and in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of.
Section 10-3-8 Deposit of Commercial Handbills on Public Property
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the town, nor shall any person hand out or distribute
or sell any commercial handbill in any public place, but nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prohibit any person from handing out or distributing on any sidewalk, street or other place
within the town, without charge to the receiver thereof, any non-commercial handbill to any
person willing to accept it.
Section 10-3-9 Handbills: Commercial and Non-Commercial
A. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon
any vehicle, but it is not unlawful on any public place for a person to hand out or
distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a non-commercial handbill to any
occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
B. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon
any private premises which are known, or should be known, to such person to be
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
C. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or non-commercial handbill
upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is
placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign
bearing the words “No Transient Merchants,” ‘No Peddlers,” “No Door-To-Door
Salesmen,” “No Trespassing”, “No Advertisements,” “No Fliers,” “No Handbills”,
indicating that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their
right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbill left upon such premises.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
D. No person shall knowingly or recklessly throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
non-commercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited unless the
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the handbill from being blown
or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that
mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United
States nor of newspapers as defined by this article.
Section 10-3-10 Dropping Litter from Aircraft
No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the town any litter, handbill or
any other object.
Section 10-3-11 Deposit of Litter on Occupied Private Property
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the town, whether
owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may
maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon any private property.
Section 10-3-12 Maintenance of Litter-Free Premises
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises
free of litter; but this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection, or within any building when not in violation of any health, fire, building
or any other regulation, ordinance, order or statute.
Section 10-3-13 Vacant Lots
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the town
whether owned by such person or not.
Section 10-3-14 Business Establishments - Receptacles
No person occupying or employed in any business establishment shall deposit any litter in any
receptacle, unless such receptacle shall be provided with a lid of sufficient weight to prevent the
escape of any litter from the receptacle. This provision shall not apply to boxes, either postboard
or wooden, greater than six inches square in size, provided, however, that a receptacle shall be
provided of sufficient size to prevent any such boxes from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, alley or other public place.
Section 10-3-15 Unsightly Premises
Every person owning, managing, controlling or occupying any real property in the town shall not
allow any part of such property visible from the street or adjoining premises to become so
unsightly or untidy as to substantially detract from the appearance of the immediate
neighborhood or tend to threaten the safety and welfare of the immediate neighborhood.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Any public nuisance committed under this article may be abated in any manner provided by law
including the method set forth in Article 10-2 of this chapter.
Section 10-3-17 Penalties
A. Any person, whether as principal, owner, agent, tenant, employee or otherwise who
maintains a nuisance upon any property within the town, violates any provision of this
article, or fails to comply with any provision of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a civil
offense as defined in Section 10-11-2. The conviction of any person hereunder shall not
relieve such person from the responsibility to correct such violation, nor prevent the
enforcement, correction or removal thereof in any manner authorized by law. Every day
that a nuisance is permitted to exist or caused to continue to exist under this article shall
be deemed a separate violation.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, whether as principal, owner, agent, tenant,
employee or otherwise who maintains a nuisance on property owned or controlled by
that person in violation of Sections 10-3-2(L) or 10-3-2(O) is guilty of a petty offense as
defined in Section 10-11-4.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person that recklessly places or
causes to be placed any rubbish, trash, filth or debris on any property not owned or
under the control of that person in violation of Section 10-3-3, or 10-3-13 shall be guilty
of a class one misdemeanor, unless that person immediately removes the rubbish, trash,
filth or debris.
ARTICLE 10-4 METHODS OF GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL
10-4-1 Hauling Refuse
10-4-2 Vehicles and Receptacles to be Spill Proof
10-4-3 Spilled Refuse
10-4-4 Dumping Refuse
Section 10-4-1 Hauling Refuse
It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled any refuse on or along any public
street, avenue or alley in the town, in violation of any of the provisions in this chapter.
Section 10-4-2 Vehicles and Receptacles to be Spill Proof
It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or along any public street in the
town any garbage, unless such garbage is contained in strong, watertight vehicles or vehicles
with watertight receptacles, constructed to prevent any such garbage from falling, leaking or
spilling and any odor from escaping.
Section 10-4-3 Spilled Refuse
Any person hauling any refuse along the streets of the town shall immediately replace in the
conveyance used for such hauling any refuse which may fall upon any street.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-4-4 Dumping Refuse
It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse upon any public or private
property within the town, except in public dumping grounds designated by the council.
ARTICLE 10-5 ABANDONED VEHICLES
10-5-1 Definitions
10-5-2 Abandonment Prohibited
10-5-3 Exemption
10-5-4 Vehicle Removal
10-5-5 Presumption of Responsibility
10-5-6 Towed Vehicles; Notification; Violation; Classification
10-5-7 Towing and Storage Costs
10-5-8 Disposition of Abandoned and Junk Vehicles
Section 10-5-1 Definitions
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. "Abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that is of a type subject to
registration under A.R.S. Title 28, whether lost, stolen, abandoned or otherwise unclaimed
and that has been abandoned on a public highway, public property or elsewhere in the
town, including private property. Evidence that a vehicle was left unattended for a period
of forty-eight hours within the right-of-way of any highway, road, street or other public
thoroughfare or for a period of seventy-two hours on public or private property or
elsewhere in the town is prima facie evidence of abandonment.
B. For the purposes of this article, "junk vehicle" means a vehicle that is in such a state of
deterioration that it cannot be profitably dismantled or salvaged for parts and cannot be
profitably restored.
C. "Officer" means any police officer or other law enforcement officer.
D. "Vehicle registration agency" means the agency or department of any state that has
charge of the records of motor vehicle registration in that state.
Section 10-5-2 Abandonment Prohibited
A person shall not abandon a vehicle on any street, highway or private property within the town.
Section 10-5-3 Exemption
A motor vehicle eligible for licensing pursuant to Chapter 7, Article 14 of A.R.S. Title 28 or
A.R.S. § 28-2411 is not an abandoned vehicle and shall not be seized pursuant to this article or
any ordinance authorized by this article while the vehicle is stored or maintained on the vehicle
owner's private property.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-5-4 Vehicle Removal
A. An officer who has reasonable grounds to believe that a vehicle has been lost, stolen,
abandoned or otherwise unclaimed may remove or cause the removal of the vehicle from
any street, highway or private property.
B. If a person removes or causes the removal of an abandoned vehicle from private property,
the person shall both:
1. Obtain written authorization from the owner or lessee of the property on a form
prescribed by the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office.
2. Submit the form and the vehicle identification form to the Maricopa County Sheriff’s
Office.
C. An officer who has removed an abandoned vehicle pursuant to this section shall inspect
the vehicle and shall complete the vehicle identification form prescribed or approved by
the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office. The Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office shall make an
inquiry to determine whether the abandoned vehicle is a stolen abandoned vehicle.
D. A person who has removed or caused to be removed an abandoned vehicle from private
property shall have the vehicle inspected by an officer or agent of the Maricopa County
Sheriff’s Office. The officer or agent shall make an inquiry to determine whether the
abandoned vehicle is a stolen abandoned vehicle.
Section 10-5-5 Presumption of Responsibility
The abandonment of a vehicle in a manner provided in this article is a presumption that the last
registered owner of record is responsible for the abandonment and is subject to this article,
unless either:
A. An affidavit has been filed that the vehicle was stolen pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-4844.
B. A stolen report has been accepted by a local law enforcement agency.
Section 10-5-6 Towed Vehicles; Notification; Violation; Classification
A. Except if acting under the direction of a peace officer, a person who moves or tows a
vehicle into a public garage, parking lot, storage yard or automotive recycling yard or on
private property without the consent of the vehicle owner or the owner's agent shall notify
the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office by telephone within one hour of the time the vehicle
is moved or towed.
B. A person who fails to comply with this section forfeits all claims for towing and storing the
vehicle and is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-5-7 Towing and Storage Costs
A. Maricopa County shall not incur any liability for the cost of towing or storing a vehicle
removed under this article when its officer has removed or caused the removal of the
vehicle under color of the officer's lawful authority.
B. The owner of a vehicle that is removed or caused to be removed under this article is liable
for any reasonable costs incurred in towing or storing the vehicle.
Section 10-5-8 Disposition of Abandoned and Junk Vehicles
Any abandoned or junk vehicle seized under this article shall be disposed of in accordance with
A.R.S. § 28-4801 et seq.
ARTICLE 10-6 UNATTENDED CONTAINERS
No person shall place, display or maintain any unattended container for soliciting deposit of
recyclable materials or donated items in any exterior location within the town limits, except in
conformance with all of the following provisions:
A. Such unattended containers may be located only within the parking lot of private property
lawfully zoned, developed and used for commercial or industrial purposes or at schools,
churches or charitable organizations which have similar parking facilities.
B. Such unattended containers may be located only with the permission of the property
owner, his agent or the person in possession of the property, and the container owner's
name and current telephone number shall be displayed thereon in a conspicuous location.
C. No person shall leave any materials outside of a container. Each container owner shall
provide adequate collection pickups and cleanup of the general area to prevent any
materials from accumulating outside the containers. The owner of such unattended
container and the property owner shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintaining
all exterior areas within twenty-five feet of the container and shall keep such area free
from litter at all times. Violation of this section shall constitute a civil violation by both the
property owner and the owner of the unattended container.
ARTICLE 10-7 ON-SITE REST ROOM FACILITIES
All construction sites shall provide on-site rest room facilities for employees while construction is
occurring in conformance with all of the following provisions:
A. There shall be a minimum of one toilet provided on-site for every single-family residential
construction project. When the same general contractor has two single-family residential
construction projects on adjoining lots with the same street frontage, one toilet located as
close as possible to the common property line shall fulfill the requirements of this article
for both sites.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
B. When there is a non-single-family residential construction site, there shall be one toilet
facility for every five thousand square feet of building area. Any fraction thereof shall be
rounded up to require the additional toilet facility.
ARTICLE 10-8 AIR QUALITY AND FUGITIVE DUST
10-8-1 Purpose
10-8-2 Definitions
10-8-3 Enforcement, Violations, Notices and Penalties
10-8-4 Vehicle Parking and Use on Vacant Lots
10-8-5 Operation of Vehicles on Public and Private Property
10-8-6 Parking, Maneuvering, Ingress and Egress
10-8-7 Leaf Blower Restrictions
10-8-8 Compliance Monitoring
10-8-9 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance
10-8-10 Remedies Not Exclusive
10-8-11 Compatibility with Other Regulations
10-8-12 Severability
Section 10-8-1 Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the Town of Queen Creek by improving air quality through the regulation of Fugitive
Dust and PM-10 particles to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. The Town hereby finds and declares that this ordinance is not a land use law. The Town
hereby finds and declares the objectives of this ordinance are:
A. To regulate the contribution of Fugitive Dust and PM-l0 from any Town resident,
developer or visitor; and
B. To establish legal authority to implement all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and
enforcement procedures necessary for compliance with this ordinance; and
C. To meet requirements imposed by state and federal law; and
D. To limit or prohibit situations that could be recognized as public nuisances; and
E. To allow for the protection of the public’s health and safety, including, transportation or
traffic control, health and sanitation and pollution control.
Section 10-8-2 Definitions
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
A. “Area A”- means the part of the greater Phoenix metropolitan area where specific
pollution control programs are in place for ozone, carbon monoxide, and particulate
matter. As defined in Arizona Revised Statutes (ARS) §49-541(1).
B. “County Dust Control Permit” – means a permit issued by Maricopa County
evidencing that a dust generating operation has a satisfactory dust control plan in
place approved by the Maricopa County Air Quality Department.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
C. “Fugitive Dust” – means the particulate matter not collected by a capture system
that is entrained in the ambient air and is caused from human and/or natural activities,
such as, but not limited to, movement of soil, vehicles, equipment, blasting, and wind.
For the purpose of this ordinance, fugitive dust does not include particulate matter
emitted directly from the exhaust of motor vehicles and other internal combustion
engines, from portable brazing, soldering, or welding equipment, or from piledrivers.
D. “Landscape Debris” – means debris generated or accumulated as a result of, or
moved in the course of, landscape operations. Landscape debris includes, but is not
limited to, grass clippings, leaves, branches, vegetative matter, rubbish, soil and rock.
E. “Leaf Blower” – means any device that generates a stream of air that is designed, or
used, to move landscape debris.
F. “Off-Road Vehicle” – means a self-propelled device and its appurtenances,
including, but not limited to, off-road or all-terrain equipment, trucks, cars,
motorcycles, motorbikes, or motor buggies and excluding devices moved by human
power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks and excluding motorized
wheelchairs.
G. “PM-10” – means the standard adopted by the Environmental Protection Agency that
focuses on smaller particulates in the air that are likely responsible for adverse health
effects because of their ability to reach the lower regions of the respiratory tract. The
PM-10 standard includes particles with an aerodynamic diameter smaller than or
equal to ten (10) microns (micrometers) as measured by the applicable state and
federal reference test methods.
H. “Person” – means any individual, organization, public or private corporation or other
entity recognized by law, company, partnership, firm, association or society of
persons, the Federal Government and any of its departments or agencies, or the
State and any of its departments or agencies, or political subdivisions.
I. “Public Roadway” –means any street, alley, road, highway or thoroughfare of any
kind that is used by the public or that is open to the public as a matter of right, for the
purpose of vehicular travel.
J. “Town” – means the Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
K. “Unstabilized” – means a surface that has not been paved or stabilized with
asphaltic concrete, cement concrete, hardscape, penetration treatment of bituminous
material and seal coat of bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate, decomposed
granite cover, crushed granite cover, aggregate cover, gravel cover, or grass or other
continuous vegetative cover, or any combination of such paving or stabilizing.
L. “Vacant Lot” – means any of the following:
1. An unsubdivided or undeveloped tract of land.
2. A subdivided residential, industrial, institutional, governmental, or commercial lot
that contains no approved or permitted buildings, structures, or uses of a
temporary or permanent nature.
3. A partially developed residential, industrial, institutional, governmental, or
commercial lot.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
4. For the purpose of this ordinance, a vacant lot is not a public roadway.
M. “Vehicle” – means a self-propelled device and its appurtenances, excluding devices
moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
Section 10-8-3 Enforcement, Violations, Notices and Penalties
A. Responsibility for Administration
1. The Enforcement Officer, acting through and designated by the Town Manager,
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance involving
air quality and fugitive dust. The Enforcement Officer may enforce the provisions
of this ordinance when reasonable cause exists to believe that any person has
violated or is in violation of any provision of this ordinance.
2. The term “Enforcement Officer” means any person, who is either an employee,
agent or independent contractor, authorized by the Town Manager to administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance and who has authority to
enforce the Town of Queen Creek rules, regulations, resolutions and ordinances.
The “Enforcement Officer” may include more than one person, including a civil
hearing officer acting in compliance with A.R.S. §9-500.21.
B. Violations, Notices and Penalties of General Applicability for Ordinance
1. Unless an alternative process or penalty is expressly indicated within this
ordinance or the Town Code, when the Enforcement Officer has reasonable
cause to believe that any person has violated or is in violation of any provision of
this ordinance, the Enforcement Officer shall issue, for the first violation of this
ordinance, a warning notice stating which requirement of the ordinance was
violated.
2. Unless an alternative process or penalty is expressly indicated within this
ordinance or the Town Code, subsequent violations of this Article shall be
considered Civil Violations subject to the procedures set forth in Section 10-11-2.
Notwithstanding the fines set forth in Section 10-11-2 of this Code, for violations
of this Article, the Enforcement Officer may impose a civil penalty of $50 for the
second violation of this ordinance. Upon a third violation of this ordinance, the
Enforcement Officer may impose a civil penalty of $100. After the fourth and
subsequent violations of this ordinance, the Enforcement Officer may impose a
civil penalty of $ 250.
C. This Ordinance shall not apply during a period of public emergency as declared by
the Town, state authorities or federal authorities or if the operation is directed by a
peace officer or other public authority.
D. Pursuant to A.R.S. §9-500.04(H), the requirements of Sections 10-8-4, 10-8-6 and 10-
8-7 of this ordinance do not apply to any site that has a permit issued by a control
officer as defined in A.R.S. §49-471 for the control of fugitive dust from dust
generating operations.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-8-4 Vehicle Parking and Use on Vacant Lots
A person shall not park or use a vehicle on an unstabilized vacant lot within the Town. This
section does not apply to sites that have been issued a County Dust Control Permit for the
control of fugitive dust from dust generating operations.
Section 10-8-5 Operation of Vehicles on Public and Private Property
A. A person shall not operate any vehicle, including off-road vehicles, on unpaved public
property that is not a public roadway or lawful easement, without lawful authority.
Lawful authority shall consist of rules, regulations, or orders of a federal agency, this
state, a county or municipality, which shall be made available to the public by any one
of the following methods:
1. A sign to designate the property is/as open. Such sign shall be in compliance with
the standard travel management sign protocol used by Southwest Land
Management Agencies and shall at a minimum be conspicuously placed at all
points of vehicular access and contain the following information: "Travel Must
Remain On Designated Routes." Copies of the standard travel management sign
protocol are available for review at the Maricopa County Air Quality Department,
1001 North Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ, 85004;
2. Orders of a government land management agency;
3. Most current maps approved by such government land management agency; and
4. Virtual posting from a government land management agency.
B. A person shall not operate any vehicle, including off-road vehicles, on unpaved
private property that is not a private road, street or lawful easement and that is closed
by the landowner by rule or regulation of a federal agency, this state, a county or a
municipality or by a proper posting, without the consent of the lawful owner. Consent
of the lawful owner consists of either or both of the following:
1. A sign to designate the property is/as open. Such sign shall be in compliance with
the standard travel management sign protocol used by Southwest Land
Management Agencies and shall at a minimum be conspicuously placed at all
points of vehicular access and contain the following information: "Travel Must
Remain On Designated Routes." Copies of the standard travel management sign
protocol are available for review at the Maricopa County Air Quality Department,
1001 North Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ, 85004;
2. Prior written permission which contains the following:
(a) the name, address and telephone number of the person granting
permission for the use of the property;
(b) a description of the interest the person granting permission has in the
property (i.e., property owner, lessee or agent);
(c) if the person granting permission is not the owner of the property, the
written permission shall also contain the name, address and telephone
number of the property owner;
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
(d) specific period of time for which permission for the use of the property is
being granted; and
(e) The signature of the person granting permission for the use of the
property.
C. Whenever any person is stopped by an Enforcement Officer for a violation of Section
10-7-5 of this ordinance, he/she shall, upon the request of the Enforcement Officer
identify or present the lawful authority or consent of the lawful owner required in this
section
D. The property owner, person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or
invitee who has lawful authority may operate such vehicles on the property if such use
does not violate any other applicable laws.
E. Exemptions:
1. This Section 10-8-5 shall not apply to the operation of vehicles used in the normal
course of business or the normal course of government operations.
2. This Section 10-8-5 shall not apply to operations directed by utilities for operation,
distribution and transmission systems provided that both of the following
conditions are satisfied: (a) operations are performed with a marked company
vehicle; and (b) if operations are performed with a personal vehicle, then
identification of the company shall be visible and readable by the public.
F. As mandated by A.R.S. §9-500.27, a person who violates this section 10-8-5 of the
ordinance is guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor.
G. As mandated by A.R.S. §9-500.27, if a person is deemed to have violated this section
10-7-5, in addition to or in lieu of a fine, a judge may order the person to perform at
least eight (8) but not more than twenty-four (24) hours of community restitution or to
complete an approved safety course related to the off-highway operation of motor
vehicles, or both.
Section 10-8-6 Parking, Maneuvering, Ingress and Egress
A. Other than Residential. All persons who are owners, tenants or operators shall
maintain parking, maneuvering, ingress and egress areas at developments other than
residential buildings with four (4) or fewer units with one or more of the following
dustproof paving methods:
1. Asphaltic concrete;
2. Cement concrete;
3. Penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous binder
and a mineral aggregate;
4. A stabilization method approved by the Town.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
B. Residential. All persons who are owners, tenants or operators shall maintain parking,
maneuvering, ingress and egress areas that are three thousand (3,000) square feet
or more in size at residential buildings with four (4) or fewer units with a paving or
stabilization method authorized by the Town Code or permit.
Section 10-8-7 Leaf Blower Restrictions
A. A person shall not operate a leaf blower in a manner that causes landscape debris to
be blown into a public roadway.
B. No person who is an employee or contractor of the Town shall operate a leaf blower
on any high pollution advisory day forecast by the department of environmental
quality, except while in vacuum mode.
Section 10-8-8 Compliance Monitoring
The Town shall be permitted to enter and inspect property subject to regulation under this
ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance.
A. If a property owner has security measures in force, which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the property owner shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Town, including the
Enforcement Officer.
B. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property to
be inspected shall be promptly removed by the property owner at the written or oral
request of the Town, including the Enforcement Officer, and shall not be replaced.
The costs of such access shall be borne by the property owner.
Section 10-8-9 Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
In addition to the enforcement process and penalties provided herein, any condition caused
or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public
health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily
abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or
otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
Section 10-8-10 Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under
any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the Town to seek
cumulative remedies.
The Town may recover all attorneys’ fees, court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this ordinance, including monitoring expenses.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-8-11 Compatibility With Other Regulations
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or
other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements
of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of
this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards of human health or the environment shall control.
Section 10-8-12 Severability
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision,
clause, sentence or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provision or application of this ordinance.
ARTICLE 10-9 SOLID WASTE SERVICES; BULK WASTE SERVICES;
RECYCLING SERVICES; ANIMAL WASTE SERVICES FOR
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
10-9-1 Purpose
10-9-2 Definitions
10-9-3 Applicability
10-9-4 Presumption of Responsibility
10-9-5 Residential Waste Services – Mandatory; Animal Waste Service
Optional
10-9-6 Temporary Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services
10-9-7 Accumulation and Storage Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program
Recyclables and Animal Waste
10-9-8 Location for Collection of Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program
Recyclables and Animal Waste
10-9-9 Time for placement for Collection of Solid Waste, Bulk Waste,
Program Recyclables and Animal Waste
10-9-10 Cart Responsibilities
10-9-11 Cart Costs for New Residential Waste Service Units
10-9-12 Ownership of Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program Recyclables and
Animal Waste
10-9-13 Rates, Charges, Fees and Payments
10-9-14 Prohibited Acts
10-9-15 Rules and Regulations
10-9-16 Inspections
10-9-17 Vector Control
10-9-18 Cart Repossession
10-9-19 Termination of Services; Lien for Unpaid Charges
10-9-20 Enforcement as a Civil Code Violation
10-9-21 Exemptions
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-9-1 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Queen
Creek, and establish a sustainable community by providing standards for the safe and sanitary
provision of Solid Waste Services, Bulk Waste Services and Recycling Services for residential
dwellings (“Residential Waste Service Units” as defined herein) within the Town. Nothing in this
Article shall be construed to impinge upon or supplant the authority of the county health
department, state department of health services or other public agency having exclusive legal
jurisdiction over any matter which is the subject of this Article.
Section 10-9-2 Definitions
In this Article, unless the context otherwise requires:
“Administrator" — Administrator shall mean the Town Manager of the Town, or his designee
or designees, who shall represent the Town in the administration of this Article.
“Animal Waste” — Animal Waste shall mean any unsanitary waste from the breeding, raising,
containing, maintaining or grooming of animals from stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken
coops, places of residence, veterinary establishments or other places of a similar nature.
Animal Waste shall include manure.
“Animal Waste Services” — Animal Waste Services shall mean the collection of Animal
Waste, delivery of Animal Waste to the Disposal Facility or the Recycling Facility, and
the disposal of Animal Waste at the Disposal Facility or recycling of Animal Waste at the
Recycling Facility.
“Audio/Video Equipment” — Audio/Video Equipment shall mean televisions, stereos, radios,
amplifiers, projectors, satellite and cable equipment, video equipment, VCR’s, CD
player, Video game equipment, surveillance equipment, cameras, broadcasting
equipment, communications equipment, and other electronic equipment of a similar
nature.
"Backdoor" — Backdoor shall mean a location at the front, side or rear of a Residential Waste
Service Unit designated by the Town for Solid Waste Services and Recycling Services
for the Residential Waste Service Units.
“Batteries” — Batteries shall mean alkaline batteries, nickel cadmium batteries, lead acid
batteries, lithium batteries, and other electronic equipment of a similar nature.
“Bag” — Bag shall mean non-dissolvable leak proof plastic sacks with a capacity of up to
approximately thirty-two (32) gallons designed or intended to store Solid Waste with
sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top.
"Bulk Waste" — Bulk Waste shall mean Solid Waste composed of materials not easily
containerized in a Cart such as, but not limited to, Green Waste, furniture, cardboard
and large appliances. Bulk Waste shall not include Animal Waste or Excluded Waste.
"Bulk Waste Services" — Bulk Waste Services shall mean the collection of Bulk Waste by the
Contractor, delivery of Bulk Waste to the Disposal Facility or the Recycling Facility by the
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Contractor, and the disposal of Bulk Waste at the Disposal Facility or recycling of Bulk
Waste at the Recycling Facility by the Contractor.
"Cart" — Cart shall mean a receptacle with wheels with a capacity of up to approximately
ninety-five (95) gallons designed or intended to be mechanically dumped into a loaderpacker
type truck and approved for use by the Town.
"Collection" — Collection shall mean the act of picking up Residential Solid Waste, Bulk
Waste, or Animal Waste from Residential Waste Service Units, or Neighborhood
Recycling Drop-off Sites, and delivery of the Residential Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, or
Animal Waste to the Disposal Facility. Collection shall also mean the act of picking up
Program Recyclables, Animal Waste, Electronics, or tires from Residential Waste
Service Units, or Neighborhood Recycling Drop-off Sites, and delivery of the Program
Recyclables or Animal Waste to the Recycling Facility.
“Computer Equipment” — Computer Equipment shall mean PC’s, laptops, CRT monitors,
modems, switches, hubs and routers, storage devices, main frames, servers, power
supplies, tape libraries, circuit boards, power cords, printers, wire and cabling, surplus
metals, mice, keyboards, hard drives, floppy, DVD and CD drives, and other electronic
equipment of a similar nature.
"Construction Waste" — Construction Debris shall mean solid waste derived from the
construction, repair or remodeling of buildings or other structures.
"Contractor" — Contractor shall mean the person or entity engaged by the Town to perform
Solid Waste Services, Bulk Waste Services and Recycling Services for Residential
Waste Service Units within the Town.
“Curbside” — Curbside shall mean within five (5) feet of the street or alleyway that provides
primary access to the Residential Waste Service Unit as designated by the Town.
"Demolition Waste" — Demolition Waste shall mean solid waste derived from the demolition of
buildings or other structures.
“Dispose”, “Disposed” or "Disposal" — Dispose, Disposed, or Disposal shall mean the
discharge, deposit injection, dumping, spilling, leaking of any Residential Solid Waste,
Town Facility Solid Waste, Special Event Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, or Animal Waste at a
Disposal Facility operated in accordance with laws.
"Disposal Facility" — Disposal Facility shall mean a facility, area of land or excavation in Town
Facility Solid Waste, Special Event Solid Waste, Bulk Waste which Residential Solid
Waste, and Animal Waste is placed for permanent disposal. Disposal Facility does not
include a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, compost pile or
waste pile or an area containing ash from the on-site combustion of coal that does not
contain household waste, household hazardous waste or conditionally exempt small
quantity generator waste.
“Electronic Components” — Electronic Components shall mean capacitors diodes, resistors,
transistor and integrated circuits, and other electronic equipment of a similar nature.
“Electronics” — Electronics shall mean Computer Equipment, Point of Sale Equipment,
Telecom Equipment, Printing Equipment, Audio/ Visual Equipment, Batteries, Electronic
Components, household appliance, surplus metals and wire and cable, test equipment,
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
lab equipment, connectors, ballasts, power strips, and other electronic equipment of a
similar nature.
“Excluded Waste” — Excluded Waste shall mean Hazardous Waste, Electronics, Construction
Waste and Demolition Waste, latex and oil based paints, stains and varnishes,
adhesives, motor oil, antifreeze, transmission fluids, gasoline and diesel fuel, pesticides
and fungicides, pool chemicals, household cleaners, propane tanks, camping cylinders,
fire extinguishers, fluorescent and CFL light bulbs, and automobile and household
batteries.
"Green Waste" — Green Waste shall mean organic yard waste, including but not limited to,
grass clippings, tree trimmings, brush clippings, and other organic yard waste of a
similar nature.
"Hazardous Waste" — Hazardous Waste shall have the meaning set forth in Arizona
Administrative Code Section R18-8-261.
“Large Lot” - Large Lot shall mean any residential lot on which Large Livestock is legally kept
in conformance with the Town Zoning Ordinance, or any residential lot of two (2) acres
or more.
“Laws” – Laws shall mean any and all Federal, State and local laws, statutes, regulations,
rulings, ordinances and policies.
“Neighborhood Recycling Drop-off Site” — Neighborhood Recycling Drop-off Site shall
mean any site designated by the Town for drop-off of Program Recyclables. The Town
has the sole authority to add or eliminate Neighborhood Recycling Drop-off Sites.
“Point of Sale Equipment” — Point of Sale Equipment shall mean credit card machines,
printers, scanners, and other electronic equipment of a similar nature.
“Printing Equipment” — Printing Equipment shall mean printers, fax machines and copiers,
calculators, typewriters and printer cartridges, and other electronic equipment of a
similar nature.
"Program Aluminum and Steel Recyclables" — Program Aluminum and Steel Recyclables
shall mean aluminum used beverage containers, aluminum foil, aluminum pie plates,
scrap aluminum, steel “tin” food cans, bi-metal containers, aerosol cans, and lids
composed primarily of whole iron or steel.
“Program Glass Recyclables” — Program Glass Recyclables shall mean clear, brown, and
green glass food and beverage jars and bottles with or without paper labels, rings, and
lids. Program Glass Recyclables shall not mean window glass, porcelain and china are
not acceptable.
“Program Paper Recyclables” — Program Paper Recyclables shall mean (i) all loose or
bagged Kraft paper, all loose or bagged old corrugated containers that have liners of
Kraft, jute, or test liner including dry food boxes, beer and soda carriers, and shoe
boxes, (ii) all loose or bagged old newspaper including slick paper inserts, and (iii) all
junk mail, junk mail inserts, residential mixed paper, bagged shredded paper, high-grade
paper, white and colored ledger, copier paper, office paper, laser printer paper,
computer paper including continuous-formed perforated white bond or green bar paper,
book paper, cotton fiber content paper, duplicator paper, form bond, manifold business
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
forms, mimeo paper, note pad paper (no backing), loose leaf fillers, stationery, writing
paper, paper envelopes without plastic windows, carbonless (NCR) paper, tabulating
cards, facsimile paper, manila folders, magazines, paperback books, small catalogs,
telephone books and Yellow Pages .
“Program Plastic Recyclables” — Program Glass Recyclables shall mean any #1 through #7
rigid plastic bottle, containers, jugs, or jars.
"Program Recyclables" — Program Recyclables shall mean Program Aluminum and Steel
Recyclables, Program Glass Recyclables, Program Paper Recyclables, and Program
Plastic Recyclables. Program Recyclables shall not include Animal Waste or Excluded
Waste.
"Recyclable Materials"— Recyclable Materials shall mean those materials which are capable
of being recycled, which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as Solid Waste,
and which are approved by the Town for Recycling Services. Recyclable Materials
shall not include Excluded Waste.
"Recycling" — Recycling shall mean any process by which materials which would otherwise
become Solid Waste are collected, processed and marketed for reuse or return to use in
the form of raw materials or products.
"Recycling Container" – Recycling Container shall mean any metal or plastic container, with a
capacity of approximately three hundred (300) gallons designed to or intended to be
mechanically dumped into a loader-packer type garbage truck and used for
Neighborhood Recycling Drop-off Site Services. All such Recycling Containers must be
clearly marked in a manner approved by the Town.
"Recycling Services" — Recycling Services shall mean the collection of Single Stream
Recyclable Materials from Residential Waste Service Units, or Neighborhood Drop-off
Recycling Sites, delivery of Recyclable Materials to Recycling Facility, and processing of
Recyclable Materials at the Recycling Facility, and marketing of Recyclable Materials by
the Recycling Facility.
“Resident” — Resident shall mean a person residing at a Residential Waste Service Unit.
“Residential Waste Service Area” — Residential Waste Service Area shall mean Residential
Waste Service Area as described by separate resolution on file with the Town Clerk.
"Residential Waste Service Unit" — Residential Waste Service Unit shall mean a residential
dwelling identified by the Town to receive Residential Waste Services and utilizing a
Solid Waste Cart for the accumulation and storage of Residential Solid Waste.
"Residential Waste Services" — Residential Waste Services shall mean the provision of (i)
once per week collection of one (1) Solid Waste Cart, Services, (ii) once per week
collection of one (1) Recycling Cart, and (iii) once per month collection of six (6) cubic
yards of Bulk Waste. Residential Waste Services may include the provision of optional
collection of (i) additional Solid Waste Cart(s), (ii) Non-collection Day Solid Waste Cart
(iii) additional Recycling Cart(s), (iv) additional collection of Bulk Waste, and (v)
collection of Animal Waste, where such election is made pursuant to this Article.
“Single Stream" — Single Stream shall mean a recycling process in which Recyclable
Materials are collected mixed together with no sorting required by the Residential Waste
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Service Unit, Neighborhood Recycling Drop-off Site or other Person generating the
Recyclable Materials.
"Solid Waste" — Solid Waste shall mean any garbage, trash, rubbish, waste tire, refuse,
sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or pollution control
facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material (as set forth in Section 49-701.01(A) of the Arizona Revised Statutes)
unless otherwise excluded by the provisions of Sections 49-701.01(B) or 49-701.02 of
the Arizona Revised Statutes. Solid Waste shall not include Animal Waste or Excluded
Waste.
"Solid Waste Services" — Solid Waste Services shall mean the collection of Solid Waste,
delivery of Solid Waste to the Disposal Facility, and the disposal of Solid Waste at the
Disposal Facility.
“Telecom Equipment” — Telecom Equipment shall mean telephones, cell phones, CSU/DSU
multiplexing equipment, phone systems, answering systems, and other electronic
equipment of a similar nature.
“Vector” — Vector shall mean rodents, flies and mosquitoes capable of transmitting disease to
humans.
Section 10-9-3 Applicability
Except where expressly provided otherwise in this Chapter, this Article shall apply to Solid
Waste Services, Bulk Waste Services, Recycling Services, and Animal Waste Services for
Residential Waste Service Units.
Section 10-9-4 Presumption of Responsibility
The Resident(s) and the property owner (if different than the Resident(s)) of any Residential
Waste Service Unit shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable laws relating to the
Residential Waste Service Unit, including compliance with this Chapter.
Section 10-9-5 Residential Waste Services Mandatory; Animal Waste Service
Optional
A. Except where expressly provided otherwise in this Article, all Residential Service
Units currently served by a water system and located within the Town Residential
Waste Service Area shall be provided Residential Waste Services by Town forces, or
the Town’s Contractor, and pay the rates as provided by Town resolution. Except
where expressly provided otherwise in this Article, every person residing in a
Residential Waste Service Unit served by a water system and located within the
Town Residential Waste Service Area shall cause Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, and
Program Recyclables to be collected by Town forces, or the Town’s Contractor.
B. Animal Waste may be collected by Town forces, or the Town’s Contractor, as set
forth herein, but is not required.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-9-6 Temporary Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services
Any Residential Waste Service Unit currently served by a water system and located within the
Town Residential Waste Service Area may be granted a Temporary Discontinuance of
Residential Waste Services by the Town if:
A. The Resident in the Residential Waste Service Unit submits a written request for
Temporary Discontinuance of Mandatory Residential Waste Services in accordance
with the Town’s Application for Temporary Discontinuance of Mandatory Residential
Waste Services; and
B. The requested period for Temporary Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services
is for a minimum period of two (2) consecutive calendar months and a maximum
period of six (6) consecutive calendar months; and
C. The requested period for Temporary Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services
combined with granted written request(s) for Temporary Discontinuance of
Residential Waste Services for the same calendar year does not exceed a total of six
(6) calendar months for the calendar year; and
D. Town receives the Residential Waste Service Unit’s Temporary Discontinuance of
Residential Waste Services application for Temporary Discontinuation of Residential
Waste Services a minimum of one (1) calendar month and a maximum of three (3)
calendar months prior to requested start date for Temporary Discontinuance of
Residential Waste Services; and
E. The Resident in the Residential Waste Service Unit submits the Temporary
Discontinuation Fee in accordance with the Town’s Application Temporary
Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services form.
A Resident may terminate the Temporary Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services and
resume receiving Residential Waste Services for a Residential Waste Service Unit by following
the procedures set forth in the Town’s Application for Temporary Discontinuation of Residential
Waste Services form and paying any applicable fee set by the Town. If a Cart(s) or Bulk Waste
is placed at the curbside of the Residential Waste Service Unit granted a Temporary
Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services during the period of time for which the Temporary
Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services has been granted without properly terminating
the Temporary Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services as set forth above, the Town shall
terminate the Temporary Discontinuance of Mandatory Residential Waste Services and no
further Temporary Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services for that Residential Waste
Services Unit shall be permitted for twelve (12) consecutive calendar months following the date
of termination of the Temporary Discontinuance of Residential Waste Services by the Town.
Upon termination of the Temporary Discontinuation of Residential Waste Services, Residential
Waste Services will resume, and all rates, charges and fees under § 10-8-13 below will apply
commencing on that date forward.
Section 10-9-7 Accumulation and Storage Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program
Recyclables, and Animal Waste
Except where expressly provided otherwise in this Chapter, Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program
Recyclables, and Animal Waste shall be accumulated and stored in conformance with the
following provisions:
A. Solid Waste. Residents shall accumulate and store Solid Waste in bags that are
tightly secured to where odors cannot escape, flies or other vectors cannot pass, and
uncontained Solid Waste shall not release dust or other particles. Residents shall
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
place bags containing Solid Waste in Carts designated by the Town for collection of
Solid Waste with the Cart lid completely closed. Residents shall accumulate and
store Solid Waste within the Residential Waste Service Unit until placement as set
forth in this Chapter.
B. Bulk Waste. Residents shall accumulate and store Bulk Waste within the
Residential Waste Service Unit until placement as set forth in this Chapter.
C. Program Recyclables. Residents shall not accumulate and/or store Program
Recyclables in bags prior to being placed in Recycling Carts or Recycling Containers
designated by the Town for collection of Program Recyclables. Residents shall
place Program Recyclables in Recycling Carts designated by the Town for collection
of Program Recyclables with the Cart lid completely closed. Residents shall place
Program Recyclables in Recycling Containers designated by the Town for collection
of Program Recyclables as instructed by the Town on the Recycling Container.
Residents shall accumulate and store Program Recyclables within the Residential
Waste Service Unit until placement as set forth in this Chapter.
D. Animal Waste. For Residents electing to receive Animal Waste Services by Town
forces, Residents shall accumulate and store Animal Waste to be collected by Town
forces, including manure, in bags that are tightly secured so that odors cannot
escape, and flies or other vectors cannot pass into or out of the bags. Residents
shall dry manure prior to accumulation and storage in tightly secured bags.
Residents shall place bags containing Animal Waste in Carts designated by the
Town for collection of Animal Waste with the Cart lid completely closed. Residents
shall accumulate and store Animal Waste within the Residential Waste Service Unit
until placement in the appropriate Cart as set forth in this Article.
Section 10-9-8 Location for Collection of Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program
Recyclables, and Animal Waste
Residents shall place Solid Waste in Carts designated by the Town for collection of Solid
Waste, Program Recyclables in Carts designated by the Town for collection of Program
Recyclables, and Animal Waste in Carts designated by the Town for collection of Animal Waste
at the:
A. Solid Waste and Program Recyclables.
(1) Curbside. For Residents not deemed approved for collection of Solid Waste and
Program Recyclables at the backdoor, Residents shall place Solid Waste and
Program Recyclables at the curbside with the lids closed, the lids opening toward
the street, and a minimum of two (2) feet apart to facilitate automated collection.
Residents shall place Carts away from street light poles, mail boxes and parked
cars. If parked cars prevent access by mechanized collection vehicles to the
sidewalk or driveway, Residents shall place the Carts in the street away from
such parked cars. Residents shall not place Carts in such a manner as to create
a pedestrian hazard, impair the use of the sidewalk or interfere with vehicular
traffic.
(2) Backdoor. If the Town deems all Residents of a Residential Waste Service Unit
are handicapped or due to age or verified physical limitations cannot safely move
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
a Cart, the Residents of such Residential Waste Service Units shall place Solid
Waste and Recycling Carts at the backdoor.
B. Bulk Waste. Residents shall place Bulk Waste neatly in a consolidated pile at
the curbside. Residents shall not place Bulk Waste in a location as to block
Carts, to create a pedestrian hazard, impair the use of the sidewalk or interfere
with vehicular traffic.
C. Animal Waste. For Residents electing to receive Animal Waste Services by Town
forces, Residents shall place Carts designated by the Town for collection of
Animal Waste at the curbside with the lids closed, the lids opening toward the street,
and a minimum of two (2) feet apart to facilitate automated collection. Residents
shall place Carts away from street light poles, mail boxes and parked cars. If parked
cars prevent access by mechanized collection vehicles to the sidewalk or driveway,
Residents shall place the Carts in the street away from such parked cars. Residents
shall not place Carts in such a manner as to create a pedestrian hazard, impair the
use of the sidewalk or interfere with vehicular traffic.
Section 10-9-9 Time for placement for Collection of Solid Waste, Bulk Waste,
Program Recyclables, and Animal Waste
Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program Recyclables, and Animal Waste shall be placed at the
curbside prior to 6:00 a.m. on the designated collection day, but shall not be placed at the
curbside before 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding the designated collection day. Carts must be
removed from the curb by end of day on the day of collection and shall be secured at the
Residential Waste Service Unit between collection days in such a manner that they are not
readily susceptible to theft or vandalism.
Section 10-9-10 Cart Responsibilities
Residents shall be responsible for the following:
A. Weight Limitations of Carts. Residents to ensure optimal use of Carts and
collection equipment and/or prevent the injury or harm to those Town or Contractor
staff shall ensure the contents of the Cart shall not exceed two hundred (200)
pounds.
B. Capacity Limitations of Carts. Residents to ensure optimal use of Carts and
collection equipment and/or prevent the injury or harm to those Town or Contractor
staff shall ensure the contents of the Cart shall not exceed the following capacity
limitations:
(1) Carts designated for collection of Solid Waste: ninety-five (95) gallons
(2) Carts designated for collection of Program Recyclables: ninety-five (95) gallons
(3) Carts designated for collection of Animal Waste
i. Animal Waste Half Cart Collection: forty-three (43) gallons
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
ii. Animal Waste Full Cart Collection: ninety-five (95) gallons
C. Ownership of Carts. All Carts are the property of the Town. Residents shall ensure
all Carts remain at the Residential Waste Service Unit after the Residential Waste
Service Unit is sold or new Resident(s) move in. Resident shall be responsible for
maintaining the Carts at the Residential Waste Service Unit.
D. Replacement of Carts. The Town will provide replacement Carts at no additional
expense to the Resident of a Residential Waste Service Unit where replacement is
necessary because of normal wear and tear caused by proper usage. The Resident
of a Residential Waste Service Unit shall be charged and shall be responsible for full
payment of a fee set forth by Town Council resolution when replacement of a Cart is
required because of something other than normal wear and tear caused by proper
usage.
E. Maintenance of Carts. The Resident of a Residential Waste Service Unit shall
ensure Carts are maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and used only for their
intended purpose.
Section 10-9-11 Cart Costs for New Residential Waste Service Units
The initial cost of providing Carts, including the cost of assembling such carts, for newly
constructed Residential Waste Service Units shall be set forth by Town Council resolution and
shall be paid by the person applying for the initial building permit for each new Residential
Waste Service Unit at the same time that the fees for the residential building permit are paid.
When property with a Residential Waste Service Unit located thereon is annexed into the Town,
the owner of such property shall pay the initial cost to the Town of providing such property with
Carts.
Section 10-9-12 Ownership of Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program Recyclables, and
Animal Waste
Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program Recyclables, and Animal Waste that is not: (i) Excluded
Waste or (ii) otherwise prohibited under applicable law or this Chapter, that is set out for
collection, transportation, storage, disposal or recovery by the Town shall become the sole
property of the Town, or it’s Contractor, when it is taken into the actual or constructive
possession of the Town or it’s Contractor.
Section 10-9-13 Rates, Charges, Fees and Payment
The Town Council by resolution may adopt, set or amend the fees, rates, payments, penalties
and charges related to this Article 10-8, which resolution shall be on file with the Town Clerk. In
addition, the following provisions shall apply:
A. When Residential Waste Services are made available, a monthly charge shall be
imposed upon all Residential Waste Service Units in accordance with the Town
resolution plus any additional fees, taxes, or charges, regardless of how they are
designated, that are or may be imposed by the state or federal government, or by a
regional authority, in respect to either individual or municipal action relating to this
Article. Except as provided in subsection F below or Section 10-8-6 above, the basic
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
monthly charges as described herein shall apply regardless of the nature and extent
of services actually provided to a Residential Waste Service Unit by the Town.
B. In case of a multiple-dwelling unit, the charge shall be billed to the Resident whom
the water bill is addressed and who shall be liable for the payment thereof.
C. All charges incurred pursuant to the provisions of this article shall become due and
payable when a utility bill is prepared by the Town and shall become a personal debt
of the Resident. Except when specific payment arrangements have been made in
advance of the delinquent date, all charges levied pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall become delinquent if unpaid twenty (20) calendar days after the utility bill
is prepared.
D. It is the responsibility of the person or persons in whose name or names an account
has been established to pay all charges in full and on a timely basis. Failure to
receive a utility bill will not excuse the account holder or holders from full and timely
payment for the services.
E. Charges for first and final bills with billing periods more or less than one (1) month
shall be prorated.
F. The Town may discontinue monthly service charges to a Residential Waste Service
Unit if the Town receives notice from the Resident or owner of the Residential Waste
Service Unit, in writing, that the Residential Waste Service Unit(s) have been
permanently abandoned, or receives notice from the Town or county health officer
that the Residential Waste Service Unit(s) have been condemned as not habitable,
or unsanitary and dangerous to human life.
Section 10-9-14 Prohibited Acts
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following, all of which shall be a civil code
infraction as defined under Section 5-7-1(A), and subject to Article 5-7, of the Town Code:
A. To collect Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, or Program Recyclables from Residential Waste
Service Units without an executed Agreement for the provision of such services.
B. To place or cause to be placed any Solid Waste, Bulk Waste, Program Recyclables,
or Animal Waste upon the property of another without proper authority.
C. To deposit any Excluded Waste in any cart.
D. To place or cause to be placed any Solid Waste, Program Recyclables, or Animal
Waste in the Cart belonging to another without proper authority.
E. To remove any materials, without proper authority, from any Cart belonging to
another which contains materials set out for Residential Waste Services;
F. To place or cause to be placed any Solid Waste in the Cart designated by the Town
for collection of Program Recyclables or Animal Waste.
G. To place or cause to be placed any Animal Waste in the Cart designated by the
Town for collection of Solid Waste or Program Recyclables.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
H. To place or cause to be placed any Program Recyclables in the Cart designated by
the Town for collection of Animal Waste.
I. To have a Cart that was not issued by the Town for the property where located.
J. To encourage, permit or fail to restrain a vicious animal from interfering with
employees performing Residential Waste Services acting in the course of their
employment. "Vicious animal" means any animal of a vicious species or an animal of
a domesticated species, including, but not limited to, cats and dogs, which is prone
to, or known to, attack persons without provocation.
K. To park a vehicle in such a way as to obstruct access to a Solid Waste, Recycling, or
Animal Waste Cart placed out for collection service, to obstruct any right-of-way, or
to obstruct or interfere with Residential Waste Services in any other manner.
L. To do any act prohibited or to fail to do any act required under this Article.
M. To burn Solid Waste, except in incinerators, as may be permitted by the county and
the Town. Any burning of Solid Waste must comply with the rules and regulations
established by the Arizona Department of Health Services and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
Section 10-9-15 Rules and Regulations
The Administrator shall make such rules and regulations as may be deemed reasonably
necessary concerning the Residential Waste Services and other wastes by the Town, its
authorized agents, licensees or permittees, including Contractor; or relating to the operation of
any recycling or waste reduction program or other similar activities or facilities. Copies of such
rules and regulations shall be filed with the office of the Town clerk. The rules and regulations
shall be made available to the public upon request.
Section 10-9-16 Inspections
Town may conduct inspections of Carts to ensure compliance with, and knowledge of, the
provisions of this Article. The Town may provide notice of compliance violations prior to
undertaking formal enforcement action pursuant to procedures established by the Administrator.
Inspections of restricted access areas on private property shall not be conducted without prior
notice to the Resident or property owner. Prior to collection the Town shall have the right to
inspect Carts and their contents.
Section 10-9-17 Vector Control
The Town has the authority to develop, administer, and enforce rules, regulations and
procedures to control vectors in accordance with county and state vector control rules and
regulations. All users shall be responsible for properly bagging materials consistent with, and
otherwise complying with, such rules regulations and procedures.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-9-18 Cart Repossession
In addition to any other actions or remedies it may pursue, the Town has the authority to
repossess Town owned Carts from Residents and/or property owners who fail to comply with
the requirements of this Article.
Section 10-9-19 Termination of services; lien for unpaid charges
A. Any and all unpaid charges for Residential Waste Services provided pursuant to this
Article shall constitute a lien on the real property, lot or tract of land benefited by the
Residential Waste Services. The lien shall be imposed in accordance with the
applicable law and unpaid charges under this Article may be consolidated with
amounts subject to lien upon the Residential Waste Service Unit by the Town.
B. In addition, delinquent charges may be collected by a civil suit, instituted in the name
of the Town by the Town attorney at the request of the Town at any time after the
charges become delinquent. The remedy provided by this section is cumulative and
supplemental to all other remedies provided under this article.
C. In addition, the Town may assign delinquent accounts to a bona fide collection
agency for collection.
Section 10-9-20 Enforcement and Inspection
Representatives of the Town may conduct inspections of waste storage, collection, hauling and
disposal activities to ensure compliance with, and knowledge of, the provisions of this Article.
The Town may provide notice of compliance violations prior to undertaking formal enforcement
action pursuant to procedures established by the administrator. These Actions may include, but
are not limited to, placing additional carts at the owner’s and/or Resident(s)’ expense, fines, or
both, as determined by the administrator. Disposal of hazardous or excluded waste may be
removed and disposed of by the Town at either the Resident(s) and/or the property owner’s
expense.
Section 10-9-21 Exemptions
A. Application for Exemption. A Resident may apply to the Administrator, in writing on
forms provided by the Town, to have an individual Residential Service Unit be exempt
from only the Solid Waste Services and Bulk Waste Services requirements of § 10-9-5 if
both of the following requirements are met:
(1) The Residential Service Unit is on a Large Lot; and
(2) The Resident can establish to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the Resident
has available and will utilize alternative services for disposal of Solid Waste that fully
comply with all Town, county, state, and federal rules, regulations and statues that
apply to such disposal.
B. Determination of Exemption. Upon a determination by the Administrator that all of the
above requirements have been fully met, the Administrator shall have discretion to grant
an exemption for the Residential Service Unit upon such conditions as the Administrator
may determine are appropriate, if the Administrator determines that an exception is
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
consistent with the purpose of this Article as set forth in § 10-9-1 of this Article and is in
the best interest of the Town. A resident may appeal the determination of the
Administrator by filing a written appeal with the Town Clerk within ten (10) business days
after the date of the Administrator’s determination, and all such appeals will be resolved
by the Town Manager, if the Town Manager is not acting as the Administrator, or by the
Town Council if the Town Manager is acting as the Administrator, within a reasonable
time after the filing of the appeal.
C. Recycling Services Applicable to Exempt Residential Service Unit. Any Residential
Services Unit granted an exemption as provided herein shall continue to receive
Recycling Services, and other community-wide services, and shall be billed for and pay
the fees, rates, taxes and other charges adopted by the Town applicable to Recycling
Services pursuant to § 10-9-13 of this Article as long as the exemption is in effect.
ARTICLE 10-10 STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE
CONTROL ORDINANCE
10-10-1 Introduction
10-10-2 Purpose
10-10-3 Definitions
10-10-4 Enforcement, Violations, Notices and Penalties
10-10-5 Applicability
10-10-6 Illicit Non-Stormwater Drainage and Connections
10-10-7 Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Pollution Control
10-10-8 Post-construction Stormwater Management
10-10-9 Industrial Activity Discharges
10-10-10 Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Stormwater
Pollutants by the Use of Best Management Practices
10-10-11 Notification of Spills
10-10-12 Compliance Monitoring
10-10-13 Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
10-10-14 Remedies Not Exclusive
10-10-15 Compatibility with Other Regulations
10-10-16 Severability
10-10-17 Disclaimer
10-10-18 Other Regulatory Requirements
10-10-19 Town Permits and Approvals
Section 10-10-1 Introduction
The Town of Queen Creek (Town) meets the minimum federal requirements for designation by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as a small Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer operator or MS4. As a small MS4, the Town is required by the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act of 1972, 33 U.S.C. Sec. 1251 et seq. commonly known as the “Clean Water Act” (as
amended), to implement and enforce a program to improve to the maximum extent practicable
the quality of Stormwater in the Town’s Stormwater conveyance system.
A. Statutory Authorization
The Town may enact a Stormwater ordinance pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 11-251.66 and 49-
371. The Town, as an MS4 under Phase II of the National Pollutant Discharge
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater program of the EPA, is empowered to regulate
Stormwater by the authority of the Clean Water Act.
B. Title
This ordinance shall be known as the “Town of Queen Creek Stormwater Quality
Management and Discharge Control Ordinance.”
C. Required Permit for Town
This ordinance ensures that the Town is compliant with its Arizona Pollutant Discharge
and Elimination System (AZPDES) General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from
Small Separate Storm Sewer Systems (Stormwater Permit) requirements by establishing
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Town’s MS4.
The Town’s Stormwater Permit and federal regulations (40 CFR 122.34) require the
Town to implement and maintain six minimum control measures (MCMs). They are:
1. Public education and outreach on Stormwater impacts;
2. Public involvement and participation;
3. Illicit drainage detection and elimination;
4. Construction site Stormwater runoff control;
5. Post-construction Stormwater management in new development and
redevelopment;
6. Pollution prevention/good housekeeping for municipal operations.
This ordinance addresses the Stormwater Permit requirements for MCMs three, four and
five. MCMs one, two, and six are related to the Town’s Stormwater Management Plan
and addressed therein.
Section 10-10-2 Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of Town by prohibiting the introduction of non-Stormwater drainages to the storm
drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
ordinance will also protect Waters of the U.S. (as defined herein) within the Town by improving
the quality of the Stormwater runoff from urbanized areas to the Town-owned MS4 system by
implementing best management practices (BMPs) by the Town and its citizens.
The objectives of this ordinance are:
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Town MS4 by Stormwater drainage in
urbanized areas by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and drainages to the Town MS4.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and
enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with the Stormwater Permit.
Section 10-10-3 Definitions
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
A. “ADEQ” – means the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
B. “Administrator” – means the Town Manager of the Town, or his designee or
designees, who shall represent the Town in the administration of this Article.
C. “AZPDES” – means the Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program as
adopted under section 402(b) of the Clean Water Act.
D. “AZPDES Permit” – means a permit issued by the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to Waters of the U.S.
E. “Best Management Practices” or “BMPs” – means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, other management practices to prevent
or reduce the introduction of pollutants directly or indirectly to the Town MS4 or Storm
Drainage Systems connected to the MS4 and the prohibition of specific activities,
practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the Enforcement Officer
determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. BMPs also include treatment
practices, operating procedures, and practices to control the following; site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
F. “Civil Hearing Officer” – a Civil Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Town
Manager and may hear all civil code infractions and make such orders as may be proper
and necessary to dispose of such cases. Such cases shall be heard without a jury. The
Civil Hearing Officer shall adopt such local rules of procedure as may be necessary to
implement the hearing of civil code infraction cases. The Civil Hearing Officer shall be
the person with authority to hear complaints related to violations and to issue penalties
for violations of Chapter 10, Health and Sanitation and for violations of the Zoning
Ordinance."
G. “Clean Water Act” – means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
H. “CFR” – means Code of Federal Regulations.
I. “Construction Activity” – means activities subject to NPDES and/or AZPDES
Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance
of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
J. “Discharge” – means any addition of any pollutant to navigable waters from any point
source.
K. “Disturbance” – means the result of altering soil from its native or stabilized condition
thereby rendering it subject to movement or erosion by water to potentially become, or
becoming a pollutant in site Stormwater runoff; also means soil disturbance.
L. “Drainage System” – means all facilities and natural features used for the movement of
Stormwater through and from a drainage area, including, but not limited to, any and all of
the following: conduits; pipes and appurtenant features; channels; ditches; flumes;
culverts; streets; swales; gutters as well as all watercourses, water bodies, and
wetlands.
M. “EPA” – means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
N. “Erosion” – means the wearing away of land surface by water or wind that occurs from
weather or runoff, but is often intensified by human activity.
O. “Enforcement Officer” – means any person, who is either an employee, agent or
independent contractor, authorized by the Town Manager to administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this ordinance and who has authority to enforce the Town of
Queen Creek rules, regulations, resolutions and ordinances. The “Enforcement Officer”
may include more than one person including a civil hearing officer acting in compliance
with A.R.S. § 9-500.21.
P. “Facility” – means any land, building, installation, structure, equipment, device,
conveyance, area, source, activity or practice from which there is, or with reasonable
probability may be, the introduction of Stormwater to the Town MS4 or Storm Drainage
Systems connected to the MS4.
Q. “Hazardous Materials” – means any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present
or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
R. “Illegal Drainage” – means any direct or indirect non-Stormwater drainage to the
County MS4 or a Storm Drainage System connected to the MS4, except as exempted in
Section 10.9.6 this ordinance.
S. “Illicit Connection” – means either of the following:
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows illegal
drainage to enter any Storm Drainage System including but not limited to any
conveyances that allow any non-Stormwater drainage including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the Town MS4 or any Storm Drainage
System and any connections to the Town MS4 or any Storm Drainage System
from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency, or
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to
the Town MS4 or any Storm Drainage System that has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized regulatory or
enforcement agency.
T. “Illicit Discharge” – means any discharge to an MS4 that is not composed entirely of
Stormwater, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES
Stormwater Permit) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.
U. “Impervious Surface” – means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is resistant to infiltration by water. It includes semi-pervious
surfaces such as compacted clayey soils, as well as most conventionally surfaced
streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar surfaces. “Net Increase of
Impervious Surface” refers to the difference between the existing impervious coverage
and the total impervious surface proposed.
V. “Industrial Activity” – means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Stormwater
Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b) (14).
W. “Urbanized Area” – means the area depicted by the most recent U.S. Census
published “urbanized” area (UA) map and as may be identified by future Decennial
Census.
X. “Land Disturbance” – means soil disturbance or any site disturbance.
Y. “Land Surveyor” – means a land surveyor licensed to practice land surveying in the
State of Arizona.
Z. “Maintenance” – means the action taken to restore or preserve the as-built functional
design of any facility or system.
AA. “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System” or “MS4” – means the system of
conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, natural conveyances or storm
drains) owned or operated by the Town and designed or used for collecting or conveying
Stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. Also the Town
MS4.
BB. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit” – means a permit issued by the EPA, or by a State under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b), that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to Waters of
the U.S., whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide
basis.
CC. “Non-Stormwater Drainage” – means any drainage to the County MS4 or a Storm
Drainage System that is not composed entirely of Stormwater.
DD. “Nuisance” – means the unreasonable or unlawful use of real or personal property that
may obstruct or injure the right of another or the public and producing such material
annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort, or hurt, that the Enforcement Officer presumes
such use will result in damage. This definition includes the conditions listed in A.R.S. 36-
601 as public nuisances dangerous to public health.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
EE. “Operator” – means an operator of a construction site, such as the developer, is one
who maintains overall operational control over construction plans and specifications,
including the ability to change these plans and specifications. An operator can also be
one who maintains day-to-day operational control over activities that will ensure
compliance with the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), such as the
general contractor or subcontractor.
FF. “Outfall” – means a point source as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where a
municipal separate storm sewer discharges to waters of the United States and does not
include open conveyances connecting two MS4s or pipes, tunnels or other conveyances
that connect segments of the same stream of other waters of the United States and are
used to convey waters of the United States.
GG. “Owner” – means the person, persons, or entity whose name appears on the title or
deed to the subject property or properties.
HH. “Permit” – means a written permit to operate or discharge, issued by the Town of
Queen Creek or other regulatory authority.
II. “Permittee” – means the person, agency or entity authorized to conduct the work
specified in accordance with the conditions of the Stormwater permit(s) and as described
in the application, approved drawings, plans, and other documents on file with the Town.
JJ. “Person” – means any individual, organization, public or private corporation or other
entity recognized by law, company, partnership, firm, association or society of persons,
the Federal Government and any of its departments or agencies, or the State and any of
its departments or agencies, or political subdivisions.
KK. “Pollutant” – means any agent introduced to Stormwater or non-Stormwater through
human activity that may cause, potentially cause, or contribute to the degradation of
water quality. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; dredged spoil,
rock, sand or silt; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
LL. “Post-construction” – means, for purposes of this ordinance, that regulated category
of construction for new developments and redevelopments that results in the
establishment of permanent Stormwater pollution prevention devices, or structural
BMPs, built in compliance to the Town’s design standards and also includes long-term
operations and maintenance (O&M) programs, or non-structural BMPs, to be
permanently associated with the Stormwater pollution devices or controls at the new
development upon completion of the land disturbing activity.
MM. “Premises” – means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
NN. “Redevelopment” – Projects that alter the “footprint” of an existing site or building in
such a way that there is a disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre of land.
Redevelopment projects do not include such activities as exterior remodeling, which
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
would not be expected to cause adverse Stormwater quality impacts and offer no new
opportunity for Stormwater controls.
OO. “Sewage” – means wastes from toilets, baths, sinks, lavatories, laundries, and other
plumbing fixtures in residences, institutions, public and business buildings, mobile
homes, watercraft, and other places of human habitation, employment, or recreation.
PP. “Storm Drainage System” – means public and private drainage facilities other than
sanitary sewers within the urbanized area of the Town by which Stormwater is collected
and/or conveyed to the Town MS4, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities,
retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
QQ. “Stormwater” – means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
RR. “Stormwater Management Plan” or “SWMP” – means a document that describes the
BMPs and activities and measures to be implemented by a person or business to
identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions and measures to
eliminate or reduce the introduction of pollutants to Stormwater, the Town MS4, or Storm
Drainage Systems connected to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable (MEP).
SS. “Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan” or “SWPPP” – means the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan associated with the permit for a site.
TT. “Town” – means the Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
UU. “Urbanized Area” – means a portion of the Town that has a population density of at
least 1,000 people per square mile and/or meets other criteria set by the U.S. Bureau of
Census in the latest Decennial Census.
VV. “Wastewater” – means liquid and water-carried industrial waste and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are conveyed to the Town collector
system and publicly owned treatment works.
WW. “Waters of the U.S.” – As defined in 33 CFR 328.3(a) and 40 CFR 230.3(s).
Section 10-10-4 Enforcement, Violations, Notices and Penalties
A. Responsibility for Administration
1. The Enforcement Officer, acting through and designated by the Town Manager,
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance involving
Stormwater. The Enforcement Officer may enforce the provisions of this
ordinance when reasonable cause exists to believe that any person has violated
or is in violation of any provision of this ordinance.
2. The Administrator or his designee or designees represent the Town in the
administration of this ordinance.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
B. Violations, Notices and Penalties of General Applicability
1. Except as otherwise specifically provided, civil offenses shall be punished by
imposition of a civil penalty in the amount of $250.00 for the first offense; $500.00
for a second offense within a 12-month period, and $2,000.00 for a third offense
within said 12-month period. For purposes of calculating the 12-month period,
such period shall begin on the date of the first offense.
2. Civil matters shall be tried before the civil hearing officer in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 5, Section 7 of the Town code. When appropriate, civil
matters may also be tried before a justice of the peace or a county hearing
officer.
C. This ordinance shall not apply during a period of public emergency as declared by the
Town, state authorities or federal authorities, or if the operation is directed by a peace
officer or other public authority.
Section 10-10-5 Applicability
This ordinance applies to all urbanized areas of the Town, as defined herein and depicted by
the most recent U.S. Census published “urbanized” area (UA) map and as may be identified by
future Decennial Census.
This ordinance applies to all water entering the Town MS4 or Storm Drainage System
connected to the MS4 in the urbanized areas of the Town and generated on any developed and
undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted in this ordinance.
Section 10-10-6 Illicit Non-Stormwater Drainage and Connections
A. Prohibition of Non-Stormwater Drainage
1. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise introduce, cause, or allow others under
its or their control to throw, drain, or otherwise introduce into the Town MS4 or
into the Storm Drainage System connected to the Town MS4 any pollutants or
waters containing any pollutants, other than Stormwater.
2. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal drainage to the Town
MS4 or any Storm Drainage System is prohibited except as described as follows:
a. The following types of drainage are exempt from prohibitions established
by this ordinance:
i. Water line flushing, irrigation water, landscape irrigation, lawn
watering, return flow from irrigated agriculture, diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, drainages from potable
water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation,
springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, individual
residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
de-chlorinated swimming pool drainages, and street wash water.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
ii. Drainage or flow from firefighting (including fire fighting training).
iii. Drainage associated with dye testing (e.g., for leak detection).
iv. Other drainages specified in writing by the Enforcement Officer as
being necessary to protect public health and safety.
b. This drainage prohibition shall not apply to any non-Stormwater drainage
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste drainage order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the EPA,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of
the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations,
and provided that written approval has been granted for any drainage to a
Storm Drainage System.
c. The Administrator may evaluate and remove any of the above
exemptions if it is determined that they are significant sources of
pollutants pursuant to 40 CFR 122.34.b.3.ii.
B. Prohibition of Illicit Connections
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections
to the Town MS4 or any Storm Drainage System is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in
the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying
non-Stormwater to the Town MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
4. Illicit connections must be disconnected and redirected to an appropriate
approved waste disposal system.
5. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent, and which may be connected to the Storm Sewer System, shall be
located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written Notice
of Violation from the Enforcement Officer requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the
location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the
outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system or other drainage point be identified. Results of these investigations are
to be documented and provided to the Enforcement Officer.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-10-7 Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Pollution Control
A. Introduction
1. Runoff from construction sites may be a major source of pollution and is subject
to federal, state and local requirements to improve Stormwater quality. With few
exceptions, these requirements include the development and implementation of a
SWPPP for every construction activity as defined herein within the urbanized
areas of the Town. That SWPPP may be reviewed by the State. SWPPPs may
be reviewed at the construction site by the Enforcement Officer. Stormwater
treatment measures (BMPs) may be required along with inspections by the Town
or State to determine compliance with the SWPPP and the installation and
management of the BMPs.
2. In accordance with its own Stormwater Permit requiring it to reduce construction
site Stormwater pollution in its urbanized area, the Town has established a
Subdivision Ordinance and a companion Design Standards and Procedures
Manual, which document the procedures and review process for construction site
stormwater runoff control.
B. Construction Site Regulation
1. An owner or operator who intends to disturb an area of land that is equal to or
greater than one acre, or that is less than one acre but is part of a larger plan of
development shall obtain permit coverage from the ADEQ. A copy of the Notice
of Intent (NOI) to be bound by the State’s general construction permit, including
the number and date of application, or evidence of the State’s construction permit
obtained by the owner or operator, must be filed with the Enforcement Officer
prior to the start of the land disturbance as required by ADEQ.
2. The SWPPP for the construction site is to remain at the site and is to be made
available to the Enforcement Officer. At the start of and during construction the
Enforcement Officer may inspect any site to determine that the SWPPP for the
site is being followed and that the indicated BMPs have been properly installed
and satisfactorily maintained. If the SWPPP has not been implemented and/or if
the BMPs onsite have not been satisfactorily installed or maintained, the
Department will notify the owner or operator of the deficiencies. If the owner or
operator fails to satisfactorily address these issues within 7 days of notification of
the deficiencies, a compliance order will be issued by the Enforcement Officer
and a complaint shall be referred to the County Attorney as provided herein and
in A.R.S.§ 49-261. The Enforcement Officer has the authority to issue a stop
work order, seek an injunction to stop the work as provided herein, and pursue
civil or criminal penalties.
C. Exemptions
Coverage under a Town Stormwater approval for construction is not required for sites
over one acre for:
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
1. Regular maintenance activities performed within the original line, grade or
capacity of a facility.
2. Construction projects where the operator can prove that there is no reasonable
probability that Stormwater can leave the site.
3. A site that qualifies for an erosivity waiver for activities in low-risk soil conditions.
4. A site already covered by an individual NPDES permit with Stormwater
provisions.
5. Emergency construction activities required to protect public health and safety.
D. Transfers of Approvals
An approval may be transferred by the submittal of a Town transfer of coverage form
that includes assurances by the new owner that the approved SWPPP and BMP
requirements will be met.
E. Termination of Coverage
Coverage under the construction approval will end when a Notice of Termination (NOT)
is filed with the Town and an inspection by the Enforcement Officer has confirmed that
the entire site has been stabilized and landscaping and paving complete (as described in
the Design Standards and Procedures Manual).
F. Compliance Monitoring
1. Right of Entry for Inspections and Observations
a. Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and
regulations provided in A.R.S. § 41-1009. An Enforcement Officer
conducting an inspection shall, unless otherwise provided by law, present
photo identification on entry of the premises, state the purpose of the
inspection and the legal authority for conducting the inspection, disclose
any applicable inspection fees, and allow the Owner, Operator, or an
authorized representative to accompany the Enforcement Officer, except
during confidential interviews.
b. If an Owner or Operator holding an approval has security measures in
force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the Owner or Operator shall make the necessary arrangements
to allow the Enforcement Officer access to the premises.
c. Owners or Operators holding an approval or their designated
representatives shall allow the Enforcement Officer ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES and/or AZPDES permit to discharge Stormwater,
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
and to determine performance of any additional duties required by the
approved plans or by applicable state and federal Stormwater regulations.
d. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
site or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the Enforcement
Officer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall
be borne by the operator.
e. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Enforcement Officer access to an
approved facility is a violation of this ordinance. A person who is the
owner or operator of a facility with an NPDES or AZPDES permit to
discharge Stormwater associated with industrial activity violates the
permit terms if the person denies the Enforcement Officer reasonable
access to the permitted facility for conducting any activity authorized or
required by this ordinance.
2. Search Warrants
a. If the Enforcement Officer has been refused access to the premises, then
the Enforcement Officer may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction in addition to issuing a compliance order,
seeking an injunction, and assessing appropriate civil or criminal
penalties under Title 49, Arizona Revised Statutes.
Section 10-10-8 Post-construction Stormwater Management
A. Introduction
The goal of this post-construction Stormwater management program is to protect public
safety and public infrastructure, reduce erosion on private properties and stream
channels, and protect the quality of Waters of the U.S. to the maximum extent
practicable. The goals are achieved by maintaining and/or restoring natural drainage
patterns, minimizing grading and disturbance, and minimizing the extent of impervious
cover, as well as encouraging the use of a variety of BMPs for reducing the pollutant
loadings from newly developed and redeveloped sites. These goals will be accomplished
by requirements to, among other things, reduce the magnitude and extent of impervious
cover and site disturbance, remove pollutants from runoff prior to the introduction of
Stormwater to the Town MS4, and promote effective operation and maintenance of all
Stormwater facilities.
1. Applicability
The Town will develop, implement, and enforce a program to address post-construction
Stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects that disturb one
(1) or more acres of land (or less than one (1) acre if part of a common plan of
development) that discharge into the Town’s MS4. The post-construction requirements
in this Section apply to permanent Stormwater management facilities, systems and/ or
devices. Stormwater management during construction activities is regulated separately
pursuant to Section 10-10-6 of this ordinance.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
B. Objectives
In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town, as
well as to protect, sustain and enhance the quality of the Waters of the U.S. in and
adjacent to the Town, drainage and Stormwater management practices shall be utilized
as directed herein to achieve the following objectives:
1. Accommodate site development and redevelopment in a manner that protects
public safety and that is consistent with federal and state water quality
requirements and the requirements of the Phase II Stormwater permit for the
Town.
2. Protect water quality to the maximum extent practicable by removing and/or
treating pollutants prior to the introduction of Stormwater to the Town MS4 or any
Storm Drainage System connected to the MS4 throughout the Town.
3. Promote effective long-term operation and maintenance of all permanent
Stormwater management facilities.
4. Treat and release Stormwater as close to the source of runoff as possible using a
minimum of structures and maximizing reliance on natural processes.
5. Address certain requirements of the Phase II Stormwater Permit regulations.
6. Reduce the environmental impacts of Stormwater pollution from existing
developed sites undergoing redevelopment while encouraging development and
redevelopment in urban areas and areas designated for growth.
C. General Requirements
1. The management of Stormwater onsite, both during and upon completion of the
land disturbances described above shall be accomplished in accordance with the
standards and criteria of this ordinance and the requirements of the Town of
Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures Manual, the Queen Creek
Subdivision Ordinance, and any applicable county floodplain regulations. The
design of any temporary or permanent facilities and structures and the utilization
of any natural drainage systems shall be in full compliance with this ordinance
and any other applicable regulation.
D. Construction and Operation Responsibilities
1. “As Built” Plans. When construction is complete the applicant shall submit to the
Department an actual “as built” plan for all Stormwater management facilities
required per the approved Stormwater permit. The “as built” plan shall show all
final design specifications for all permanent Stormwater facilities and if necessary
shall be prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer or land
surveyor registered in the State of Arizona. The “as built” plan shall be based on
an actual field survey. The “as built” plan shall be submitted to the Department
for review and final inspection by the Department. Any performance and/or
financial securities established for the project by the Department shall include
requirements for submittal of “as built” plans.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
E. Ownership and Maintenance
1. All Stormwater management facilities, systems and/or devices identified within an
approved Stormwater permit shall be owned and maintained by one, or a
combination of, the following entities:
a. An individual for his or her own on-lot Stormwater management facilities
not constructed as part of a subdivision and/or land development plan.
b. Where individual on-lot Stormwater management facilities, systems and/
or devices are proposed in a subdivision or other development greater
than one acre, the subdivision and/or land development plan and plat
shall contain a note in a form satisfactory to the Department designating
the entity responsible for operation and maintenance of the on-lot facilities
consistent with an approved operation and maintenance plan.
c. An entity that owns or has a perpetual right to access the land on which
the Stormwater management facilities, system and/ or devices are
located. The operation and maintenance obligation runs with the land and
is binding upon the initial grantees of each lot and his, her, or their heirs,
administrators, successors or assigns. Stormwater management facilities,
systems and/ or devices or the ownership of the land on which they are
located may not be deeded or dedicated to the County or the Flood
Control District.
Section 10-10-9 Industrial Activity Discharges
A. Submission of NOI or Other Proof of Compliance to the Town
1. Any person subject to an industrial activity individual or general NPDES or
AZPDES discharge permit, upon request, may be required to provide a copy in a
form acceptable to the Administrator, prior to the allowing of discharges to the
Town MS4.
2. The owner or operator of a facility required to have an individual NPDES or
AZPDES permit to discharge Stormwater associated with industrial activity shall
obtain proof of the permit, or if under a general permit, a copy of the NOI.
3. Any person found owning or operating a facility or owning a site that is not
exempt, that does not have an NPDES or AZPDES permit, and is discharging
Stormwater associated with industrial activity within the Town MS4 may be
reported to the EPA and/or the ADEQ.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-10-10 Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants
by the Use of Best Management Practices
A. Any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of Stormwater that discharges to any Storm Drainage System connected
to the Town MS4 must implement BMPs for managing Stormwater. The owner or
operator of such activity, operation, site or facility shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental introduction of prohibited materials or other
wastes into any Storm Drainage System using BMPs. These BMPs shall be part of
SWPPP as necessary for compliance with requirements of the AZPDES permit.
B. Any person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of illegal
non-Stormwater drainage as described in Section 10-10-6(A), may be required to
implement, at said person’s expense, additional BMPs to prevent the further drainage of
pollutants.
Section 10-10-11 Notification of Spills
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a
facility, site or operation, including construction sites, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility, site or operation has information of any known or suspected
release of materials that are resulting or may result in the illegal introduction of pollutants
into a Storm Drainage System connected to the MS4 or the Town MS4 shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In
the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In
the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the
Administrator in person, by phone, or by e-mail no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to the Town within ten calendar days of the phone notice. If prohibited materials
emanate from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the release and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least one year or as
may otherwise be required by applicable state or federal law.
B. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this
ordinance.
Section 10-10-12 Compliance Monitoring
The Town shall be permitted to enter and inspect property subject to regulation under this
ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance.
A. Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations provided in
A.R.S. 41-1009.
B. If the owner or operator of a facility has security measures in force, which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the property owner shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Town, including
the Enforcement Officer.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
C. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property to be
inspected shall be promptly removed by the property owner at the written or oral request
of the Town, including the Enforcement Officer, and shall not be replaced. The costs of
such access shall be borne by the property owner.
Section 10-10-13 Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
In addition to the enforcement process and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public
health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily
abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
Section 10-10-14 Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under
any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the Town to seek
cumulative remedies.
The Town may recover all attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this ordinance, including monitoring expenses.
Section 10-10-15 Compatibility with Other Regulations
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any
other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this
ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards of human health or the environment shall control.
Section 10-10-16 Severability
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause,
sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provision or application of this ordinance.
Section 10-10-17 Disclaimer
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum
standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will
ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized drainage of pollutants.
Neither submission of a plan or permit under the provisions herein, nor compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any
person or property otherwise imposed by law.
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-10-18 Other Regulatory Requirements
Permits and approvals issued pursuant to this ordinance shall not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to comply with or to secure other required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, regulation, act, statute or ordinance. This
ordinance shall not preclude the inclusion in such other permit of more stringent requirements
concerning regulation of Stormwater and erosion.
Section 10-10-19 Town Permits and Approvals
An application for any discretionary permits or approvals issued by the Town shall be
accompanied by plans demonstrating how the development project will comply with the
requirements of this ordinance. The permit or approval shall not be granted unless the decision
maker determines that the development project complies with the applicable requirements of
this ordinance. If a person applies for any one permit from the Town, that person is not relieved
from the obligation to obtain any other applicable Town permit or permits
ARTICLE 10-11 PENALTIES
10-11-1 Enforcement Officers
10-11-2 Civil Offenses
10-11-3 Procedure
10-11-4 Criminal Penalties
10-11-5 State Law Penalties
Section 10-11-1 Enforcement Officers
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter 10, any Code Enforcement
Officer, Peace Officer, or the Town Attorney or Town Prosecutor, may issue civil citations
or complaints to enforce violations of this Chapter.
Section 10-11-2 Civil Offenses
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, any person who fails to comply
with the requirements of this Chapter, or violates any of its provisions is guilty of a civil
offense. Except as otherwise specifically provided, civil offenses shall be punished by
imposition of a civil fine in the amount of $250.00 for the first offense; $500.00 for a
second offense in a 12-month period, and $2,000.00 for a third offense in said 12-month
period. For purposes of calculating the 12-month period, such period shall begin on the
date of the first offense.
Section 10-11-3 Procedure
Civil matters shall be tried before the civil hearing officer in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 5, Section 7 of this Code.
When appropriate, civil matters may also be tried before a justice of the peace or county
hearing officer
Ordinance 666-18; 675-18(b) Revised 10-18
Section 10-11-4 Criminal Penalties
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, any person who violates a provision of
this Chapter for which a civil penalty is not prescribed upon first conviction shall be
considered guilty of a petty offense and upon subsequent convictions shall be guilty of a
class 1 misdemeanor.
Section 10-11-5 State Law Penalties
Nothing in this Chapter 10 regarding civil penalties shall be interpreted or applied to
prevent a law enforcement officer from imposing criminal penalties as provided by state
law.
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
CHAPTER 11 - TRAFFIC
Article 11-1 ENFORCEMENT1
It shall be the duty of the Town Law Enforcement and/or its designated agency to provide for the
enforcement of the traffic regulations of the town and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to
traffic in the town, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic collisions, and to
carry out all duties specially imposed upon the Town Law Enforcement agent by this Chapter.
Article 11-2 PERMANENT TRAFFIC CONTROL1
Section 11-2-1 Adoption of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
Section 11-2-2 Traffic Control Devices
Section 11-2-3 Speed Limits
Section 11-2-4 Multi-Way Stop Controls
Section 11-2-5 Over-Dimensional (Oversize/Overweight) Loads
Section 11-2-6 Traffic Signals
Section 11-2-7 Crosswalks, School Zones, and Traffic Lanes
Section 11-2-8 Turn Restrictions
Section 11-2-9 One-Way Streets and Alleys
Section 11-2-10 Regulation of Traffic at Intersections
Section 11-2-11 Drivers to Obey Signs
Section 11-2-12 Processions
Section 11-2-13 Operation of Vehicles on Vacant Lots
Section 11-2-14 Driving on Private Property
Section 11-2-15 Stopping in a Roadway or Median – Prohibited Acts
Section 11-2-16 Exceptions
Section 11-2-17 Penalty
Section 11-2-1 Adoption of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
The Town of Queen Creek adopts the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)
handbook (most recently adopted version by the Arizona Department of Transportation)
published by the Federal Highway Administration, and the Arizona Department of
Transportation Supplement to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices handbook.
Exceptions are noted in the following Sections of this Ordinance.
Section 11-2-2 Traffic Control Devices:
1. No person shall install or maintain in any area of private property used by the public, or
intended for traffic using a public street, any sign, signal, marking, or other device
intended to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, or which gives the appearance to a
reasonable observer of being intended to regulate, warn, or guide traffic.
2. The Town reserves the right to remove any sign that is deemed a nuisance or public
hazard, and may, at the discretion of the Town Traffic Engineer impose a reasonable
charge to the property owner for the cost of removals from private property.
3. All permanently installed signing within Town right-of-way by private parties (developers)
shall comply with Section 11-2-1, as well as the Towns relevant engineering standards,
details, and specifications.
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
4. The Town reserves the right to charge monetary damages to any party or organization
that is found responsible for damage to any Town owned traffic control device.
Section 11-2-3 Speed Limits:
The Town Traffic Engineer or Council will determine and post the appropriate posted speed limit
for all street segments based upon the application of accepted engineering standards, practices,
and judgment.
1. All local residential streets shall have a prima facie speed limit of 25mph; these types of
streets may or may not be posted with a physical sign.
2. Reduced speed limits for school zones (whenever a school fronts onto an arterial street
with a posted speed of 45mph or greater) are to be posted either 30mph or 35mph, and
are to be in force between the hours of 7:30am to 3:30pm weekdays.
3. Temporary reduced speed limits for construction and maintenance work zones, special
events, or any other activity within or adjacent to the right-of way that would require a
reduced regulatory speed limit are to be determined at the time of approval of the Traffic
Control Plan. All installations of temporary speed limits shall conform to the
requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) handbook and
the Arizona Department of Transportation Supplement to the MUTCD.
Section 11-2-4 Multi-Way Stop Controls:
Council authorizes the Town Traffic Engineer to establish, as necessary for the safe and
efficient flow of traffic, multi-way stop controls that conform to the requirements of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices handbook.
Section 11-2-5 Over-Dimensional (Oversize/Overweight) Loads:
Loads that are considered over-dimensional in nature are required to possess a valid permit
issued from the jurisdiction at the point of origin. The responsible party will be required to file a
routing request with the Town of Queen Creek at least 3-business days prior to the anticipated
move date. The Town will review the request, the proposed route, as well as the proposed time
and schedule to ensure that the load can safely operate. Town staff will approve the route,
make recommendations, or deny the load access to the Town’s right-of-way.
Over-dimensional loads traveling through, originating or terminating within the Town may be
required to have a law enforcement escort.
Section 11-2-6 Traffic Signals:
Council authorizes the Town Traffic Engineer to conduct Traffic Signal Warrant Studies to
determine the placement of new traffic signals, and to operate traffic signals at intersections as
deemed appropriate by such studies.
Section 11-2-7 Crosswalks, School Zones, and Traffic Lanes:
Council authorizes the Town Traffic Engineer:
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
1. To designate and maintain, by appropriate device, marks or lines upon the surface of
the roadway so as to establish crosswalks at locations where there are substantial
number of pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as may be
necessary.
2. To establish school zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be
necessary for the protection of school children.
3. To add pavement markings as necessary within the Town’s right-of-way.
Section 11-2-8 Turn Restrictions:
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any street or so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
Council authorizes the Town Traffic Engineer to:
1. Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to an intersection indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
2. To determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right-, leftor
U-turn, and shall have placed proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours,
in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be
removed when such turn(s) are permitted.
Section 11-2-9 One-Way Streets and Alleys:
Council authorizes the Town Traffic Engineer to designate any street or alleys which is to be
limited to one-way traffic.
Proper signing shall be installed at appropriate locations to indicate the one-way condition.
Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
Section 11-2-10 Regulation of Traffic at Intersections:
Council authorizes the Town Traffic Engineer to designate through streets, intersections where
stops are required, and intersections where vehicles shall yield the right-of-way.
Section 11-2-11 Drivers to Obey Signs:
Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall
obey such signs unless directed to proceed by the town law enforcement agent or a lawful traffic
control device. No driver shall drive upon or through any unpaved right-of-way, private property,
vacant lot or similar property to avoid obedience to any regulation included in this chapter.
Section 11-2-12 Processions:
No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without first securing a
permit from the town, and all such requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation,
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
proposed line of march, destination and such other regulations as the Town may set forth
therein.
A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by such methods
as may be determined and designated by the Town.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising of an authorized procession
while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision
shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic signals or the town law
enforcement agent.
Each driver in a procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as
practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
Section 11-2-13 Operation of Vehicles on Vacant Lots:
No person shall operate a vehicle on or across any portion of a vacant lot other than on an
established dust-proof driveway, except during activities authorized by the Town.
Section 11-2-14 Driving on Private Property:
No person shall operate, drive or leave any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter, mini-bike,
trail bike, dune buggy, jeep or other form of transportation propelled by an internal combustion
engine upon the private property of another or upon public property which is not held open to
the public for vehicle use, without permission from the owner of the property or the person who
is entitled to immediate possession thereof, or the authorized agent of either.
Whenever any person is stopped by a law enforcement officer for investigation of a violation of
this section, the person shall show proof that the permission required has been obtained and
from whom permission was obtained.
Section 11-2-15 Stopping in a Roadway or Median – Prohibited Acts
No pedestrian may stop or remain in the portion of any roadway designed for vehicular use or in
a painted or raised traffic island or median not specifically designated for use by pedestrians
except to wait to cross the roadway at the next pedestrian signal or, in the absence of a
pedestrian signal, when traffic has cleared or yielded.
Section 11-2-16 Exceptions
A. The provisions of this Section 11-2-15 shall not apply to persons occupying a median
or roadway while conducting activities related to maintenance, surveying, construction,
landscape maintenance, landscape improvements, or other similar activity necessary for
the safe and efficient operation of Town streets; provided that all such operations must
be conducted only upon approval of the Public Works Director or designee, and upon
such conditions as the Public Works Director shall require, such as adjacent lane
closures, use of appropriate safety vests or gear, and/or other safety precautions
designed to ensure the safety of motorists and those temporarily occupying the median
for these purposes.
B. The provisions of Section 11-2-15 shall not apply to emergency personnel occupying
a median or roadway in response to an accident, safety hazard, or other emergency
situation. Emergency personnel temporarily occupying a median or roadway for these
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
purposes should take adequate precautions to help ensure proper notification of the
emergency situation if feasible and to provide such safety measures as are appropriate
and reasonably available in light of the emergency situation presented.
Section 11-2-17 Penalty
A violation of Paragraph A of this Section 11-2-15 shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor.
Article 11-3 TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL2
Section 11-3-1 Permission to Access Right-of-Way
Section 11-3-2 Street Closures
Section 11-3-3 Temporary Traffic Control Plans
Section 11-3-4 Certified Persons
Section 11-3-5 Temporary Signing
Section 11-3-6 Flaggers
Section 11-3-7 Haul Routes
Section 11-3-8 Arrow Boards
Section 11-3-9 Off-Duty Law Enforcement Officer2
Section 11-3-10 Allowable Restriction/Closure Hours/Days
Section 11-3-11 Directing Traffic
Section 11-3-1 Permission to Access Right-of-Way:
Any contractor, agency, utility, or any other person that is performing work within the right-ofway
shall obtain an Encroachment Permit from the Town’s Community Development
Department prior to entering the right-of-way. The permit will not be valid without the required
Traffic Control Plan Application and Traffic Control Plan being submitted to and approved by the
Town PRIOR to entering the right-of-way. The Traffic Control Plan Application and Traffic
Control Plan shall be on-site and attached to the permit whenever activities are taking place in
the right-of-way, and shall be produced upon request by Town staff or law enforcement.
Section 11-3-2 Street Closures:
Requests for street closures (excluding special events as determined by the Town) shall be
made a minimum of 30-days prior to the date needed. Requests shall be made in writing and
shall include a Traffic Control Plan Application and a Traffic Control Plan that meets the
requirements of Section 11-3-3. Requests will be reviewed and approved based upon need and
potential life/safety issues. If a road closure request is granted, the contractor will be held to the
dates requested and approved by the Town. Upon approval, the contractor shall provide the
Town with a Cashier’s Check (bond) in the amount of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) made
payable to the Town of Queen Creek. Should the contractor not complete their work in the
agreed upon time limits, the bond shall be subject to forfeit, and a Two Thousand Dollar
($2,000.00) per day fine may be levied for each day the work is not completed. The contractor
may be directed on the last day of authorized work to begin work to open the road. The Town
reserves the option of taking the necessary steps to open the road should the need arise.
Section 11-3-3 Temporary Traffic Control Plans:
A Traffic Control Plan in complexity that matches the work being performed and proximity to
traffic will be required whenever construction, maintenance or other activities are taking place
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
within the Town’s right-of-way. A Traffic Control Plan that is computer generated and that is
designed and drawn by a person that is currently certified as a Traffic Control Supervisor by the
American Traffic Safety Services Association (ATSSA) will be required along with a Temporary
Traffic Control Plan Application (provided by the Town) at least two (2) business days prior to
the start of work. Traffic Control Plans shall be submitted directly to the Town, using the
established procedure, by the individual or company providing the temporary traffic control
services.
Section 11-3-4 Certified Persons:
Any temporary traffic control that is placed within the right-of-way on an arterial street, or as
required by the Town shall be completed under the direct, on-site supervision of a person that is
currently certified as a Traffic Control Technician by the American Traffic Safety Services
Association (ATSSA). The Technician shall carry ATSSA-issued proof of certification on his/her
person at all times when working within the right-of-way, and shall produce the certification, as
well as state-issued photo identification, upon demand by Town staff or law enforcement.
Section 11-3-5 Temporary Signing:
All temporary signing in place due to the requirements of a Traffic Control Plan shall be a
minimum of ASTM Type IV sheeting, a minimum of 36”x36” (for Warning Series signs), and
shall be mounted on spring type stands. All signing for projects considered to be Long-Term
Stationary in nature by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be post mounted.
Section 11-3-6 Flaggers:
Any civilian flagger working within the Town’s right-of-way shall hold current certification as a
flagger by the American Traffic Safety Services Association (ATSSA), or a pre-approved
equivalent, and shall carry proof of certification at all times when working within the right-of-way.
Certified flaggers may be required to provide proof of certification prior to working within the
Town’s right-of-way. Off-duty law enforcement officers may be used in lieu of certified flaggers.
No civilian shall be permitted to control traffic at an intersection at any time.
Section 11-3-7 Haul Routes:
If construction activities are determined by the Town to require special routing of haul trucks to
prevent impacts on surrounding streets, neighborhoods, or businesses, the contractor will be
required to develop, submit, and utilize an approved haul route. A Traffic Control Plan
Application and Traffic Control Plan may be required depending upon the complexity of the haul.
Any request for an approved haul route shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
? Origin and destination of the haul route;
? A clear and legible plan or map illustrating the proposed haul route, or portion of the haul
route within Town limits, showing all roadways on which the haul is proposed, crossing
arterials, and the route to be traveled;
? Frequency, number, and nature of trucks involved in the haul;
? Location and number of certified flaggers (required when trucks are entering or leaving
the right-of-way at a point of origin and/or destination, and at the discretion of the Town,
when trucks are turning across traffic);
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
? Copy of current Maricopa County Dust Permit (if applicable); and
? Traffic Control Plan Application and Traffic Control Plan (if applicable).
Haul routes will not be permitted through areas where active school crossing controls are in
place, during peak travel times or days, within the Town Center area (Ellsworth Rd between
Chandler Heights Rd and Rittenhouse Rd, and Ocotillo Rd between Rittenhouse Rd and Hawes
Rd), or at the direction of the Town. Additional application requirements, route restrictions, and
costs may apply to hauls which involve oversize or overweight vehicles or hazardous materials.
Section 11-3-8 Arrow Boards:
Arrow boards are required whenever a lane merge is in place in the right-of-way; use in shifting
conditions shall only be as approved by the Town.
Section 11-3-9 Off-Duty Law Enforcement Officer:
A uniformed law enforcement officer shall be present as required as a part of an approved traffic
control plan or as directed by the Town Traffic Engineer or designee. Only Maricopa County
Sheriff’s Office (MCSO) deputies regularly assigned to the Queen Creek District shall be
permitted to be utilized within the Town Of Queen Creek. If a Queen Creek District MCSO
Deputy is not available, only the District or the Town Traffic Engineer or designee may authorize
the use of a post-certified peace officer from another jurisdiction.
Section 11-3-10 Allowable Restriction/Closure Hours/Days:
No non-emergency activity that reduces lane width or usable road service shall be permitted to
take place between the hours of 5:00am and 8:30am or 4:00pm at 7:00pm on non-holiday
weekdays without prior authorization from the Town.
No activity shall take place within the Town’s right-of-way on Saturday, Sunday or Town
observed holidays without prior approval. Contractor’s opting to work weekends, observed
holidays or other than normal work hours may be charged for hours worked by Town staff at
current overtime rates.
Section 11-3-11 Directing Traffic:
1. The town law enforcement and fire protection agencies are hereby authorized to direct
all traffic by voice, hand or signal.
Article 11-4 PARKING
Section 11-4-1 Method of Parking
Section 11-4-2 Blocking Traffic
Section 11-4-3 Authority to Erect Signs Restricting Parking
Section 11-4-4 Parking Vehicles on Sidewalks
Section 11-4-5 Restricted Parking Areas for the Physically Disabled
Section 11-4-6 Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited
Section 11-4-7 Trailer or Semi-Trailer Parking
Section 11-4-8 Parking Vehicles for Sale in the Public Right-of-Way
Section 11-4-1 Method of Parking:
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
Except as otherwise posted, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are
adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel
to and within eighteen inches of the right hand curb.
Section 11-4-2 Blocking Traffic:
1. No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in
the Town in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
twenty feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except
that a person may stop temporarily in the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or
when necessary, in the observance of traffic control devices, or as directed by the town
law enforcement or fire protection agency.
2. No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a
private driveway except for the loading or unloading of materials, and not then unless
such loading or unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free
movement of vehicular traffic.
Section 11-4-3 Authority to Erect Signs Restricting Parking:
Council authorizes the Town Traffic Engineer to have signs erected requiring parking at an
angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left hand curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers
that parking is prohibited and restricting parking, stopping and/or standing in any way that may
be necessary for the safe and efficient movement of traffic. When such signs have been
erected, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to such parking restrictions.
Section 11-4-4 Parking Vehicles on Sidewalks:
No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not, nor shall an owner permit
his vehicle to be parked, upon any sidewalk in the town.
Section 11-4-5 Restricted Parking Areas for the Physically Disabled:
1. No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space on either public or private property set
aside and identified for use only by persons with physical disabilities, unless the vehicle
has displayed thereon a distinguishing insignia or numbered plates bearing the
international wheelchair symbol as provided in A.R.S. § 28-881. The handicap card
shall be placed on the dashboard so as to be visible.
2. Subsection 1 of this section shall apply only to those parking spaces that are identified
with standard signs or other markers, as approved by the town.
Section 11-4-6 Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a Town Law Enforcement agent or traffic
control device, either on public or private property, in any of the following places:
1. Within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant.
2. In any area designated as a fire lane.
1Ordinance 384-07; Ordinance 460-09; Ordinance 575-15 Revised 10-2015
3. In any area designated as prohibiting stopping, standing, or parking.
4. Within a marked school crossing zone.
Section 11-4-7 Trailer or Semi-Trailer Parking:
Trailers or semi-trailers designed or intended to be drawn behind a motor vehicle shall not be
parked upon a street, alley, or other public right-of-way for a period of time longer than two (2)
hours, except commercial vehicles may be parked for a longer period of time only when such
parking is necessary while actually carrying out a lawful commercial purpose. At no time shall
any trailer or semi-trailer attached or not to a truck or tractor is parked so as to block a lane of
travel on a public street, or otherwise interfere with the safe and efficient movement of traffic.
Section 11-4-8 Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any portion of the Towns right-of-way for the specific
purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2. Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by any
emergency.
3. Displaying advertising.
4. Displaying commercial exhibits.
CHAPTER 12 LAND USE
ARTICLE 12-1 LAND SPLITS1
12-1-1 Requirements Generally
12-1-2 Building Permit Issuance Restriction
12-1-3 Conformance Requirements
12-1-4 Applicability of Land Split and Subdivision Processes
12-1-5 Application and Approval Procedures
12-1-6 Application Requirements
12-1-7 Land Split Map Requirements
12-1-8 Administrative Action on Application
12-1-9 Approval Criteria
12-1-10 Recordation
12-1-11 Appeals to Council
Section 12-1-1 Requirements Generally
The division of any land, lot, parcel or unit for the purpose of sale or lease, whether immediate
or future, into two or three lots, parcels or units any one of which is two and one-half acres or
less, shall require the submittal and approval of a parcel plat, as described hereinafter. Sale or
lease includes every disposition, transfer or offer or attempt to dispose of or transfer land or an
interest or estate thereof.
Section 12-1-2 Building Permit Issuance Restriction
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a
lot or parcel created in violation of the provisions of these regulations.
Section 12-1-3 Conformance Requirements
A. A land split map shall conform to all applicable policies of the town general plan.
B. A land split map shall conform to all applicable regulations of the town zoning ordinance.
C. A land split map shall conform to all present and future street classification plans and
requirements.
Section 12-1-4 Applicability of Land Split and Subdivision Processes
1Ordinance 21-91
The regulations contained in this article apply to all divisions of land created for sale or lease
within the corporate limits of the town defined to be a land split.
A. It is unlawful for any person, partnership or other legal entity to create for sale or lease
any parcel that is subject to the requirements of this article until an approved land split
map complying with the provisions hereof has been recorded with the recorder's office of
the county wherein the platted area lies.
B. The division of any property into two or more parcels, if a new street is involved, shall
proceed through the subdivision process.
C. The division of any property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded
subdivision plat, into more than two parcels shall proceed through the subdivision
process.
D. The creation of four or more units having the right of exclusive occupancy coupled with an
undivided interest in the land, such as in a condominium, horizontal property regime,
cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project shall proceed through the
subdivision process.
E. The creation of two or three units having the right of exclusive occupancy coupled with an
undivided interest in the land, such as in a condominium, horizontal property regime or
similar project shall proceed through the land split map process.
F. Boundary adjustment plats and deeds, where the land taken from one parcel is added to
an adjacent parcel, need not follow the land split requirement provided approval has been
given in writing by the planning and building director, and provided that the proposed
adjustment does not:
1. Create any new lots;
2. Render any new lots created by the boundary adjustment smaller than those existing
prior to the boundary adjustment;
3. Render the setbacks of any new lots created by the boundary adjustment smaller
than those existing prior to the boundary adjustment;
4. Impair any existing access, easements or public improvements.
Section 12-1-5 Application and Approval Procedures
A. The division of land defined by this article to be a land split requires the approval of a land
split map by the planning department or the council.
B. The purpose of the land split map review is to determine the appropriateness of the
access and lot design with respect to the contours of the land, to determine whether the
setbacks of existing development are being rendered nonconforming with the creation of
new lot lines, to determine if a subdivision is being created, and to determine whether or
not the proposed land split conforms with town policies and ordinances. Before
proceeding with any division of land or the preparation of a parcel plat, the owner or his
agent should meet with the planning department for an informal discussion on the
proposed land division.
LAND USE
September 2007
Section 12-1-6 Application Requirements
Applicants requesting land split map approval shall submit the following to the planning
department:
A. A completed application form;
B. A nonrefundable seventy-five dollar filing fee to offset the costs of investigating and
processing the application;
C. Three blueline or blackline prints folded into a nine-inch by twelve-inch size and one mylar
(which may be submitted later, but prior to final approval of the land split map);
D. A title report dated not more than thirty days prior to submittal of the application.
Section 12-1-7 Land Split Map Requirements
A. The land split map shall be submitted on a transparent reproducible polyester film drawn
with india ink at a scale large enough to show all details clearly (normally one inch equals
one hundred feet or larger) on a sheet eighteen by twenty-four inches.
B. The land split map shall show or contain the following information:
1. A title, to read: Town of Queen Creek Land Split Map (Case Number);
2. Graphic and written scale, north indicator and date of preparation;
3. Legal description of the property;
4. Location and description of existing and proposed monuments to which all bearings,
dimensions, angles and similar data shall be referenced. Such data shall be tied to
the town datum system;
5. Boundaries of the property fully balanced and closed showing all bearings and
distances (in feet and decimals thereof) determined by an accurate survey in the
field;
6. By note or a legend, identification of any symbols used on the map;
7. Bearings and dimensions of all parcel lines with each parcel identified by letter and
indicating the net area in square feet of each parcel;
8. Name, course, length and width of existing and proposed street dedication;
9. Course, length and width of existing and proposed private access, utility, public
service and drainage easements;
10. The identification of adjacent subdivisions and land split maps by record data;
LAND USE
11. Delineation on the map of any areas identified on the flood insurance rate map as
special flood areas;
12. The location of existing structures;
13. A note stating that there are no visible encroachments except as shown on this plat;
14. Paragraphs legally setting forth:
a. Owner's certificate
b. Acknowledgment
c. Surveyor's certificate and engineer's certificate, if applicable
d. Certificate of approval (town)
e. Recorder's certificate
f. Dedication of roadways and/or easements, if applicable.
Section 12-1-8 Administrative Action on Application
A. The planning department shall review the application and make a determination as to its
completeness. The department shall advise the applicant of deficiencies if the application
is determined to be incomplete.
B. Upon determining that an application is complete, the planning department may distribute
materials to all appropriate agencies and utility providers for their recommendations.
C. The planning department shall render a written decision on the proposed land split.
D. A copy of the decision shall be sent to the applicant, advising him that he may appeal the
decision to the town council.
Section 12-1-9 Approval Criteria
The planning department and the town council, in evaluating and making decisions on land split
proposals, shall consider the following criteria:
A. The land split proposal's consistency with the town's general plan;
B. The proposal's conformity to the town's zoning ordinance;
C. The proposal's conformity to other applicable sections of the code;
D. The proposal's conformity with the town's street classification plan;
LAND USE
September 2007
E. The proposal's lot size and design with respect to the site's topography;
F. The identification of any setback problems with respect to any existing development on
the property and the new parcel boundaries to be created;
G. A determination from the title information and lot/street design that a subdivision is not
being created;
H. That, prior to recordation, the signatures written in india ink and all required stamps are in
place;
I. Other pertinent criteria.
Section 12-1-10 Recordation
The approved mylar copy, fully executed and reflecting all requirements of approval, shall be
recorded in the Maricopa County recorder's office with four copies thereof returned to the
planning department.
Section 12-1-11 Appeals to Council
An appeal of the department's decision must be filed with the town clerk's office within thirty
days of the date of the decision. The town council shall consider the appeal no earlier than
fourteen days nor later than forty-five days from the date of the filing of the appeal.
8/2007
CHAPTER 13 FLOOD CONTROL
ARTICLE 13-1 DRAINAGE AND EROSION PROVISIONS1
13-1-1 Designation of Authority
13-1-2 Technical Design Specifications
13-1-3 Floodplain Management Regulations2
Section 13-1-1 Designation of Authority
The Town designates the Maricopa County Flood Control District and Pinal County Flood
Control District as the enforcement authority for all flood plain management activities within the
areas of special flood hazard as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Flood Insurance Rate Maps and for those areas identified by the Maricopa County Flood
Control District and Pinal County Flood Control District to be areas of special flood concern
within the corporate limits of the town. For all other lands not within an area of special flood
hazard as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance Rate
Maps or designated areas of special flood concern by the Maricopa County Flood Control
District or Pinal County Flood Control District, the authority for enforcement of drainage and
erosion provisions shall be the Town or other designated agent.
Section 13-1-2 Technical Design Specifications
The following listed publications, copies of which are on file in the office of the town clerk, are
hereby designated for use on all building permit requests:
A. DRAINAGE DESIGN MANUAL FOR MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA, VOLUME I
HYDROLOGY , JANUARY 1, 1995
B.
C. DRAINAGE DESIGN MANUAL FOR MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA VOLUME II
HYDRAULICS, JANUARY 28, 1996
D. DRAINAGE DESIGN MANUAL FOR MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA VOLUME III
EROSION CONTROL, JANUARY 1, 1993
D. PINAL COUNTY DRAINAGE MANUAL – VOLUME I: DESIGN CRITERIA, AUGUST
2004
E. PINAL COUNTY DRAINAGE MANUAL – VOLUME II: DESIGN METHODOLOGY &
PROCEDURES, AUGUST 2004
Ordinance 414-07
8/2007
SECTION 13-1-3 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
13-1-3 A. The Town Manager of the Town of Queen Creek is appointed as the National Flood
Insurance Program Floodplain administrator for the Town and is responsible for coordinating
with the Flood Control District Of Maricopa County and Pinal County and will serve as the
community point of contact on National Flood Insurance Program issues for County, State and
Federal officials.
13-1-3 B. Those public records entitled “Flood Insurance Study for Maricopa County and
Incorporated Areas with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated SEPTEMBER 30,
2005” and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, three copies of which shall be kept on
file in the office of the Town Clerk, are hereby adopted by reference, as the basis for
establishing the special flood hazard areas for floodplain management in the Town of Queen
Creek. The special flood hazard areas documented in the Flood Insurance Study and Flood
Insurance Rate Maps are the minimum area of applicability of the floodplain management
regulations and may be supplemented by studies for other areas as allowed in the regulations.
13-1-3 C. That public record designated as the “Floodplain Management Regulations for
Maricopa County 2006 revision AND ALL SUBSEQUENT AMENDMENTS AND/OR
REVISIONS, three copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the town clerk, is hereby
adopted as the legal basis for implementing floodplain management in this community.
13-1-3 D. Those public records entitled “Flood Insurance Study For Pinal County” dated March
5, 1990, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated August 15, 1983, and all
subsequent amendments and/or revisions, three copies of which shall be kept on file in the
office of the town clerk, are hereby adopted by reference as the basis for establishing the
special flood hazard areas for floodplain management in the Town of Queen Creek. The special
flood hazard areas documented in the flood insurance study and flood insurance rate maps are
the minimum area of applicability of the floodplain management regulations and may be
supplemented by studies for other areas as allowed in the regulations.
13-1-3 E. That public record designated as the “Pinal County Floodplain Management
Ordinance” dated August 2006, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, three copies
of which shall be kept on file in the office of the town clerk, is hereby adopted as the legal basis
for implementing floodplain management in this community.
Rev. 08/2015
CHAPTER 14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE 14-1 SIDEWALKS1
14-1-1 Sidewalk Maintenance
14-1-2 Obstructions in Sidewalk
14-1-3 Penalties
Section 14-1-1 Sidewalk Maintenance
All persons owning or occupying land or places of business within the town shall keep
the sidewalk or public places fronting or bordering their property, including the area
between the sidewalk and the curb, free of weeds or grass in excess of ten inches.
Trees, shrubs and other landscaping planted in the area between the sidewalk and the
curb shall be maintained by the adjacent landowner or occupant in such a way as not to
impede, obstruct or interfere with the passage and or public accessibility of any sidewalk
or street including, without limitation, the passage of street sweeping and other street
cleaning equipment, and/or personnel. In the event the owner or occupant does not
maintain such trees, shrubs, or landscaping in the manner required by this Section, the
Town may cut or trim such trees, shrubs or plant growth, or otherwise take measures
necessary to eliminate the impediment, obstruction or interference with the passage on
the sidewalk or street.
Section 14-1-2 Obstructions in Sidewalk
No owner or occupant of land shall allow or permit obstructions of any kind (i.e. garbage,
debris, decomposed granite or landscape materials, trees, shrubs or plant growth, etc.) to
impede, obstruct or interfere with the passage of any public sidewalk; provided however,
this section shall not prohibit the temporary storage of such matters in authorized
receptacles for collection, or the passage of sidewalk cleaning and repair equipment
and/or personnel, within the Town. In the event any owner or occupant of land allows
trees, shrubs, or plant growth on that land to impede, obstruct or interfere with the
passage of any sidewalk including, without limitation, the passage of sidewalk cleaning
and repair equipment and/or personnel, the Town may cut or trim such trees, shrubs or
plant growth, or otherwise take measures necessary to eliminate the impeding,
obstruction, or interference with the passage on the sidewalk.
Section 14-1-3 Penalties
In addition to any other penalties prescribed by law, any person found violating this
Article after 30 days written notice is subject to a civil penalty of $100 for the first
offense, and $500 for each subsequent offense. Each day shall be considered a
separate offense.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Rev. 08/2015
ARTICLE 14-2 STREETS1
14-2-1 Obstructions in Street
14-2-2 Open Junk Storage Prohibited
14-2-3 Draining onto Street Prohibited
14-2-4 Penalties
Section 14-2-1 Obstructions in Street
No owner or occupant of land shall allow obstructions of any kind (i.e. garbage, debris,
decomposed granite or landscape materials, trees, shrubs or plant growth, etc) to impede,
obstruct or interfere with the passage of any street or alley including without limitation, the
passage of street sweeping and other street cleaning and repair equipment and/or
personnel, within the Town or to diminish the visibility of any traffic control device or
signal. In the event any owner or occupant of land allows trees, shrubs or plant growth on
that land to impede, obstruct or interfere with the passage of any street or alley, including
without limitation, the passage of street cleaning and repair equipment and/or personnel,
the Town may cut or trim such trees, shrubs or plant growth, or otherwise take measures
necessary to eliminate the impeding, obstruction, or interference with the passage of the
street and may charge the cost of such trimming, cutting, or other measures to the owner
of the land.
Section 14-2-2 Open Junk Storage Prohibited
No person shall deposit, store or maintain any garbage or junk that is visible from
beyond the lot boundaries, except as authorized for collection.
Section 14-2-3 Draining onto Street Prohibited
No person shall deposit in, sweep upon or permit to drain into any public right-of-way or
public place of the town any garbage, junk, obstruction or similar matter or any
hazardous material which is offensive to sight or smell or impedes passage or is
detrimental to public health.
Section 14-2-4 Penalties
In addition to any other penalties prescribed by law, any person found violating this
Article after 30 days written notice is subject to a civil penalty of $100 for the first
offense, and $500 for each subsequent offense. Each day shall be considered a
separate offense
1Ordinance 84-96; Ordinance 383-07 and Ordinance 557-14
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Rev. 08/2015
ARTICLE 14-31 SCALLOPED STREET ASSESSMENTS
14-3-1 Definitions.
14-3-2 Exemptions2
14-3-3 Required.
14-3-4 Approval of Owner’s Plans.
14-3-5 Construction Prior to Development; Assessment Policy.
14-3-6 Assessment Procedure.
14-3-7 Right-of-way.
14-3-8 Collecting unpaid assessments at time of development.
Section 14-3-1 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them:
“Cost” means the actual cost of:
(1) Construction of the public street improvements as determined by the construction
contract price.
(2) Inspection and permit fees.
(3) Engineering fees required for the preparation of plans and specifications.
(4) Other incidental fees required to complete the improvements.
“Development” includes construction of residential, commercial or industrial buildings or
structures or major additions or alterations to existing structures and includes new buildings or
structures on property having existing buildings or structures situated on such property. When
such property is zoned for agricultural or single family residential use at the time of assessment,
development shall also require a change of use or purpose.
“Major addition or alteration” means any addition or alteration to an existing building hereafter
made where the addition or alteration increases total floor area of the building by twenty-five
percent (25%).
“Owner” means the person or legal entity that owns property adjacent to the street right-of-way.
“Right-of-way” means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication,
usage or process of law is reserved or dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley,
public utility, pedestrian walkway, bikeway or drainage purposes.
“Street improvement” means, but is not limited to, asphaltic concrete surfacing, aggregate base,
curb and gutters, sidewalks or valley gutters, storm drainage facilities and irrigation tiling.
“Streets” means the full width of the right-of-way of any road, street, highway, alley, land or
pedestrian walkway, whether or not such road, street, highway, alley, land or pedestrian right-ofway
has been improved or accepted for maintenance by the Town.
1Ordinance 470-10; Ordinance 509-12
2Ordinance 552-14
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Rev. 08/2015
Section 14-3-2 Exemptions1
(a) Street improvements otherwise required by this article shall not be required where the
construction, alteration or addition consists solely for installation or replacement of
mechanical equipment.
(b) The Town’s Redevelopment Area, established by Ordinances 517-05 and 518-05, as
amended, is exempt for the application of this Article, provided however that where
deemed appropriate by the Town Council on a case by case basis, street improvements
may be required pursuant to the Town’s zoning authority.
Section 14-3-3 Required
(a) Construction at time of development. At the time of development of property within the
Town, the proprietor or owner of the property shall construct street improvements within
and adjacent to such property.
(b) Responsibility for costs. The costs of all street improvements shall be the full
responsibility of the proprietor or owner of the property.
(c) Temporary deferral. If, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, the installation of off-site
improvements would not feasible from an engineering standpoint, the installation of
improvements may be temporarily deferred, provided a cash bond, irrevocable letter of
credit, or similar instrument approved by the Town Attorney, is filed with the Town for the
cost of the improvements. Estimated costs of the improvements shall be established by
the owner or proprietor’s engineer and reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer.
(d) Construction prior to development. If the Town Council determines that street
improvements within or adjacent to the property are necessary prior to the development
of the property, the Council may order street improvements to be constructed by the
Town as provided in Section 14-3-5.
Section 14-3-4 Approval of Owner’s Plans
The owner or proprietor of property intended to be developed shall submit the street
improvement plans to the Town for approval. No building permit shall be issued until the street
improvement plans have been approved by the Town Engineer. Street improvements shall be
constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the Town Engineer and in accordance
with the Town’s design principles and standards set forth in Chapter 7, Article 3 of the Town
Code and the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures Manual. No certificate
of occupancy shall be issued until street improvements are constructed in accordance with the
approved plan unless the certificate of occupancy is otherwise approved by the Town Engineer.
Section 14-3-5 Construction Prior to Development; Assessment Policy
Where the Town Council has determined that certain streets within the Town shall be
constructed or improved prior to development of the property adjacent to such streets, the
Council may order such streets to be constructed or improved at the Town’s expense. Such
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Rev. 08/2015
expense shall be assessed against the adjoining property subject to the following:
(1) The assessment of property, if adjacent arterial streets are involved, shall not
exceed the cost of improving more than one-half (1/2) of the width or more than
one thousand (1,000) lineal feet of such adjacent arterial street, except that if any
parcel of land is presently being used for single-family residential use and the
width of such does not exceed two hundred (200) lineal feet, such property shall
not be assessed greater than one-half (1/2) the cost of the average residential
street within the Town.
(2) The assessment of property shall not exceed the actual costs incurred by the
Town at the time of construction.
Section 14-3-6 Assessment Procedure.
(a) Determination of improvement’s necessity; notice of hearing; contents. The Town
Council, at a public hearing, shall determine the necessity of street improvements if the
cost thereof is to be assessed against adjacent property. Prior to the public hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall, at a duly noticed public meeting, review the
necessity of the street improvements and provide a recommendation to the Council.
Notice of the Council hearing shall be given to the owners, and other affected persons
who would be assessed for the costs of improvements by certified mail no less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain:
(1) A description of the proposed street improvements.
(2) The estimated cost of assessment for each affected parcel of property.
(3) The date, time and place that the Town Council shall consider the necessity of
improvement and adoption of a resolution of intention.
Notice shall also be published in a weekly newspaper on (1) time each week for two (2)
consecutive weeks, or in a daily newspaper four (4) consecutive times. In addition,
notice shall also be conspicuously posted along the line of the proposed improvement at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing on necessity of the improvements.
(b) Filing of objection. The property owners and any other persons directly interested in the
work or in the assessment may, prior to the time fixed for the hearing, file in the office of
the Town Clerk a written objection, briefly specifying the grounds for objection.
(c) Hearing. At the time of public hearing, the Town Council shall hear and pass upon any
objections to the proposed improvements, and its decision shall be final and conclusive.
It may modify the extent of the proposed improvements and proceed without the
necessity for republishing, reposting and remailing new notices. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Town Council may pass its resolution of intention directing that plans,
specifications and estimates of the cost and expenses of the proposed improvements be
finalized by the Town Engineer, filed with the Clerk and filed in the official records of the
county recorder, and order that a call for sealed bids be made.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Rev. 08/2015
(d) Completion of improvements; determination of costs; additional hearing; notice; contents
of notice. Upon completion of the improvements, the Council shall by resolution, at a
public hearing, determine the cost of the improvements and assess against the
properties adjacent to the street improvement, the total amount of the costs and
expenses of the work in accordance with Section 14-3-5. Notice of this public hearing
shall be given to the property owner, and other affected persons who would be assessed
for the costs of improvements, by certified mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date
of the hearing. This notice shall contain:
(1) A description of the street improvement; and
(2) The cost of assessment for each affected parcel of property.
(e) Objections to legality of assessment or other proceedings; filing; council action. The
property owners and any other persons directly interested in the street improvements or
in the assessment who have any objection to the legality of the assessment or to any of
the previous proceedings connected therewith or who claim that the work has not been
performed according to the contract may, prior to the time fixed for the hearing, file in the
office of the Town Clerk a written notice briefly specifying the grounds for objection. At
the time fixed for the hearing, or at any time thereafter to which the hearing may be
postponed, the Council shall hear and rule upon the objections. The decision of the
Council shall be final and conclusive as to all errors, informalities and irregularities which
the Council might have remedied or avoided at any time during the progress of the
proceedings.
(f) Right to appeal. The determination of necessity by the Council resulting in the
assessing of property under this section may be appealed by any aggrieved party to the
Superior Court.
(g) Unpaid assessments. The Council's resolution shall provide that any assessments
remaining unpaid shall be paid prior to or at the time of the development of the assessed
property.
(h) Recording of assessment; lien. A resolution declaring the assessment and describing
the properties against which the assessments are imposed shall be recorded in the
office of the county recorder. When so recorded, the amount so assessed shall be a lien
upon the properties assessed for ten (10) years thereafter, or until such assessments
are paid, whichever first occurs, and such recording shall be notice to all persons
interested in the contents of the record.
(i) Abatement of assessment; conditions. Any assessment made under this section shall
abate if the property has not been developed within ten (10) years of the assessment.
Section 14-3-7 Right-of-way.
When it is necessary to improve a full street and sufficient right-of-way is not available, the
Town Engineer may obtain the right-of-way upon terms that are just to the property owner and
the Town. If the right-of-way is not dedicated at time of construction, the cost to the Town to
purchase the right-of-way shall be considered an expense attributable to the street
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Rev. 08/2015
improvements and shall be assessed against the property at the time of development.
Section 14-3-8 Collecting unpaid assessments at time of development.
At the time of development of the property adjacent and abutting such improvements, the Town
Council shall fix, levy and assess the amount to be repaid upon such property and collect the
amounts of such improvements as county taxes are collected. All statutes providing for the levy
and collection of State and County taxes, including collection of delinquent taxes and sale of
property for nonpayment of taxes, are applicable to the assessments provided for in this article.
PARKS AND RECREATION
Revised 9-2018
CHAPTER 15 PARKS AND RECREATION
ARTICLE 15-11 RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
ARTICLE 15-22 PUBLIC PARK REGULATIONS
15-2-1 Adoption by Reference
15-2-2 Enforcement and Penalty
Section 15-2-1 Adoption by Reference
The “Town of Queen Creek Public Park Regulations,” three copies of which are on file in the
Town Clerk’s Office, is hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this code.
Section 15-2-2 Enforcement and Penalty
A. The Town Manager, or designee or any local law enforcement officer, is authorized to
eject from any park, retention basin or wash any person who violates any provision of
this chapter or who engages in any disorderly or disruptive behavior in a park, retention
basin or wash.
B. The Town Manager, or designee, or any local law enforcement officer shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, retention basin
or wash used in violation of this chapter.
C. After the Town Manager, or designee, or any local law enforcement agent requests that
a person leave a park, retention basin, or wash, it is unlawful for such person to remain
in the park, retention basin or wash or to return to the same park, retention basin or
wash within twenty-four hours of the request to leave.
D. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class one misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and
imprisonment.
ARTICLE 15-33 PARKS, TRAILS AND OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE
1Added by Ordinance 103-07 and subsequently deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 446-09
2Ordinance 103-97; revised by Ordinance 675-18
3Added by Ordinance 352-06 and subsequently deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 360-06
1
CHAPTER 16 UTILITIES
ARTICLE 16-1 (RESERVED)
ARTICLE 16-2 PROVISION OF UTILITY SERVICE
Section 16-2-1 Applicability of article
Section 16-2-2 Related Documents
Section 16-2-3 Definitions
Section 16-2-4 Regulations part of customer contract
Section 16-2-5 Responsibilities
Section 16-2-6 Utility Services Director
Section 16-2-7 Application for service
Section 16-2-8 Deposits
Section 16-2-9 Grounds for refusal of service
Section 16-2-10 Service lines, and water meters
Section 16-2-11 Easements and rights-of-way
Section 16-2-12 Customer responsibility
Section 16-2-13 Payment of bills
Section 16-2-14 Grounds for termination of service
Section 16-2-15 Nonpayment of delinquent bill, filing of lien, interest
Section 16-2-16 Reconnection of service
Section 16-2-17 Deposit required after termination
Section 16-2-18 Termination without notice
Section 16-2-19 Limitation of liability
Section 16-2-20 Right of entry; inspections
Section 16-2-21 System repair fees
Section 16-2-22 Sales taxes; business privilege taxes; in-lieu taxes
2
Section 16-2-23 Enforcement
Section 16-2-24 Liens
Section 16-2-1 Applicability of article
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, order and general welfare
of the present and future utility customers of the town. This chapter governs the operation of utility
services provided by the town. The provisions of this article shall be applicable generally to all
utility services provided by the town. Where provisions of this article conflict with specific provisions
of this chapter 16, such specific provisions shall apply.
Utility service shall mean potable water service, irrigation service, reclaimed water service, sewer
service, effluent delivery and solid waste/recycling service provided by the town.
The services provided for under this chapter are limited to the town’s equipment ability and capacity.
The town may reject any application for utility service. Enforcement rights granted to the town
under this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedy available to the town at law
or equity.
Section 16-2-2 Related Documents
The water master plan, wastewater master plan and the design and construction standards
manual for water, wastewater and irrigation systems (collectively “utility system master plans”) are
incorporated into this chapter by reference and may be periodically reviewed and updated by the
utility systems department director to comply with new regulations, requirements, and procedures.
Such updates shall be presented to the town council and posted on the town’s website at least 60
days prior to implementation, and additional notice of such updates shall be provided by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation once each week for two consecutive weeks.
Section 16-2-3 Definitions
“Applicant” means a person requesting the town to provide utility service.
“Application” means a request to the town for utility services.
“Customer” means the person or entity in whose name service is rendered, as evidenced by the
name on the application, the contract for service, or utility bills, regardless of the identity of the
actual user of the utility service. Customer includes the customer’s agent or contractor.
“Meter” means the instrument for measuring and indicating or recording the volume of water that
has passed through it.
“Request for service” means the act of requesting or receiving utility service from the town which
constitutes an agreement by the customer to comply with all the terms and conditions which are
imposed by the town.
“Wastewater utility” means infrastructure used for the collection or treatment of wastewater.
“Water utility” means infrastructure used for the extraction, storage, or delivery of potable water
or non-potable water but not for the delivery of wastewater or stormwater.
3
Section 16-2-4 Regulations part of customer contract
All regulations contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract of every customer
of the town taking utility service from the town, and such customer taking utility service shall be
considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. By accepting utility service
provided by the Town of Queen Creek Utility Services Department, the customer agrees to the
regulations set forth in this document/ chapter/ article?
Section 16-2-5 Responsibilities
The town council may, by ordinance or resolution, set and amend any rate, rate component, charge,
fee, penalty, surcharge or service charge. The town council may adopt comprehensive utility
system master plans. Upon adoption of the plans, the council shall assure that no extension,
improvement or addition to a town utility shall be constructed or authorized unless and until the
extension, improvement or addition conforms to the corresponding utility system master plan. The
town council may adopt and amend engineering design and construction standards for
improvements to, extensions of, additions to, and modifications of the town’s utilities.
A separate fund is established for the town’s water utility and for the town’s wastewater utility. All
funds paid to the town pursuant to provisions of this chapter for, but not limited to, service charges,
fees, construction of facilities, fines and penalties shall be deposited into the corresponding utility
fund, and all expenditures made by the town in relation to the town’s ownership, operation,
maintenance, repair, expansion, acquisition, management, salaries, professional fees, debt
service, bond payments and other costs and charges shall be paid from the corresponding utility
fund. The town council may make loans from the general fund to the town utility funds from time to
time to supplement revenues generated by the town utilities to assure the timely payment of all
obligations, provided that the loans are timely repaid from the corresponding utility fund to the
general fund. The town utilities shall be self-supporting and funded solely from revenues generated
from utility operations.
Section 16-2-6 Utility Services Department Director
The town utilities director shall be responsible for the day-to-day management of the town utilities
including, but not limited to:
A. Provision of safe and reliable service to town utility customers
B. Compliance with federal, state, and local ordinances and regulations
C. Preparation and periodic updating of utility system master plans, including but not limited to
the water master plan, wastewater master plan and the design and construction standards
manual for water, wastewater and irrigation systems
D. Sufficiency of the town’s water utility supply
E. Adequacy of the town’s wastewater utility capacity F. Inspection and repair of the utility
systems
G. Review of all engineering plans and contracts related to the town’s utilities
H. Collection of all funds due the town’s utilities
I. Development of utilities elements of the town’s capital improvement plan
4
J. Preparation and administration of annual budgets K. Enforcement of this chapter
Section 16-2-7 Application for service
Water and/or wastewater utility service may only be provided pursuant to application to the town.
Before providing service, the town shall collect all installation and other charges required by this
chapter and all customer information deemed appropriate by the utilities department.
Section 16-2-8 Deposits
The town may require a deposit from an applicant for service. A separate deposit may be required
for each service connection. No interest shall be paid to customers on deposits. Deposit refunds
shall be made to the individual whose name is on the account at the time of the refund. Upon the
discontinuance of service, the deposit will be applied by the town toward settlement of the account.
Section 16-2-9 Grounds for refusal of service
The town may refuse to establish utility service if any of the following conditions exist:
A. The applicant has an outstanding amount due for utility service with the town, and the
applicant does not bring current any outstanding bills.
B. A condition exists which in the town’s judgment is unsafe or hazardous to the applicant, a
resident of the town or the town’s personnel or facilities.
C. Refusal by the applicant to provide the town with a deposit.
D. Failure of customer to furnish such funds, service, equipment or rights-of-way necessary to
serve the customer and which has been specified by the town as a condition for providing
utility service.
E. Applicant provides false information for the purpose of obtaining service.
Section 16-2-10 Service line and water meters
An applicant for utility service shall be responsible for the cost of installing all customer piping up
to the water meter and/or discharge point for the sewer connection. The town will install its water
meter at the property line or in the public right-of-way. Where the meter or service line location is
changed at the request of the customer or due to alterations on the customer’s premises, the
customer shall provide and have installed at his expense all piping necessary for relocation of the
meter, and the town may charge for moving the meter service line.
Section 16-2-11 Easements and rights-of-way
Each town utility customer shall grant adequate easements or rights-of-way satisfactory to the town
to ensure that customer service connections are accessible by the town.
The customer’s failure to grant adequate easements or rights-of-way shall be grounds for the town
to refuse utility service.
When the town discovers that a customer is performing work or has constructed facilities adjacent
to or within an easement or right-of-way and the work, construction or facility poses a hazard or is
5
in violation of federal, state or town laws, ordinances, statutes, rules or regulations, or may interfere
with the town’s access to its utility facilities or equipment, the town shall take whatever actions are
necessary to eliminate the hazard, obstruction or violation at customer’s expense.
Section 16-2-12 Customer responsibility
A. Each town utility customer shall be responsible for the following:
a. Maintaining all facilities on the customer’s side of the point of connection in a safe
and efficient manner and in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local
rules and regulations. The point of connection is the meter for water service and is
where the house sewer connects to the sewer collection system for sewer service.
b. Safeguarding all town utility property installed in or on the customer’s premises for
the purpose of providing utility service to that customer.
c. Exercising all reasonable care to prevent loss or damage to town utility property,
excluding ordinary wear and tear. The customer shall be responsible for loss of or
damage to town utility property on the customer’s premises arising from neglect,
carelessness or misuse and shall reimburse the town for the cost of necessary
repairs or replacements.
d. Payment of any equipment damage resulting from unauthorized breaking of seals,
tampering or bypassing the town water meter.
e. Notifying the town of any town utility equipment failure.
f. Paying all utility rates, charges and fees when due. B. Special provisions relating to
water service.
a. Water furnished by the town shall be used only on the customer’s premises and shall
not be resold to any other person.
b. During critical water conditions, as determined by the Town Council and/ or Utility
Services Department Director, the customer shall use water only for those purposes
specified by the Council and/ or Utility Services Department Director.
c. Disregard for this provision shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of
water utility service by the town.
C. Special provisions relating to sewer service:
a. Sewer service provided by the town shall be only for the benefit of the customer’s
premises and shall not be extended to any other property.
b. Nothing shall be discharged into the sewer collection system which is prohibited by
law, may lead to a sanitary sewerage overflow, or adversely affects the operation or
maintenance of the collection system. This prohibition includes but is not limited to
oil, grease, and flammable material.
6
c. Disregard for this provision shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of
sewer and water service by the town.
d. Each customer shall provide the town and its employees and agents the right of safe
ingress and egress to the customer’s premises for any purpose reasonably related
to the town’s provision of utility service to the premises.
Section 16-2-13 Payment of bills
Utility rates, charges or fees are due and payable to the town upon billing. Any rate, charges or
fees not paid in full by the next billing due date are subject to a late charge, in addition to the balance
due, in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the town council and amended from
time to time. Rates, fees, and/ or charges that are not paid in full by the 10th day following the
original billing due date, may result in water service being discontinued/ disconnected.
Section 16-2-14 Grounds for termination of service
Utility service to a customer may be terminated by the town for any of the following reasons:
A. Customer violation of any of the provisions in this chapter;
B. Failure of the customer to meet or maintain the utility services department’s credit and
deposit requirements;
C. Failure of the customer to provide the town reasonable access to its utility equipment
and property;
D. Failure of a customer to pay a delinquent bill for utility service.
Section 16-2-15 Nonpayment of delinquent bill; filing lien; interest
If any bill for a utility rate, charge or fee made to the customer pursuant to this chapter is not paid
by the next billing date, the customer shall be given written and/ or electronic notice specifying that
the bill is delinquent and outlining the procedure by which the customer may challenge the accuracy
of the bill.
The town may file a lien on the property for unpaid fees that are at least 90 days delinquent. The
town may enforce the lien by any method permitted by law. Unpaid fees shall accrue interest at
the rate provided by A.R.S. § 44-1201.
Section 16-2-16 Reconnection of service
In no case shall any individual, other than the town water utility, turn on the water supply to any
building or any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly
water bill or for the violation of any provision of this chapter. All water that has been turned off by
the town water utility shall only be turned on again by the employees or agents of the town water
utility.
7
Section 16-2-17 Deposit required after termination
If utility service is terminated due to nonpayment of a delinquent bill, the town shall require payment
in full of all amounts due and owing and payment of a utility deposit as a condition of reestablishing
service.
Section 16-2-18 Termination without notice
Utility service may be terminated by the town without advance written notice under the following
conditions:
A. Existence of a hazard to the safety or health of the customer, town personnel, or general
population;
B. Evidence of water meter tampering or fraud;
C. Evidence of unauthorized resale of water or utility services;
D. A customer’s failure to comply with the curtailment procedures imposed by the Town Council
and/ or Utility Services Department Director during water supply shortages or restrictions.
Section 16-2-19 Limitation of liability
The town does not warrant nor guarantee its ability to provide continuous or uninterrupted utility
service; nor does the town warrant or guarantee any particular level of utility service. If utility service
is interrupted, disconnected, irregular or defective or fails from causes beyond the town’s control or
due to the negligence of its employees, servants or agents, the town shall not be liable for damages,
claims or losses arising therefrom.
Section 16-2-20 Right of entry; inspections
The town shall have the right to enter commercial, institutional and industrial establishments and to
enter upon residential property for inspection purposes related to the provision of utility service as
required by this chapter or any other law, rule, regulation or order of an entity having jurisdiction
thereover and for the enforcement of this chapter.
Provision shall be made for regular inspection of the town’s facilities used in providing utility service
and when required by this chapter or any other law, rule, regulation or order of an entity having
jurisdiction thereover, for the inspection of premises receiving utility service for purposes related to
the provision of utility service.
Section 16-2-21 System repair fees
Any customer, developer, contractor, or other person who damages, cuts, destroys, or causes the
need for repair to the town’s wastewater or water systems or any part thereof (i.e. mains, laterals,
service connections, etc.) shall be held financially responsible for the cost of the repair. The town
8
shall assess the responsible party for the cost of the repair in an amount in accordance with this
Code.
Section 16-2-22 Sales taxes; business privilege taxes; in-lieu taxes
All applicable sales taxes, business privilege taxes and in-lieu-of-franchise taxes shall be added to
utility user fees.
Section 16-2-23 Enforcement
A penalty charge may be added to any user fee payment that is delinquent. Interest may accrue
on the sum of delinquent payments and penalty charges, compounded monthly.
Section 16-2-24 Liens
Delinquent utility service fees and charges shall constitute a lien against the property upon which
such lien may be imposed. The Utility Services Director may file a lien on property for the
nonpayment of utility services. Before filing the lien, the town shall provide written notice to the
owner of the property. The notice shall be given at least 30 days before filing the lien and shall
include an opportunity for a hearing with a designated town official. The notice shall either be
personally served or mailed to the property owner, at the last known address by certified mail, or to
the address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the owner does not resided on
the property, the notice shall be sent to the last known address.
The unpaid utility service fees and charges, from the date of the date of recording in the office of
the county recorder in the county in which the property is located, are a lien on the property until all
fees and charges are paid. The lien is subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all
prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of property to satisfy a lien obtained
under this article shall be made on judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The town may bring
an action to enforce the lien in the superior court in the county in which the property is located at
any time after the recording, but failure to enforce the lien by this action does not affect its validity.
The recorded unpaid utility service fees and charges are prima facie evidence of the truth of all
matters recited in the recording and of the regularity of all proceedings before the recording.
Unpaid fees and charges pursuant to this article accrue interest at the rate prescribed by A.R.S. §
44-1201. The town shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred in
the foreclosure of any such lien.
A prior assessment of unpaid fees and charges for the purposes provided in this chapter does not
bar a subsequent assessment for these purposes and any number of liens on the same lot or tract
of land may be enforced in the same action.
ARTICLE 16-3 SANITARY SEWER REGULATIONS
16-3-1 Definitions
16-3-2 Digging Up Streets without a Permit
9
16-3-3 Private Wastewater Systems
16-3-4 Sanitary Sewers Outside Town
16-3-5 Sanitary Sewers: Design, Construction, and Inspection
16-3-6 Building Connections: Permits, Approval, Records, and Responsibility
16-3-7 Ownership of Public Sewer Lines and Other Equipment Maintained by the
Utility Services Department
16-3-8 1 Sewer Service Fees
16-3-9 Mandatory Sewer Connections
16-3-10 Control Manholes
Section 16-3-1 Definitions
The words or phrases used herein shall have the meaning prescribed in the current Town code
except as otherwise indicate herein:
“Branch sewer” means a sewer which receives wastewater from lateral sewers from a relatively
small area.
“Building connection” means the connection to the public sewer and the extension there from
the sewer to the property line in an alley or street or to the easement line in an easement,
whichever is applicable, depending on the location of the public sewer.
“Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the building connection or other
place of disposal.
“Cooling water” means the clean wastewater discharged from any heat transfer system.
“Discharge” means the disposal of wastewater into the TCS/POTW.
“Effluent” means wastewater that has been treated in a POTW.
“Lateral sewer” means a sewer which discharges into a branch or other sewer and has no
common sewer tributary to it.
“Main sewer” means a sewer which receives wastewater from one or more branch sewers as
tributaries.
“Maintenance” means keeping the TCS/POTW in a state of repair, including expenditures
necessary to maintain the capacity for which such works were designed and constructed.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm , company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, state, municipality, Indian tribe, political subdivision of the
state, federal governmental agency, or any other legal entity, including their legal representatives,
agents or assigns.
10
“POTW” means a public owned treatment works and connecting sewer collection system
which are owned and /or operated, in whole or in part, by the Town and which provide the Town
with wastewater collection and disposal services.
“POTW user” means any person, lot, parcel of land, building or premises that discharges or
causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW.
“Public sewer” means a lateral, branch, main or trunk sewer controlled and maintained by the
Town.
“Replacement” means those expenditures made for obtaining and installing equipment
accessories, and /or appurtenances during the useful life of the TCS/POTW which are
necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the TCS/POTW for which they were
designed and constructed.
“Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm water, surface
water and groundwater are not intently admitted.
“Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
“Storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but does
not include wastewater containing pollutants.
“TCS” means Town Collection System (TCS). All sanitary sewer lines owned and maintained
by the Town.
“Town” means the Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
“Utility Services Department” The department as established by the Town to provide utility
service, including water, wastewater, irrigation, and reclaimed water.
“Utility Services Department Director” The person designated in, Section 16-5-2 this Chapter
16 to supervise the operation of the Utility Services Department, and who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities, or a duly authorized representative of the Director.
Section 16-3-2 Digging up Streets Without a Permit; Tampering with Equipment
Prohibited
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Dig up or cause to be dug up any street or alley in the Town for the purpose of
connecting to the TCS/POTW without first obtaining a permit from the Town
Engineer;
B. Having a permit, dig up any portion of any street or alley of the Town for the purpose
of connecting to the TCS and fail or neglect to place the street or alley in
its original condition; or
C. Maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the TCS.
11
Section 16-3-3 Private Wastewater Systems
A. Except as provided in this Article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain within the
Town any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater.
B. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available within the Town or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the Town, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system, complying with the provisions and recommendations of the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality and the Sanitary Code of Maricopa County.
Such private wastewater disposal system shall be constructed, maintained, and
operated at all times in a sanitary manner.
Section 16-3-4 Sanitary Sewers Outside Town
Any TCS/POTW user located outside of the Town limits who discharges wastewater into a sanitary
sewer owned or operated by the Town shall be bound by the requirements of this
Article.
Section 16-3-5 Sanitary Sewers; Design, Construction, and Inspection
A. The Town shall have the authority to approve the design, issue permits and conduct
inspections of sewer facilities that are to be connected to the Town’s sanitary sewer
system.
B. The design and construction of all sanitary sewers under the jurisdiction of the Town must
conform to the standard sewer design and construction specifications as identified in the
Maricopa Association of Governments Specifications, the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality Bulletin No. 11 and the Town’s standards.
C. All sewers to be attached directly to the TCS/POTW shall be inspected by personnel of the
Town during construction. The Town shall be notified at least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to cutting into the TCS/POTW prior to obtaining Town approval of sewer construction.
Section 16-3-6 Building Connections; Permits, Approval, Records, and
Responsibility
A. No authorized person shall make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb
any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Utility Services Department.
B. Each person making application for a building connection shall obtain a valid plumbing
permit from the Town as a prerequisite for the approval of the required building connection.
All applications for building connections shall be accompanied by the current fees for such
work.
12
C. The number, location, manner of connection and size of all building connections shall be
subject to the approval of the Utility Services Department Director or designee and the
Utility Services Department Engineering Manager.
D. The Town shall keep a record of all building sewer connections made and the purpose for
which they are to be used, together with the name of the owner of the property, the owner’s
agent or a representative.
E. The property owner shall be responsible for the cleaning, unstopping, maintenance, and
repair of the building connection piping serving the property from the owner’s home or
building to the public sewer.
F. Where the correction of a stoppage requires the repair or replacement of a damaged or
broken section of the building connection and the damaged or broken section is located
off-property in a street or alley, the property owner shall have the damaged or broken
section repaired by a licensed contractor who shall obtain all permits required by the Town.
Section 16-3-7 Ownership of Public Sewer Lines and Other Equipment Maintained by
the Utility Services Department
The ownership of all public sewer lines, pumping stations, treatment facilities, and equipment and
other appurtenances to the sewer system maintained or accepted for maintenance by the Utility
Services Department shall be vested in the Town and in no case shall the owner of any premises
have the right to claim any part except where otherwise provided in the code.
Section 16-3-8
Sewer Service Fees
A. The Council may, by ordinance or resolution, set and amend any rate, rate component, fee
or service charge to be made for sewer service.
B. Sewer service fees shall be apportioned to include a user charge relating to the volume of
effluent contributed by each user, a collection system maintenance and operation charge
that includes all costs associated with maintenance of the collection system, customer
billing and administration, and a capital reserve charge relating to the volume of effluent
contributed. Sewer service fees shall be allocated in such a manner that is proportionate
to the cost of providing wastewater service to each user or user class insofar as those
costs can reasonably be determined.
C. The average winter water use or the volume portion of the sewer service fee shall be
determined for residential (R1) and commercial (C2) users from the average monthly water
use during the winter billing cycles of December, January, and February. The new volume
portion of the sewer service fee shall become effective the first billing cycle of the
subsequent fiscal year. For other users the monthly volume shall be used.
D. If a user can demonstrate that the volume portion of their service fee is significantly in error,
they can appeal to the Utility Services department Director or designee for an adjustment
13
of their sewer service fee. The decision of the Utility Services Department Director or
designee shall be final.
E. If a user discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the town
sewer system, either directly or indirectly, and it can be shown by such party, to the
satisfaction of the director, that a significant portion of the water as measured by the water
meter does not and cannot enter the sewer system, then the director may determine in
such manner and by such method as the director may find practicable, the percentage of
metered water entering the sewer system to determine the sewer charge, or the director
may require or permit the installation of acceptable additional water or sewer meters, at
the discharging party's expense to determine the quantity of water actually entering the
sewer system, in which case the quantity of water used to determine the sewer charge
shall be the quantity of water actually entering the sewer system. If such additional water
or sewer meters are installed, the meter shall be subject to the adopted base charge for
that specific meter without any additional usage charges.
F. The following sewer user classes are established:
CLASS
R1 Residential I – With an individual water meter such as single family
detached.
R2 Residential II – Other, with landscaping on a separate meter, such as
condominiums.
R3 Residential III – New customers prior to establishing the AWWU.
C1 Commercial and Industrial I – Landscaping on separate meters and no
pretreatment; includes office buildings, apartments, retails, restaurants,
schools, employment, etc.
C2 Commercial and Industrial II – Landscaping on the same meter and no
pretreatment; includes Queen Creek Middle School, Canyon State
Academy, and some Town Center office conversions.
C3 Commercial and Industrial III – C1 with pretreatment.
B1 Builder – Between issuance of building permit and certificate of occupancy.
F. In addition to the sewer service charges listed in (B) and (E), the Council may set other
sewer service classes, fees, or charges as desired.
Section 16-3-9 Mandatory Sewer Connections
A. Property currently served by a septic tank system and located within the Town’s sanitary
sewer service area shall within six months from the date a public sewer becomes available
to the property, connect to the public sewer in accordance with provisions of this section
and the Town’s building code. For purposes of this section, a public sewer is available to
a property when the Town installs or causes to be installed lateral lines from the public
sewer to the property line. It is the Town’s responsibility to notify property owners when
sewer service becomes available.
14
B. All new development within the Town’s sanitary sewer service area shall be required to
connect to a public sewer system. When an existing sewer line is not adjacent to a
proposed new development, it shall be the property owner’s responsibility to extend the
system in accordance with the Town’s sewer master plan to serve their development.
C. All property owners within the Town’s sanitary sewer area shall, within six (6) months of
the adoption of this ordinance begin paying the sewer service fees provided in Section 6-
4-10.
Section 16-3-10 Control Manholes
When required by the Utility Services Department Director, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying any liquid or free-flowing wastewater, excluding uncontaminated water but
including cooling water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, with or without sanitary sewer, shall
install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, measurement and
sampling of the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessible, safely located and constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Utility Services Department Director. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner at the owner’s expense.
ARTICLE 16-4 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REGULATIONS
16-4-1 Purpose and Policy
16-4-2 Administrative
16-4-3 Abbreviations
16-4-4 Definitions
16-4-5 Industrial Users Identified as Class I, II, or III
16-4-6 Prohibited Discharge Standards
16-4-7 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
16-4-8 State Pretreatment Standards
16-4-9 Local Limits
16-4-10 Town’s Right of Revision
16-4-11 Dilution
16-4-12 Pretreatment Facilities
16-4-13 Additional Pretreatment Measures
16-4-14 Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans
15
16-4-15 Hauled Wastewater
16-4-16 Wastewater Analysis
16-4-17 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
16-4-18 Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections
16-4-19 Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
16-4-20 Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
16-4-21 [Reserved- Wastewater Discharge Permitting: General Permits]
16-4-22 Application Signatories and Certifications
16-4-23 Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
16-4-24 Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
16-4-25 Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
16-4-26 Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
16-4-27 Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
16-4-28 Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
16-4-29 Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
16-4-30 Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
16-4-31 [Reserved- Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions]
16-4-32 Baseline Monitoring Reports
16-4-33 Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
16-4-34 Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline
16-4-35 Periodic Compliance Reports
16-4-36 Reports of Changed Conditions
16-4-37 Reports of Potential Problems
16-4-38 Reports from Unpermitted Users
16-4-39 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting
16-4-40 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste
16-4-41 Analytical Requirements
16-4-42 Sample Collection
16-4-43 Date of Receipt of Reports
16-4-44 Recordkeeping
16
16-4-45 Certification Statements
16-4-46 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
16-4-47 Search Warrants
16-4-48 Confidential Information
16-4-49 Publication of Users in Significant
16-4-50 Notification of Violation
16-4-51 Consent Order
16-4-52 Show Cause Hearing
16-4-53 Compliance Orders
16-4-54 Cease and Desist Orders
16-4-55 Administrative Fines
16-4-56 Emergency Suspensions
16-4-57 Termination of Discharge
16-4-58 Alternative Administrative Enforcement
16-4-59 Judicial Enforcement Remedies
16-4-60 Supplemental Enforcement Action
16-4-61 Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
16-4-62 Prohibited Discharge Standards
16-4-63 Bypass
16-4-64 [Reserved - Wastewater Treatment Rates]
16-4-65 Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 16-4-1 Purpose and Policy
This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for Users of the Town of Queen Creek (Town)
Collection System and Publicly Owned Treatment Works and enables the Town to comply with all
applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251
et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part
403). The objectives of this ordinance are:
A. To prevent the introduction of Pollutants into the Town Collection System and Publicly
Owned Treatment Works that will interfere with their operation;
B. To prevent the introduction of Pollutants into the Town Collection System and Publicly
17
Owned Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment Works,
inadequately treated, into the receiving waters or aquifer, or otherwise be incompatible with
the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
C. To protect Publicly Owned Treatment Works Personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
D. To promote reuse and recycling of Industrial Wastewater and sludge from the Publicly
Owned Treatment Works;
E. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and
improvement of the Town Collection System and Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
F. To enable the Town to comply with the applicable Aquifer Protection Permit and Arizona
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements,
and any other Federal or State laws to which the Publicly Owned Treatment Works is
subject; and
G. To prevent the introduction of Pollutants into the Town Collection System and Publicly
Owned Treatment Works in amounts that could cause or contribute to a sanitary sewer
overflow.
This ordinance shall apply to all Users of the Town Collection System and Publicly Owned
Treatment Works. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits;
provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires User reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
Section 16-4-2 Administration
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Utility Services Department Director shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed
upon the Utility Services Department Director may be delegated by the Utility Services Department
Director to other Town Personnel.
Section 16-4-3 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations, when used in this ordinance, shall have the designated meanings:
°C
degrees Celsius
°F
degrees Fahrenheit
AAC
Arizona Administrative Code
ADEQ
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality
APP
Aquifer Protection Permit
18
A.R.S.
Arizona Revised Statutes
AZPDES
Arizona Pollution Elimination Discharge System
BMP Best Management Practice
BMR Baseline Monitoring Report
BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand
cm centimeter
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical Industrial User
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
gpd gallons per day
IU
Industrial User
LUST Leaking Underground Storage Tanks
mg/l milligrams per liter
O&M
Operation and Maintenance
POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC
Standard Industrial Classification
SIU Significant Industrial User
SNC Significant Noncompliance
TCS Town Collection System
TRC Technical Review Criteria
TSS Total Suspended Solids
U.S.C. United States Code
Section 16-4-4 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
“Act or “the Act” The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water
Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
“Approval Authority” Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ).
19
“APP” Aquifer Protection Permit (APP) issued by ADEQ which imposes State standards
governing the quality of effluent discharged either directly to an aquifer or to a land surface
that will reach an aquifer.
“Authorized Representative of the User” (1)
If the User is a corporation:
(a) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge
of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or
decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities,
provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the
operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making
major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and
regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to
the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) If the User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor,
respectively.
(3) If the User is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of
the government facility, or their designee.
(4) The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3, above, may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
Discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company
and the written authorization is submitted to the Town.
“AZPDES Permit” Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (AZPDES) issued
by ADEQ which imposes State standards governing the quality of the effluent discharged from
the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
“Best Management Practices” (BMPs) Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed
in Section 16-4-6 A and B [40 CFR 403.5(a) (1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. [Note: BMPs also include
alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established
Categorical Pretreatment Standards and effluent limits.]
“Biochemical Oxygen Demand” (BOD) The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20
degrees Centigrade (°C), usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., milligrams per liter [mg/l]).
20
“Bypass” The intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of a pretreatment process.
“Categorical Industrial User” (CIU) An Industrial User subject to a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard or Categorical Standard.
“Categorical Pretreatment Standard” or “Categorical Standard” Any regulation containing
Pollutant discharge limits promulgated by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in
accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific
category of Users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and
are incorporated in this chapter by reference.
“Code of Federal Regulations” (CFR) Compilation of federal regulations promulgated under
the CWA and incorporated herein by reference.
“Chemical Oxygen Demand” (COD) The quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical
oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
“Composite Sample” A combination of individual samples obtained at regular intervals over
a specified time period. The volume of each individual sample shall be either proportional to
the flow rate during the sample period (flow composite) or constant and collected at equal time
intervals during the composite period (time composite) as defined in the permit.
“Control Authority” The Town.
“Clean Water Act” (CWA) The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C
§§1251 et seq., incorporated herein by reference.
“Daily Maximum” The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a Pollutant collected
during a calendar day.
“Daily Maximum Limits” The maximum allowable discharge limit of a Pollutant during a
calendar day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily Discharge
is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum
Limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily Discharge is the arithmetic average
measurement of the Pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
“Domestic wastewater” Any wastewater derived from the ordinary living processes in a
residential dwelling unit of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special
treatment, by conventional POTW processes.
“Effluent” Wastewater that has been treated in a POTW.
“Environmental Protection Agency” (EPA) The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or,
where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
“Existing Source” Any source of Discharge that is not a New Source.
21
“Food Service Facility” Any facility that processes, prepares, and/or serves food, including
but not limited to industrial and commercial establishments, such as delicatessens, bakeries,
and restaurants, and private and public institutions, such as schools, hospitals, churches, daycare
and residential facilities with common food preparation and dining areas, but excluding
private dwellings.
“Grab Sample” A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow or
time of day in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
“Indirect Discharge” or “Discharge” The introduction of Pollutants into the TCS and POTW
from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
“Industrial Waste” Any liquid, free-flowing waste, resulting from any industrial or
manufacturing process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural
resources, with or without Suspended Solids, excluding uncontaminated water.
“Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit” A written authorization issued by the Utility
Services Department Director categorized as either Class I or Class II allowing a Class I or
Class II industrial user to discharge wastewater into the TCS.
“Inflow” Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system, including sewer service
connections, from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between Storm Water Sewers
and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, Storm Waters, surface runoff, street wash
waters or drainage.
“Instantaneous Limits” The maximum concentration of a Pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample
collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
“Interference” A Discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a Discharge or Discharges
from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its
sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the applicable
APP and AZPDES permits or of the prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with any
of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent
State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State
regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; and the Toxic Substances Control Act.
“Local Limit” Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the Town upon nonresidential
facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40
CFR 403.5(a) (1) and (b).
“Maintenance” Keeping the Town Collection System (TCS) and POTW in a state of repair,
including expenditures necessary to maintain the capacity for which such works were designed
and constructed.
22
“Medical Waste” Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
“Monthly Average” The sum of all daily Discharges measured during a calendar month
divided by the number of daily Discharges measured during that month.
“Monthly Average Limit” The highest allowable average of daily Discharges over a calendar
month, calculated as the sum of all daily Discharges measured during a calendar month divided
by the number of daily Discharges measured during that month.
“New Source”
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a
Discharge of Pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of
proposed Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to
such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that Section,
provided that:
(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no
other source is located; or
(b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or
production equipment that causes the Discharge of Pollutants at an Existing Source; or
(c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure,
facility, or installation are substantially independent of an Existing Source at the same site.
In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to
which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new
facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the Existing Source, should be
considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an Existing Source is located results in a modification
rather than a New Source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility,
or installation meeting the criteria of Section (1) (b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces,
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a New Source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if
the owner or operator has:
(a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program
(i) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing
buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of New Source facilities or equipment; or
23
(b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to
purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss,
and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this paragraph.
“Noncontact Cooling Water” Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
“Parameter” A fundamental characteristic of wastewater around which treatment is designed,
such as flow, BOD, TSS, and phosphorus.
“Pass Through” A Discharge which exits the POTW in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a Discharge or Discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the applicable APP or AZPDES permit, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
“Permittee” Any person who owns, operates, processes or controls an establishment or plant
being operated under a valid Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit to discharge wastewater
into the TCS and POTW.
“Person” Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association,
joint stock company, trust, estate, Indian tribe, governmental entity, or any other legal entity;
or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State,
and local governmental entities.
“pH” A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units; the
logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter or solution.
“Pollutant” Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, Sewage,
garbage, biosolids, munitions, Medical Wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal,
agricultural and Industrial Wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., fats, oils,
grease, pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
“Pretreatment” The reduction of the amount of Pollutants, the elimination of Pollutants, or
the alteration of the nature of Pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing
such Pollutants into the TCS and POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except
by diluting the concentration of the Pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
Pretreatment standard.
“Pretreatment Requirements” Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
Pretreatment imposed on a User, other than a Pretreatment standard.
“Pretreatment Standards or Standards” Pretreatment Standards shall mean Prohibited
Discharge Standards, Categorical Pretreatment Standards, and Local Limits.
24
“Process Wastewater” Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into
direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate
product, finished product, by-product, or waste product.
“Prohibited Discharge Standards” or “Prohibited Discharges” Absolute prohibitions
against the Discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 16-4-6 of
this ordinance.
“Publicly Owned Treatment Works” (POTW) A treatment works as defined by Section 212
of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned in part by the Town and provide the Town with
wastewater collection and disposal services. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of Sewage or
Industrial Wastes of a liquid nature, recharge/reuse systems and facilities, and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a Treatment Plant.
“Ready Access” The ability of the Utility Services Department Directorto enter and approach
sampling and monitoring locations such that equipment can be safely and easily delivered by
truck, installed, operated, maintained, and inspected.
“Representative Sample” A Composite Sample obtained by flow proportional sampling
techniques except where another sampling method is specified by the User’s wastewater
discharge permit or authorized by the Utility Services Department Director.
“Sanitary Sewer” A sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm water, surface water
and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
“Septic Tank Waste” Any Sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
“Sewage” Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations,
etc.). Any and all waste substances, liquids or solids associated with human habitation, but
excluding storm, surface and ground water, and Industrial Waste.
“Significant Industrial User” (SIU) Defined as Industrial User that meets the following
criteria:
(1) An Industrial User subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or
(2) An Industrial User that:
(a)Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day (gpd) or
more of process wastewater to the TCS and POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(b)Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW’s Treatment Plant; or
(c) Is designated as such by the Town on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or
requirement.
25
(3) The Town may determine that an Industrial User subject to Categorical
Pretreatment Standards is a non-significant Categorical Industrial User (CIU) rather than
a SIU on a finding that the Industrial User never discharges more than one hundred (100)
gpd of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the
following conditions are met:
(a)The Industrial User, prior to Town’s finding, has consistently complied with all
applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements; and
(b)[Reserved]
(c) The Industrial User never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
(4) Upon a finding that a User meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) of this part has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
Pretreatment Standard or requirement, the Town may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an Industrial User, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f) (6), determine that such User should not be considered a
SIU.
“Slug Load or Slug Discharge” Any Discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could
cause a violation of the Prohibited Discharge Standards in Section 16-4-6 of this ordinance. A
Slug Discharge is any Discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to
an accidental spill or a non-customary batch Discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, Local
Limits or permit conditions. In particular, any pollutant concentration, quantity, or flow rate
which, during any period of fifteen minutes or more, is greater than five times the average
twenty-four hour concentration, quantity, or flow rate for such pollutant during normal
operations.
“Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code” A classification pursuant to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
“Storm Water Sewer” A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but
excludes Sewage and polluted Industrial Wastes.
“Storm Water” Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation.
“Total Suspended Solids” (TSS) or “Suspended Solids” The total suspended matter that
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering.
“Town” The Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
“Town Collection System” (TCS) All sanitary sewer lines owned and maintained by the
Town.
26
“Upset” An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the User. An Upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
“User” or “Industrial User” A source of Indirect Discharge.
“User Charge” A portion of the sewer fee levied by the Town which shall be sufficient to fund
the estimated annual operation and maintenance (during replacement) cost of the TCS and
POTW.
“User Class” Any grouping as determined by the Utility Services Department Director of TCS
and POTW users, including Class I, II, and III industrial users.
“Utility Services Department Director” The person designated by the Town, Section 16-2-
2 of the Town Code, to supervise the operation of the Pretreatment Program, and who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this ordinance, or a duly authorized
representative.
“Utility Services Department” The department established by the Town to provide utility
service, including water, waste water, irrigation and reclaimed water.
“Vehicle Service Facility” Any facility, excluding residential homes, that conducts one or
more of the following operations with respect to vehicles or components of vehicles: vehicle
repair, fuel dispensing, vehicle fluid replacement, engine and parts cleaning, body repair,
vehicle salvage and wrecking, or vehicle washing.
“Waste Hauler” Any Person carrying on or engaging in vehicular transport of wastewater or
wastes as part of, or incidental to, any business for the purpose of discharging such waste into
the TCS and POTW.
“Wastewater” Liquid and water-carried industrial waste and sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which are conveyed to the TCS and POTW.
“Wastewater Treatment Plant” or “Treatment Plant” That portion of the POTW which is
designed to provide treatment of municipal Sewage and Industrial Waste.
Section 16-4-5 Industrial Users Identified as Class I, II, or III
The following sewer user classes have been established for Commercial and Industrial Users:
A. Class I Industrial users are defined as Significant Industrial Users (SIUs)
B. Class II Industrial users shall be any industrial user that meets all of the following criteria:
27
a. Is not an SIU;
b. Is determined in writing by the Utility Services Department Director to be
responsible for an industrial discharge which causes or has the reasonable
potential to cause harm or damage to the TCS or POTW, worker safety, public
safety, or the environment; and
c. Has discharges which are any one or more of the following:
i. Greater than the equivalent strength of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd
of domestic waste measured by BOD and TSS.
ii. Pollutants in groundwater subject to a remedial action plan that has been
approved by an appropriate regulatory agency.
iii. Any of the substances described in Section 16-4-6 of this ordinance.
iv. Either domestic wastewater or no discharge at all, but such industrial user
does have significant quantities of pollutants which, if discharged, would be
regulated by this ordinance.
d. All Commercial Industrial Users that are not Class I or II under subsections A and
B of this Section shall be identified as Class III Industrial Users.
Section 16-4-6 Prohibited Discharge Standards
A. General Prohibitions
No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the TCS and POTW any Pollutant or
wastewater which causes Pass Through or Interference, or any water or waste that could
cause a violation of any Categorical Standard or Pretreatment or recharge requirement. These
general prohibitions apply to all Users of the TCS and POTW whether or not they are subject
to Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other National, State, or local Pretreatment
Standards or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions
Except as provided in this Section, no Person or User shall discharge, cause to be discharged, or
process or store in such a manner that they could be discharged, any of the following described
water or wastes to the TCS or POTW:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or
gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity could be sufficient, either alone or by
interaction with other substances, to cause injury to the TCS and POTW from fire or
explosion.
28
2. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the TCS and POTW, including, but not
limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit
(°F) (60 °C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
3. Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the TCS and POTW, or at any point in the TCS and POTW, of more than
five percent (5%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit
of the meter.
4. Any water or waste having a pH lower than five (5.0) standard units (SU) or greater than
ten and one-half (10.5) SU or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel to the TCS and POTW.
5. Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 °F (65.6 °C), or which will inhibit
biological activity in the TCS and POTW resulting in Interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the TCS and POTW to exceed 104
°F (40 °C).
6. Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in amounts that will cause or
contribute to obstruction of the flow in the TCS and POTW.
7. Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts
which will cause or contribute to obstruction of the flow in the TCS and POTW, Interference,
Pass Through, or damage to the TCS and POTW.
8. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at
a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause Interference with the POTW.
9. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause or contribute to obstruction of the
flow in the TCS and POTW, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch (1/2”) or
1.27 centimeters (cm) in any dimension.
10. Any water or waste containing a toxic, poisonous, radioactive or other substance in
sufficient quantities to cause, or have the potential to cause, injury or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, cause effluent of the POTW to come out of ADEQ
compliance, cause corrosive structural damage or equipment degradation constitute a
hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard to the TCS and POTW system or in the
receiving waters and aquifer, or Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gasses,
vapors or fumes within the TCS and POTW system in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and/or safety problems.
11. Any Pollutant in concentrations that pose a risk of fume toxicity or other health and safety
risks to TCS and POTW workers. The Town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance
or in wastewater discharge permits, specific instantaneous effluent limitations for these
Pollutants.
29
12. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gas or substance which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or
prevent entry into the TCS for maintenance and repair.
13. Trucked or hauled Pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Utility Services
Department Director in accordance with Section 16-4-15 of this ordinance, including any
water or waste that is transported from the point of generation to the TCS and POTW by
any septic tank pumper or chemical Waste Hauler, or similarly transported unless the
transporter has first:
a. Disclosed to the Utility Services Department Director the origin, nature,
concentration and volume of all Pollutants to be discharged; and
b. Obtained written consent of the Utility Services Department Director to discharge.
14. Storm Water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, single-pass
cooling water or condensate that may constitute inflow to any sanitary sewer. No rain spout,
roof drain or other form of surface drainage and no foundation drainage or sump pump
shall be connected to, or discharge into, any sanitary sewer. Storm Water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers or drains as are specifically
designated by the Utility Services Department Director.
15. Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the Pretreatment of Industrial Wastes.
16. Medical Wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Utility Services Department
Director in a wastewater discharge permit.
17. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the POTW effluent to fail
a toxicity test.
18. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive
foaming in the TCS and POTW.
19. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently
imparts color to the POTW effluent, thereby violating the AZPDES permit.
20. Wastewater that has been diluted in any way as a substitute for pretreatment for the
purpose of obtaining compliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment
requirement imposed by this Article except where dilution is expressly authorized by any
categorical standard.
21. A discharge, other than domestic wastewater, that exhibits a characteristic of a
hazardous waste or contains a substance that is listed as a hazardous waste pursuant to
either the Arizona Administrative Code (AAC) R18-8-261 or 40 CFR Part 261, whichever
is applicable, whether or not the discharge is otherwise subject to hazardous waste
30
regulations. The Utility Services Department Director may allow a discharge of such
wastes, if upon written request of the affected person; the Utility Services Department
Director determines that the discharge would not cause Interference or Pass Through
with POTW operations.
22. Waste water sampled using the following specified sample type which exceeds the limits
for the following parameters, expressed in the total form as micrograms per liter (ug/L):
a) The instantaneous effluent limitation shall be the maximum allowable
concentration permitted in a discharge at any time as measured in a grab
sample. The instantaneous effluent limitation for the following parameters shall
be:
Parameter Limit (ug/L) Sample Type
i. Benzene 35 Grab
ii. Chloroform 2,000 Grab
b) The following parameters are prohibited from being discharged to the TCS and
POTW:
i. BHC-alpha
ii. BHC-beta
iii. BHC-gamma (lindane)
iv. Chrysene
v. Heptachlor
vi. Heptachlor Epoxide vii. Phenanthrene
viii. Polychlorinated Biphenyl Compounds (PBCs)
Section 16-4-7 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
The Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-
471 are hereby incorporated.
A. Where a Categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass
or the concentration of a Pollutant in wastewater, the Utility Services Department Director
may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(c).
B. When the limits in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard are expressed only in terms of
mass of Pollutant per unit of production, the Utility Services Department Director may
convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of Pollutant
discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations
applicable to individual Industrial Users.
31
C. When wastewater subject to a Categorical Pretreatment Standard is mixed with
wastewater not regulated by the same Standard, the Utility Services Department Director
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
D. [Reserved]
E. [Reserved]
Section 16-4-8 State Pretreatment Standards
State Pretreatment Standards located at Arizona Administrative Code R18-9-A905 (A) (8) (b) are
hereby incorporated.
Section 16-4-9 Local Limits
A. The Utility Services Department Director is authorized to establish Local Limits pursuant
to 40 CFR 403.5(c).
B. Class I Industrial Users shall not discharge or cause to be discharged at any entry point
into the TCS any wastewater which exceeds the daily average effluent limitation
specified in part (3) below. A Class II Industrial User also may be subject to one or more
of the daily average effluent limitations if the Utility Services Department Director
determines in writing that such user is responsible for an industrial discharge which causes
or has the reasonable potential to cause harm or damage to worker safety, public safety
or the environment. This written determination shall identify the daily average effluent
limitations applicable to the user that are necessary to minimize the potential harm or
damage to worker safety, public safety and the environment.
1. The daily average effluent limitation shall be the maximum
allowable concentration permitted in a discharge as measured, where feasible, in a
composite sample obtained by flow proportional sampling techniques. If the Utility
Services Department Director determines that flow-proportional site sampling is not
feasible, the Utility Services Department Director may allow or conduct composite
sampling by time-proportional techniques or by the compositing or averaging of one or
more grab samples.
2. Sampling for the daily average effluent limitation shall be conducted
using the sample type specified in part (3) below.
3. The daily average effluent limitation for the following parameters,
expressed in the total form as milligrams per liter (mg/L), shall be:
32
Parameter Limit (mg/L) Sample Type
a. Arsenic 0.1 Composite
b. Cadmium 0.047 Composite
c. Copper 1.5 Composite
d. Cyanide 2.0 Grab
e. Lead 0.41 Composite
f. Mercury 0.0023 Composite
g. Selenium 0.024 Composite
h. Silver 1.2 Composite
i. Zinc 3.5 Composite
C. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the TCS and
POTW. The Utility Services Department Director may impose mass limitations in addition
to the concentration-based limitations above. The Utility Services Department Director may
develop Best Management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater
discharge permits to implement Local Limits and the requirements of Section 16-4-6.
Section 16-4-10 Town's Right of Revision
The Town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge
permits, more stringent Standards or requirements on Discharges to the TCS and POTW
consistent with the purpose of this ordinance.
Section 16-4-11 Dilution
No User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a
Discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable Pretreatment Standard or
requirement. The Utility Services Department Director may impose mass limitations on Users who
are using dilution to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards or requirements or in other cases
when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
Section 16-4-12 Pretreatment Facilities
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this ordinance and achieve
compliance with all Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local Limits, and prohibitions outlined in
Section 16-4-6 of this ordinance within the time limitations specified by EPA, ADEQ, or the Utility
33
Services Department Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance
shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the User’s expense.
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed Pretreatment
facilities shall be submitted for review by and the approval of the Utility Services Department
Director as well as the engineering division of the State and County Boards of Health. No such
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in
writing. The completed facilities shall not be placed in service until they have been inspected
for conformance to the approved plans and the final construction approved by the Utility Services
Department Director. The approval of the plans and inspection of construction shall not relieve the
owner from complying with, and achieving, discharge limitations set forth in this chapter. The
review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the User from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a Discharge acceptable to the
Town under the provisions of this ordinance.
Federal Pretreatment regulations shall be enforced as applicable. No Discharge may cause the
POTW to exceed the applicable APP or AZPDES limitations.
Section 16-4-13 Additional Pretreatment Measures
A. The Utility Services Department Director may require Users to restrict their Discharge
during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific
sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate Sewage waste
streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the TCS and POTW and determine the User's compliance with the requirements of
this ordinance.
B. The Utility Services Department Director may require any Person discharging into the TCS
and POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage
and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may
be issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Pretreatment devices for the removal of fats, oils, and grease and sand, grit, and/or other
solids shall be installed by Food Service Facilities and Vehicle Service Facilities. They shall
also be installed by other Users when, in the opinion of the Utility Services Department
Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive
amounts of these materials except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential Users. Requirements for the proper handling of these constituents in
wastewater are as follows:
1. Grease interceptors shall be required, installed, and maintained as specified in
the Utility Services Department Director policies and procedures for the sizing
and cleaning of interceptors for the food service industry.
2. Sand/oil interceptors and oil/water separators shall be required, installed, and
maintained as specified in the Utility Services Department Director’ policies and
procedures for the sizing and cleaning of interceptors for the vehicle service
industry.
34
3. All interceptors and separators shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Utility Services Department Director or designee as defined by the Utility
Services Department Design and Specifications Manual; located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection; constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature;
and provided with trafficrated vaults and lids. They shall be of a substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which,
when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
4. Where installed, all interceptors and separators shall be maintained by
the
owner, at his expense, in continuous, efficient operation at all times. Interceptors and
separators shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly by the User at the
User’s expense as specified in the Utility Services Department Director’ policies and
procedures. The User shall have grease removed and disposed by grease haulers that
are approved by the Utility Services Department Director. The User shall keep records
of all cleaning, repair and maintenance for at least three (3) years on the site where the
interceptor, separator or trap is located. These records shall include copies of
manifests indicating the point of discharge for each load. Such records shall
be available for inspection by the Utility Services Department Director upon request.
5. The Utility Services Department Director may require, in addition to the
installation of Pretreatment devices, other actions by Users as necessary to
implement the Town’s program to manage fats, oil, and grease, including but
not limited to adoption and implementation of BMPs.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and
maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
Section 16-4-14 Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans
The Utility Services Department Director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental
Discharge/Slug Discharge control plan. The Utility Services Department Director may require any
User to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Utility Services
Department Director may develop such a plan for any User. An accidental Discharge/Slug
Discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch Discharges; B.
Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the Utility Services Department Director of any
accidental or Slug Discharge, as required by Section 16-4-37 of this ordinance; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or Slug Discharge. Such
procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic Pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
35
Section 16-4-15 Hauled Wastewater
A. The Utility Services Department Director shall require haulers of Septic Tank Waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits.
B. Septic Tank Waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the
Utility Services Department Director and at such times as are established by the Utility
Services Department Director. The Utility Services Department Director may collect
samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable Standards. The Utility
Services Department Director may require the Septic Tank Waste hauler to provide a waste
analysis of any load prior to discharge. The Discharge of hauled Septic Tank Waste is
subject to all other requirements of this ordinance.
C. Septic Tank Waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form
shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the Septic Tank Waste hauler, permit
number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. Septic Tank Waste haulers shall maintain records of all wastetracking
forms for at least three (3) years.
D. The Utility Services Department Director shall require grease haulers to obtain wastewater
discharge permits.
E. Grease haulers shall not discharge mixed loads of grease and septic tank waste or any
other type of waste. Grease haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by
the Utility Services Department Director and at such times as are established by the Utility
Services Department Director. The Utility Services Department Director may collect
samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable Standards. The Utility
Services Department Director may require the grease hauler to provide a waste analysis
of any load prior to discharge. The Discharge of hauled grease is subject to all other
requirements of this ordinance.
F. Grease haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include,
at a minimum, the name and address of the grease hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics
of waste. Grease haulers shall maintain records of all waste-tracking forms for at least
three (3) years.
G. The Utility Services Department Director shall require haulers of Industrial Waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The Utility Services Department Director may require
generators of hauled Industrial Waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Utility
Services Department Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled Industrial Waste.
The Discharge of hauled Industrial Waste is subject to all other requirements of this
ordinance.
H. Industrial Waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the
Utility Services Department Director and at such times as established by the Utility Services
Department Director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Utility
Services Department Director. The Utility Services Department Director may collect
36
samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable Standards. The Utility
Services Department Director may require the Industrial Waste hauler to provide a waste
analysis of any load prior to discharge.
I. Industrial Waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall
include, at a minimum, the name and address of the Industrial Waste hauler, permit
number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. Industrial
Waste haulers shall maintain records of all waste-tracking forms for at least three (3) years.
Section 16-4-16 Wastewater Analysis
When requested by the Utility Services Department Director, a User must submit information on
the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within forty-five (45) days of the request. The
Director of Utilities Services is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require Users to update this information.
Section 16-4-17 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
A. No SIU shall discharge wastewater into the TCS and POTW without first obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit from the Utility Services Department Director, except that a
SIU that has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 16-4-20 of this ordinance may
continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
B. The Utility Services Department Director may require Vehicle Service Facilities and Food
Service Facilities to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The Utility Services
Department Director may also elect to issue a general permit which applies to all individual
Users in a particular category (e.g., Vehicle Service Facilities). Vehicle Service Facilities
and Food Service Facilities shall also meet the Pretreatment Requirements of Section 16-
4- 14C.
C. The Utility Services Department Director may require other Users to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.
The Utility Services Department Director may also elect to issue a general permit or set
general requirements, including implementation of Pretreatment and BMPs, which apply
to all individual Users in a particular category. For the purposes of this ordinance, Users
in a category:
1. Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
2. Discharge the same types of wastes;
3. Require the same effluent limitations;
4. Require the same or similar monitoring; and
5. In the opinion of the Director of Utilities Services, are more appropriately
controlled under a general permit or general requirements than under individual
wastewater discharge permits.
37
D. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed
a violation of this ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the
sanctions set out in Sections 16-4-50 through 16-4-60 of this ordinance. Obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all Federal and State Pretreatment Standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of Federal, State, and local law.
Section 16-4-18 Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections
Any User required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into
the TCS and POTW prior to the effective date of this ordinance and who wishes to continue such
Discharges in the future, shall, within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this ordinance,
apply to the Utility Services Department Director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance
with Section 16-4-20 of this ordinance, and shall not cause or allow Discharges to the TCS and
POTW to continue after thirty (30) days of the effective date of this ordinance except in
accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Utility Services Department
Director.
Section 16-4-19 Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
Any User required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the TCS and POTW must obtain such permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such Discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge
permit, in accordance with Section 16-4-20 of this ordinance, must be filed at least thirty (30) days
prior to the date upon which any Discharge will begin or recommence.
Section 16-4-20 Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
A. All Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application. The Utility Services Department Director may require all Users to submit either
independently or as part of an application the following information:
1. Identifying Information:
a. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator
and owner; and
b. Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant production
processes on the premises.
2. Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for
the facility;
3. Description of Operations;
a. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product
produced by type, amount, processes, and rate oof production), and Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) of the operation(s) carried out by such User. This description should
38
include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the TCS
and POTW from the regulated processes.
b. Typres of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and checmicals uised or
stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to
the TCS and POTW;
c. Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours
of operation;
d. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
and
e. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers,
floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of
discharge.
4. Time and duration of Discharges;
5. The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
6. Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the TCS and POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
waste stream formula set out in Section 16-4-7C (40 CFR 403.6(e));
7. Measurement of Pollutants;
a. The Categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each regulated process
and any new categorically regulated processes for Existing Sources.
b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration,
and/or mass, where required by the Standard or by the Utility Services Department
Director, of regulated Pollutants in the Discharge from each regulated process.
c. Instantaneous, Daily Maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where
required, shall be reported.
d. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in Section 16-4-41 of this ordinance. Where the
Standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative,
the User shall submit documentation as required by the Director of Utilities Services or
the applicable Standards to determine compliance with the Standard.
e. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 16-
4-42 of this ordinance.
8. [Reserved]
39
9. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director of Utilities
Services to evaluate the permit application; and
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the
User for revision.
Section 16-4-21 [Reserved - Wastewater Discharge Permitting: General Permits]
Section 16-4-22 Application Signatories and Certifications
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications, User reports and certification statements
must be signed by an Authorized Representative of the User and contain the certification
statement in Section 16-4-45A.
B. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization
satisfying the requirements of this Section must be submitted to the Utility Services
Department Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
Section 16-4-23 Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
The Utility Services Department Director will evaluate the data furnished by the User and may
require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the Utility Services Department Director will determine whether or
not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Utility Services Department Director may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit or place upon it such conditions and restrictions
as authorized by this ordinance.
Section 16-4-24 Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5)
years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the Utility Services Department Director. Each
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
Section 16-4-25 Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary
by the Utility Services Department Director to prevent Pass Through or Interference, protect the
quality of the water body receiving the POTW’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
sludge management and disposal, protect against damage to the TCS and POTW, and prevent
sanitary sewer overflows.
A. Wastewater discharge permits for SIUs must contain and for all other Users may
contain:
1. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event
shall exceed five (5) years;
40
2. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to the Town in accordance with Section 16-4-28 of this ordinance, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
3. Effluent limits based on applicable Pretreatment Standards and/or requirements for
BMPs;
4. Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements.
These requirements shall include an identification of Pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State,
and local law; and
5. [Reserved]
6. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of Pretreatment
Standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such
schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable
Federal, State, or local law.
7. [Reserved]
8. [Reserved]
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following
conditions:
1. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
2. Requirements for the installation of Pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or
prevent the introduction of Pollutants into the treatment works;
3. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine Discharges;
4. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans, including but not
limited to BMPs, to reduce the amount of Pollutants discharged to the TCS and
POTW;
5. The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the TCS and POTW;
6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities
and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
7. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and
State Pretreatment Standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
41
8. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Utility Services Department Director
to ensure compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
Section 16-4-26 Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
A. Reserved.
B. Permit Appeals. The Utility Services Department Director shall provide public notice of the
issuance of an individual wastewater discharge permit. Any Person, including the User,
may petition the Utility Services Department Director to reconsider the terms of a
wastewater discharge permit within twenty (20) days of notice of its issuance.
1. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
2. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the individual wastewater discharge
permit. If appeal is from denial, the appeal should set forth all reasons the application
for permit, renewal, or reissuance should have been granted.
3. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not
be stayed pending the appeal.
4. If the Utility Services Department Director fails to act within thirty (30)
days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit,
or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
5. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Arizona
Superior Court for Maricopa County within thirty (30) days of final administrative action.
This article cannot confer jurisdiction upon the Arizona Superior Court for
Maricopa County by only establishes when action may be ripe and administrative
remedies have been exhausted.
Section 16-4-27 Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
A. The Utility Services Department Director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
1. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local Pretreatment
Standards or requirements;
2. To address significant alterations or additions to the User's operation, processes,
or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit
issuance;
42
3. A change in the TCS or POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized Discharge;
4. Information indicating that the permitted Discharge poses a threat to the TCS and/or
POTW, Town personnel, or the receiving waters;
5. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
6. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater
discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
7. Revision of or a grant of variance from Categorical Pretreatment Standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
8. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
9. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator
where requested in accordance with Section 16-4-28.
B. [Reserved]
Section 16-4-28 Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee
gives at least sixty (60) days advance notice to the Utility Services Department Director and the
Utility Services Department Director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The
notice to the Utility Services Department Director must include a written certification by the new
owner or operator which:
A. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes;
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
C. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge
permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as
of the date of facility transfer.
Section 16-4-29 Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
The Utility Services Department Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. Failure to notify the Utility Services Department Director of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed Discharge;
43
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of Utilities Services of changed
conditions pursuant to Section 16-4-36 of this ordinance;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater
discharge permit application;
D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F. Refusing to allow the Utility Services Department Director timely access to the facility
premises and records;
G. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to pay sewer charges;
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted
facility; or
M. Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater
discharge permit or this ordinance.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of
business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular User are void upon
the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that User.
Section 16-4-30 Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
A User with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 16-4- 20 of
this ordinance, a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the User's existing
wastewater discharge permit.
Section 16-4-31 [Reserved - Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions]
Section 16-4-32 Baseline Monitoring Reports
A. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination
under 40 CFR 403.6(a) (4), whichever is later, existing CIUs currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the TCS and POTW shall submit to the Utility Services
Department Director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below.
At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their Discharge, New Sources, and
sources that become CIUs subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
44
Categorical Standard, shall submit to the Utility Services Department Director a report
which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. A New Source shall report the
method of Pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable Categorical Standards. A New
Source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of Pollutants to be
discharged. The Utility Services Department Director may designate in permits issued to
other Users that they must file the reports required by this Section.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
1. All information required in Section 16-4-20 A(1)(a), Section 16-4-20 A(2), Section
16-4-20 A(3)(a), and Section 16-4-20.A(6).
2. Measurement of Pollutants.
a. The User shall provide the information required in Section 16-4-20 A(7)(a)
through (d).
b. The User shall take a minimum of one Representative Sample to compile that data
necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
c. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from Pretreatment facilities if
such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no Pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to
Pretreatment the User should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate
compliance with the Pretreatment Standards. Where an alternate concentration or
mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted
limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the Control Authority.
d. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with Sections 16-4-41 and
16-4-42.
e. The Utility Services Department Director may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial Pretreatment measures.
f. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and
methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected Pollutant Discharges to the
TCS and POTW.
3. Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the User's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional Pretreatment is
required to meet the Pretreatment Standards and requirements.
4. Compliance Schedule. If additional Pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the Pretreatment Standards, the shortest schedule by which the User will
45
provide such additional Pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
Pretreatment Standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet
the requirements set out in Section 16-4-33 of this ordinance.
5. Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) must
be signed and certified in accordance with Section 16-4-22 of this ordinance.
Section 16-4-33 Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 16-4-32 (B)(4)
of this ordinance:
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
Pretreatment required for the User to meet the applicable Pretreatment Standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction,
and beginning and conducting routine
operation);
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
C. The User shall submit a progress report to the Utility Services Department Directorno later
than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the
reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the User to return to the
established schedule; and
D. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the
Utility Services Department Director.
Section 16-4-34 Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a New Source following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the TCS and POTW, any User subject to such Pretreatment
Standards and requirements shall submit to the Utility Services Department Director a report
containing the information described in Section 16-4-20 A(6) and (7) and 16-4-32.B(2) of this
ordinance. For Users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance
with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
User's long-term production rate. For all other Users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards
expressed in terms of allowable Pollutant Discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall include the User's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 16-4- 45.A
of this ordinance.
46
Section 16-4-35 Periodic Compliance Reports
A. SIUs and other Users as may be designated by the Utility Services Department
Director shall provide, at their own expense, sampling and analyses at least twice each
year, in June and December, according to 40 CFR 403.12. If any sample that is taken by
the SIU or the Town is not within the limits of this chapter or the Federal Categorical
Standards, then the User will be required to perform the sampling and analyses as often
as is determined by the Utility Services Department Director to be necessary.
B. All SIUs and other Users as may be designated by the Utility Services Department
Director shall, at a frequency determined by the Utility Services Department Director but in
no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the
nature and concentration of Pollutants in the Discharge which are limited by Pretreatment
Standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section 16-4-22 of this ordinance.
C. All wastewater samples must be representative of the User's Discharge and analyzed in
compliance with Sections 16-4-41, 16-4-42, and 16-4-43. Wastewater monitoring and
flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in
good working order at all times. The failure of a User to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the User to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its Discharge.
D. If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this Section monitors any Pollutant more
frequently than required by the Utility Services Department Director, using the procedures
prescribed in Section 16-4-42 of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
Section 16-4-36 Reports of Changed Conditions
Each User must notify the Utility Services Department Director of any planned significant changes
to the User's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater
at least forty-five (45) days before the change.
A. The Utility Services Department Director may require the User to submit such information
as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission
of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 16-4-20 of this ordinance.
B. The Utility Services Department Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under Section 16-4-30 of this ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under Section 16-4-27 of this ordinance in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
C. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow
increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the Discharge of any previously
unreported Pollutants.
47
Section 16-4-37 Reports of Potential Problems
A. In the case of any Discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental Discharges,
Discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch Discharge, Slug
Discharge or a Slug Load, that may cause potential problems for the TCS and POTW, the
User shall immediately telephone and notify the Utility Services Department Director of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of the Discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the User.
B. Within five (5) days following such Discharge, the User shall submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the Discharge and the measures to be taken by the User to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to
the TCS and POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the User of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may
be imposed pursuant to this ordinance.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the User's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees who to call in the event of a Discharge described in paragraph A,
above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a Discharge to
occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
D. SIUs are required to notify the Utility Services Department Director immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for a Slug Discharge.
Section 16-4-38 Reports from Unpermitted Users
All Users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports
to the Utility Services Department Director the Utility Services Department Director may require.
Section 16-4-39 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting
If sampling performed by a User indicates a violation, the User must notify the Utility Services
Department Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The User
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
Utility Services Department Director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.
Re- sampling by the User is not required if the Utility Services Department Director performs
sampling at the User’s facility at least once a month, or if the Utility Services
Department Director performs sampling at the User between the time when the initial sampling
was conducted and the time when the User or the Utility Services Department Director receives
the results of this sampling, or if the Director of Utilities Services has performed the sampling and
analysis in lieu of the User.
Section 16-4-40 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste
A. Any User who commences the Discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the Utility
Services Department Director, the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any Discharge into
the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
48
under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
Discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the User discharges more than one hundred
(100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the User: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste
stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve
(12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180)
days after the Discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of
changed conditions must be submitted under Section 16-4-36 of this ordinance. The
notification requirement in this Section does not apply to Pollutants already reported by
Users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of Sections 16-4-32, 16-4-34, and 16-4-35 of this ordinance.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph A, above, during a calendar
month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes,
unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes
in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during
which the User discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous
waste, the User must notify the Utility Services Department Director, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the
Discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such
regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this Section, the User shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise
permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable
Federal or State law.
Section 16-4-41 Analytical Requirements
A. All Pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a
wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the Pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must
be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.
49
B. In order to be considered for compliance with the requirements of this article, analysis of
all samples must be conducted by a laboratory licensed by the State of Arizona (A.R.S.
36-495, et seq).
Section 16-4-42 Sample Collection
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through
appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on
data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
A. Except as indicated below, the User must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flowproportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling
or grab sampling is authorized by the Utility Services Department Director. Where timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
Utility Services Department Director, the samples must be representative of the Discharge.
Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple Grab Samples collected during a 24hour period may
be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the
samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil
and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite Samples for
other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Utility Services Department Director, as
appropriate. In addition, Grab Samples may be required to show compliance with
Instantaneous Limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and
volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
C. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports
required in Section 16-4-32 and 16-4-34 [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four (4)
Grab Samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the Utility Services Department
Director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs
Section 16-4-35 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the User is required to collect the
number of Grab Samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable
Pretreatment Standards and requirements.
D. The flow must be measured by the User at the time that the sample is taken according to
40 CFR 403.12(d).
Section 16-4-43 Date of Receipt of Reports
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which
are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service,
the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
50
Section 16-4-44 Recordkeeping
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make available for
inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this ordinance and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the User independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with BMPs established under Section 16-4-9. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the
samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for
the duration of any litigation concerning the User or the Town, or where the User has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Utility Services Department Director.
Section 16-4-45 Certification Statements
A. Certification of Permit Applications and User Reports - The following certification
statement is required to be signed and submitted by Users submitting permit
applications in accordance with Section 16-4-22; Users submitting BMRs under Section
16-4-32 B(5) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12 (l)]; Users submitting reports on compliance with
the Categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines under Section 16-4-34 [Note: See
40 CFR 403.12(d)]; Users submitting periodic compliance reports required by Section 16-
4-35 A through D [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)]. The following certification
statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in Section 16-4-4:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified Personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the Person or Persons who
manage the system, or those Persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
B. [Reserved]
C. [Reserved]
Section 16-4-46 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
The Utility Services Department Director shall have the right to enter the premises of any User to
determine whether the User is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Utility Services
Department Director Ready Access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
A. Where a User has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the User shall make necessary arrangements with
51
its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director of
Utilities Services will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of
performing specific responsibilities.
B. The Utility Services Department Director shall have the right to set up on the User's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
and/or metering of the User's operations.
C. The Utility Services Department Director may require the User to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the User at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated
annually to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the User at the written or verbal
request of the Utility Services Department Director and shall not be replaced. The costs
of clearing such access shall be borne by the User.
E. Unreasonable delays allowing the Utility Services Department Director access to the
User's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. Unreasonable delays are defined
in the Town’s Enforcement Response Plan, as described in Section 16-4-58.
F. The Town will maintain records of monitoring that are necessary to enforce this Section.
G. The Town may sample randomly and analyze for any Pollutants that would be
anticipated in the effluent of a SIU or other User as may be designated by the Utility
Services Department Director. The Town may designate an independent laboratory to
conduct the sampling and analyses, and the staff of the designated laboratory shall be
allowed to enter the premises of any User to sample any Discharge which may
enter the wastewater collection system.
H. The User will be financially responsible for any sampling and analysis done by the Town
that is not routine as provided for in this Section.
Section 16-4-47 Search Warrants
If the Utility Services Department Director has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may
be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the Town designed to verify compliance with this
ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety
and welfare of the community, then the Utility Services Department Director may seek issuance
of a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 16-4-48 Confidential Information
Information and data on a User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit
applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the Utility
Services Department Director’ inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public
52
without restriction, unless the User specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Director of Utilities Services, that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted in writing at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the User furnishing
a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses
related to the applicable APP or AZPDES program or Pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the Person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
Section 16-4-49 Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
The Utility Services Department Director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the TCS and
POTW, a list of the Users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
noncompliance (SNC) with applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements. The term SNC
shall be applicable to all SIUs (or any other Industrial User that violates paragraphs (C), (D) or (H)
of this Section) and shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty- six
percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken for the same Pollutant parameter
taken during a six- (6-) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment
Standard or requirement, including Instantaneous Limits as defined in Section 16-4-6;
B. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three
percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each Pollutant parameter
during a six- (6- ) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric Pretreatment
Standard or requirement including Instantaneous Limits, as defined by
Section 16-4-6, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other Pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or requirement as defined by Sections
16-4-6, 16-4-7, 16-4-8, and 16-4-9 (Daily Maximum, long-term average, Instantaneous
Limit, or narrative Standard) that the Director of Utilities Services determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other Discharges, Interference or Pass Through,
including endangering the health of TCS and POTW personnel or the general public;
D. Any Discharge of a Pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to
the environment, or has resulted in the Utility Services Department Director’ exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a Discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
53
F. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports,
including BMRs, reports on compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of BMPs, which the Utility Services
Department Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local Pretreatment program.
Section 16-4-50 Notification of Violation
When the Utility Services Department Director finds that a User has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or requirement, the Utility Services Department Director may
serve upon that User a written Notice of Violation. Within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of this
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the User to the Utility Services
Department Director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the User of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation. Nothing in this Section shall
limit the authority of the Utility Services Department Director to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation.
Section 16-4-51 Consent Orders
The Utility Services Department Director may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any User responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the User to correct the
noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 16-4-53 and 16-4-
54 of this ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable.
Section 16-4-52 Show Cause Hearing
The Utility Services Department Director may order a User which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or requirement, to appear before the Utility Services
Department Director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served on the User specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the User show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior
to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any Authorized Representative of the User. A show
cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
User.
54
Section 16-4-53 Compliance Orders
When the Utility Services Department Director that a User has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other Pretreatment Standard or requirement, the Utility Services Department Director may issue
an order to the User responsible for the Discharge directing that the User come into compliance
within a specified time. If the User does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer
service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed, maintained and/or properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self- monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of Pollutants discharged to the
sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
Pretreatment Standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the User of liability
for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
Section 16-4-54 Cease and Desist Orders
When the Utility Services Department Director finds that a User has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or requirement, or that the User's past violations are likely to
recur, the Utility Services Department Director may issue an order to the User directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the User to:
A. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address
a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the
Discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the User.
Section 16-4-55 Administrative Fines
A. When the Utility Services Department Director finds that a User has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or requirement, the Utility Services
Department Director may fine such User in an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000), in accordance with A.R.S. 49-391. Such fines shall be assessed on a
per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge
limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an
additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue
thereafter at a rate of one percent (1%) per month. A lien against the User's property will
be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
55
C. Each and every day any violation continues shall be deemed and considered a separate
offense. Any Person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Town by
reason of such violation.
D. The penalties set forth above shall be cumulative and nonexclusive. In addition to those
penalties set forth herein, the Town may institute any other remedies available,
including, but not limited to, a civil action to recover any and all monies due the Town.
E. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the Utility Services
Department Director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within
fifteen (15) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the Utility Services
Department Director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the User's appeal
is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned
to the User. The Utility Services Department Director may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
F. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the User.
Section 16-4-56 Emergency Suspensions
The Utility Services Department Director may immediately suspend a User's Discharge, after
informal notice to the User, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened Discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of Persons and/or TCS and POTW employees;
damage or cause to damage the collection, treatment recharge/reuse system, or any part thereof,
or cause a detrimental decrease in recharge water quality. The Utility Services Department
Director may also immediately suspend a User's Discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the TCS and POTW, or which presents,
or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
A. Any User notified of a suspension of its Discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
wastewater Discharge. In the event of a User's failure to immediately comply voluntarily
with the suspension order, the Utility Services Department Director may take such steps
as deemed necessary including, but not limited to, immediate severance of the Sewer
Connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the TCS and POTW, the aquifer or other
receiving waters, or endangerment to any individuals. The Utility Services Department
Director may allow the User to recommence its Discharge when the User has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Utility Services Department Directorthat the period
of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 16-4-57 of
this ordinance are initiated against the User.
B. A User that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any Discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Utility
Services Department Director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing
under Sections 16-4-52 or 16-4-57 of this ordinance.
56
Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this Section.
Section 16-4-57 Termination of Discharge
In addition to the provisions in Section 16-4-29 of this ordinance, any User who violates the
following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
Discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and
characteristics prior to Discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the User's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring, or sampling; or
E. Violation of the Pretreatment Standards in Section 16-4-5 through 16-4-11 of this
ordinance.
Such User will be notified of the proposed termination of its Discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under Section 16-4-52 of this ordinance why the proposed action should
not be taken. Exercise of this option by the Utility Services Department Director shall not be a bar
to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
Section 16-4-58 Alternative Administrative Enforcement
As an alternative to the administrative enforcement procedures and remedies delineated in
Sections 16-4-50 through 16-4-57 of this ordinance, the Utility Services Department Director may
elect to administratively prosecute violations of this chapter in accordance with the procedures
delineated in the Town’s Enforcement Response Plan promulgated and adopted by the Town
pursuant to statutory requirements set forth in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended
by the Clean Water Act of 1977. A copy of the Enforcement Response Plan will be available
through a public records request from the Town Clerk.
Section 16-4-59 Judicial Enforcement Remedies
A. Injunctive Relief
When the Utility Services Department Director finds that a User has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or requirement, the Utility Services Department Director may
petition the Superior Court of Arizona, Maricopa County, through the Town’s
Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains
or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the User. The Utility Services Department
57
Director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the User to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a User.
B. Civil Penalties
1. A User who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit, or any order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment
Standard or requirement shall be liable to the Town for a maximum civil penalty of up to
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per violation, per day, in accordance with A.R.S.
49-391. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall
accrue for each day during the period of the violation. A.R.S. 49-391 permits recovery of
civil penalties provided therein by action in superior court or negotiated settlement
agreement. No consent decree in superior court or negotiated settlement may become
final until the Town has provided a period of thirty (30) days for public comment.
2. The Utility Services Department Director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the Town.
3. In determining the amount of civil liability, the Town or Court shall take into account all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the
violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through
the User's violation, corrective actions taken by the User to reduce, mitigate and/or
eliminate the violation and any future potential violations of a similar nature, the compliance
history of the User, and any other factor as justice requires.
4. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against a User.
C. Criminal Prosecution
1. A User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per violation, per day, or imprisonment
for not more than six (6) months, or both.
2. A User who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the TCS and POTW which
causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000)
per violation, per day, or the cost of property repairs, whichever is greater, or be subject to
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition
to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State
law.
3. A User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained,
pursuant to this ordinance, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
58
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per violation, per day, or imprisonment
for not more than six (6) months, or both.
4. In the event of a second conviction, a User shall be punished by a fine of not more than
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more
than two (2) years, or both.
D. Remedies Nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive. The Utility Services Department
Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
User. Enforcement of Pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Town’s
enforcement response plan. However, the Utility Services Department Director may take other
action against any User when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Utility Services Department
Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant User.
Section 16-4-60 Supplemental Enforcement Action
A. Penalties for Late Reports
A penalty shall be assessed to any User for each day that a report required by this ordinance, a
permit, or order issued hereunder is late, beginning five (5) days after the date the report is due,
according to the schedule in the Town’s Enforcement Response Plan. Actions taken by the Utility
Services Department Director to collect late reporting penalties shall not limit the
Director of Utilities Service’s authority to initiate other enforcement actions that may include
penalties for late reporting violations.
B. Performance Bonds
The Utility Services Department Director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any User who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a
previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment
Standard or requirement, unless such User first files a satisfactory bond, letter of credit, cash, or
other security device payable to the Town, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Utility
Services Department Director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
C. Liability Insurance
The Utility Services Department Director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any User who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a
previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment
Standard or requirement, unless the User first submits proof that it has obtained financial
assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the TCS and POTW caused by its Discharge.
D. Payment of Outstanding Fees and Penalties
59
The Utility Services Department Director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any User who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a
result of any provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder.
E. Water Supply Severance
Whenever a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or requirement,
water and/or sewer service to the User may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the
User's expense, after it has demonstrated its ability to comply to the satisfaction of the Utility
Services Department Director.
F. Public Nuisances
A violation of any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or requirement is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Utility Services Department Director.
Any Person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Town
Code Title 3 and 4 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the Town for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. The remedy provided herein shall be
in addition to any other remedy authorized by this Chapter.
G. Informant Rewards
The Utility Services Department Director may pay up to five hundred dollars ($500) for information
leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a User.
H. Contractor Listing
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards and
requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to
the Town. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the Town held by a User found
to be in SNC with Pretreatment Standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of
the Utility Services Department Director.
Section 16-4-61 Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
A. Upset
1. For the purposes of this Section, “Upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the User. An Upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
60
2. An Upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance
with Categorical Pretreatment Standards if the requirements of paragraph (C), below, are
met.
3. A User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of Upset shall demonstrate, through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
a. An Upset occurred and the User can identify the cause(s) of the Upset;
b. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner
and in compliance with applicable O&M procedures; and
c. The User has submitted the following information to the Utility Services Department
Director Services within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the Upset
[if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five (5) days]:
i. A description of the Discharge to the TCS and POTW and cause of
noncompliance;
ii. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if
not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
iii. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
4. In any enforcement proceeding, the User seeking to establish the occurrence of an Upset
shall have the burden of proof.
5. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of Upset only in an
enforcement action brought for noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
6. Users shall control production of all Discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its
treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
Section 16-4-62 Prohibited Discharge Standards
A User shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 16-4-6(A) of this ordinance or the
specific prohibitions in Sections 16-4-6(B) of this ordinance if it can prove that it did not know, or
have reason to know, that its Discharge, alone or in conjunction with Discharges from other
sources, would cause Pass Through or Interference and that either:
A. A Local Limit exists for each Pollutant discharged and the User was in compliance with
each limit directly prior to, and during, the Pass Through or Interference; or
61
B. No Local Limit exists, but the Discharge did not change substantially in nature or
constituents from the User's prior Discharge when the Town was regularly in compliance
with the applicable APP and AZPDES permits, and in the case of Interference, was in
compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
Section 16-4-63 Bypass
A. For the purposes of this Section,
1. “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a User's
treatment facility.
2. “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected
to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in or reduction of production, or the additional cost of
treatment/Pretreatment facilities.
B. A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment Standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (C) and (D) of
this Section.
C. Bypass Notifications
1. If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit written prior request
and notice to the Utility Services Department Director, at least ten (10) days before the
date of the bypass.
2. A User shall submit oral notice to the Utility Services Department Director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment Standards within twentyfour
(24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the User becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause;
the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not
been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
D. Bypass
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the Utility Services Department Director may take an
enforcement action against a User for a bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, Personal injury, or severe
property damage as defined in Section 16-4-63 A (2);
62
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal
periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back- up
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering
judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventive maintenance; and
c. The User submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of this Section.
The Utility Services Department Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the Utility Services Department Director
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (D)(1) of this
Section.
Section 16-4-64 Wastewater Treatment Rates
A. Pretreatment Charges and Fees
The Town may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
Town’s Pretreatment Program which may include:
1. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications;
2. Fees to recover legal costs resulting from enforcement response to any user
noncompliance including, but not limited to, administrative expenses, investigation,
sampling, testing, legal proceedings and filings, and continued compliance monitoring; and
3. Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance and are separate
from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the Town.
B. Severability
If any provision of this ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect.
63
-[Reserved] Section 16-4-65 Miscellaneous Provisions
Article 16-5 WATER REGULATIONS
16-5-1 Definitions
16-5-2 Utility Services department Director; rules and regulations; assignment of
duties
16-5-3 Applicability; conditions for service
16-5-4 Application for domestic water service for a new unit of service; fees;
design and construction standards
16-5-5 New water service connections; permit; approval; records
16-5-6 Application for water service for an existing unit of service; related fees
16-5-7 Requesting temporary service suspension; resuming service
16-5-8 Maintenance of meters and connections; right of entry for inspection
16-5-9 Changes or alterations
16-5-10 Testing of meters
16-5-11 Defective meters
16-5-12 Tampering with, damaging meters; unlawful possession of
equipment or reinstatement of service
16-5-13 Schedule of rates
16-5-14 Customer Billing
16-5-15 Payment of bills; delinquent bills
16-5-16 Creation of lien for unpaid charges
16-5-17 Discontinuance of service
16-5-18 Town not liable for damages
16-5-19 Urban irrigation service; rules and regulations governing service;
Applicable rates
64
Section 16-5-1 Definitions
“Appropriate Fees” means charges as specified in the Water Rate Schedule.
“Application” means a request to the utility for water service, as distinguished from
aninquiry as to the availability or charges for such service.
“Appurtenance” means an item attached to a main structure which enables it to function,
but is not considered an integral part of it.
“AOC Application” means an Application for Approval of Construction, which must be
filed and approved by the Town in order to receive domestic water service for a new unit
of service.
“ATC Application” means an Application for Approval to Construct, which must be filed
and approved by the Town in order to start construction and installation of the approved
facilities.
“Billing Period” means the time interval between two (2) consecutive meter readings that
are taken for billing purposes.
“Customer” means the owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises
supplied domestic water service by or in any manner connected to the water system of the
Town.
“Distribution system” means the network of public waterlines which compose the basic
grid and distribution system for municipal water service.
“Domestic water” means water supplied through the pipes of the water system of the
Town.
“Due Date” means the date that customer payments are to be in the TofQCWD’s office.
“Irrigation Service” means the service line between the irrigation main line and discharge
port (also known as the red-head) and includes any valves that may be attached.
“Manual” means the Town of Queen Creek Design & Construction Standards Manual,
which was adopted by resolution of the Town Council, and is available online at
http://www.queencreek.org/Index.aspx?page=557.
“Meter” means the instrument for measuring and indicating or recording the volume of
water that has passed through it.
“Meter Tampering” means a situation where a meter has been illegally altered. Common
examples are meter bypassing, use of magnets to slow the meter recording and broken
meter seals.
65
“Normal Business Hours” as defined on the Town of Queen Creek’s Web site.
“Non-Potable Water” means any water which is not safe for human consumption
pursuant to the standards set by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
“Potable water” means any water which is safe for human consumption pursuant to the
standards set by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
“PWS System” means the Town’s Public Water Supply System. “04-07-033”
“Second Notice” means the customer billing statement that is sent out fifteen (15) days
after the first notice and allows ten (10) additional days before termination of service. This
notice will be in red ink and contain Notice of Termination language.
“Service Line” means that pipeline between a water main and the meter.
“Service Connection” means the line after the meter that is the property of the customer.
It is the customer’s responsibility for the maintenance of the plumbing after the meter.
“Source facilities” means all components and facilities utilized in the production,
treatment, storage and delivery of potable water to the distribution system.
“Town” means the Town of Queen Creek.
“TofQCWD” means the water division of the Town of Queen Creek Utility Services
Department, which is located in the Town’s Development Services Building, at 22358 S.
Ellsworth Road, Queen Creek, AZ 85242.
“Unit of service” means each structure, group of structures, portion of a structure or real
property which is served by a separate water meter.
“Urban Irrigation” means the delivery of non-potable water from Central Arizona Project
or designated wells to certain properties through pipelines or ditches for the purpose of
watering lawns in areas where this service is available.
“Water Unit” means any appurtenances used in the delivery of water in PWS.
“Water Rate Schedule” means the Town’s water rate schedule, which was adopted by
resolution of the Town Council, and is available to the public at the TofQCWD or online at
http://www.queencreek.org/Index.aspx?page=481.
“Town Council” means the duly elected Town Council of the Town of Queen
Creek,Arizona.
Section 16-5-2 Town Utility Services Department Director; rules and regulations;
assignment of duties
66
A. The Utility Services Department Director of the Town is designated as the Utility
Services Department Director and shall have full charge over and direction of the PWS
system and all improvements, extensions and equipment pertaining thereto, and shall have
charge and supervision over all employees assigned to the work thereon. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Utility Services Department Director may be
delegated by the Utility Services Department Director to other Town Personnel.
B. The Town may make rules and regulations not in conflict with the provisions of any
ordinance governing the use of the connections to the water distribution system of the
Town. Such rules and regulations do not become effective until approved by the Town
Council.
Section 16-5-3 Applicability; conditions for service
A. Domestic water may be supplied by the Town to customers upon the terms and
conditions prescribed in this article, and not otherwise.
B. The determination of the Utility Services Department Director as to whether any
Unit of Service comes within the meaning of this article so as to require a separate service
connection, meter box and turn-off valve shall be final; provided, that the owner or occupant
of such premises shall have the right to appeal from such decision to the Town Council at
its next regular meeting. In the event of any such appeal, the determination of the Town
Council shall be final.
Section 16-5-4 Application for domestic water service for a new unit of service;
related fees; design and construction standards
A. Prior to starting Construction or installation of facilities an ATC, the approved
application from the proper governing agency must be received by the Town.
B. Prior to the furnishing of domestic water to a new unit of service, the contractor or
owner-builder must provide an AOC Application and submit all necessary application
materials and fees to the TofQCWD. AOC Application materials and related fees are
contained in the Manual.
C. The TofQCWD shall have the authority to approve the design, issue permits and
conduct inspections of all water units and components that are to be connected to the PWS
system.
D. The design and construction of all water units and components under the jurisdiction
of the TofQCWD must conform to the water design and construction specifications set forth
in the Manual.
E. All water units to be attached to the PWS system shall be inspected by personnel of
the TofQCWD during construction. The TofQCWD shall be notified at least two (2)
business days prior to attaching to the PWS system. In making a connection to the PWS
system, no physical alteration shall commence until an authorized TofQCWD inspector is
67
present. No domestic water service shall be turned on prior to obtaining TofQCWD final
approval of the unit’s construction.
Section 16-5-5 New water service connections; permit, approval, records
A. No person shall make any connections with the PWS system or any appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining written (and/ or verbal?) authority from the Utility Services
Department Director. (valid authorization?)
B. Each person making an application for a water service connection shall obtain a valid
permit from the Town as a prerequisite for the approval of the required water service
connections. All applications for water service connections shall be accompanied by
the current fees for such work.
C. The number, location, manner of connection and size of all water service connections
shall be subject to the approval of the Utility Services Department Director.
D. The Town shall keep a record of all building water connections made and the type of
meter, together with the name of the owner of the property, the owner’s agent or a
representative.
Section 16-5-6 Application for water service for an existing unit of service; related
fees
A. Before turning on domestic water to an existing unit of service, the property owner
or occupant thereof shall complete an application for water service with the TofQCWD or
online at https://www.queencreek.org.
B. The application must be accompanied by the appropriate fees as set forth in the
Water Rate Schedule.
C. Domestic water service shall not be furnished to any property unless the application
is completed and all charges against the property of any nature whatsoever due and
payable to the Town have been paid. This includes any deposits that may apply.
D. Any delinquent amounts owing on an existing or prior accounts must be paid when
a property owner or occupant applies to open another service account. Failure to pay the
delinquent amount owing on a prior account or accounts constitutes grounds for the Town
to refuse new service.
E. Domestic water Customers shall be required to notify the TofQCWD of any change
in mailing address, occupancy, or ownership within fifteen (15) days after such change
occurs. Failure to contact the TofQCWD may result in penalties or late charges which would
be the responsibility of the customer.
F. Under normal conditions, domestic water service shall be provided no earlier than
one (1) business day after an application is completed.
68
G. If domestic water service is requested to be provided on the same day that the
application is completed, that request must be made with the TofQCWD no later than 4:00
p.m. local time, and a same day service fee as set forth in the Water Rate Schedule will
apply. All fees shall be due and payable at the time of the service request.
Section 16-5-7 Requesting temporary service suspension; resuming service.
A. Customers with domestic water service may request that the TofQCWD suspend
water service temporarily. Customers desiring to discontinue the use of water must give a
one (1) business day notice thereof in person at the TofQCWD or by phone speak directly
to a TofQCWD Customer Service Representative during the Town’s normal business
hours. If request is made online at https://www.queencreek.org, request to discontinue
service must be made during normal Town business hours or charges for water service will
be continued until such notice is given.
B. As a condition of service suspension, the customer shall pay any outstanding
charges to the TofQCWD before the water meter will be turned off.
C. To resume domestic water service, the owner or occupant shall pay any past-due
fees. Owners or occupants shall allow the TofQCWD one (1) business day to
reestablish service when requested during normal Town business hours. If a request to
reestablish service is made after normal Town business hours, the request will be treated
as having been made on the next business day.
D. If domestic water service is requested to be resumed on the same day that the
request for resuming service is made, that request must be made in person with the
TofQCWD or by phone speaking directly to a TofQCWD Customer Service
Representative no later than 4:00 p.m. local time and same day service fee shall apply.
E. Due to extenuating circumstances, such as broken or leaking pipes or other causes
that in the opinion of the TofQCWD constitute good cause, the TofQCWD may refuse to
resume any unit of service until such time as it is appropriate and safe to do so.
F. Customers remain responsible for any water used, even if water service was turned
off or locked. If the TofQCWD determines that water is used, the customer will be billed for
it.
Section 16-5-8 Maintenance of meters and connections; right of entry for inspection
A. All water meters shall remain the property of the Town, and the Town shall be
responsible for maintenance of meters, except in cases where they are willfully damaged
by the customer.
B. The water customer shall maintain all water lines and connections within the property
and after the meter.
69
C. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to ensure that access by employees of
the Town to the water meter is not obstructed by landscape materials, vehicles or any other
obstruction. In the event that any authorized employee is refused admittance to any
premises or is hindered or prevented from inspecting the water system upon such
premises, the TofQCWD reserves the right to disconnect services to such premises after
giving twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the property owner or occupant of its intention to do
so if the obstruction is not removed.
D. If the property owner or occupant, having received a notice of
accessibility/obstruction, removes such obstruction and notifies the TofQCWD within
twenty-four (24) hours of such removal, a service fee as set forth in the Water Rate
Schedule will be assessed to cover expenses for returning to the property to gain access
to the meter.
Section 16-5-9 Changes or alterations
Any person receiving domestic water service from the Town desiring to make any changes
or alterations in the existing water connection shall be required to furnish the Utility Services
Department Director a statement of the changes or alterations to be made, and receive the
Utility Services Department Director’s written permission before any such changes or
alterations are made.
Section 16-5-10 Testing of meters
It shall be the privilege of each customer of the TofQCWD to insist upon a meter test.
After the meter has been field tested by the TofQCWD and if such meter is found incorrect,
it shall be immediately replaced by the Town. If the field test indicates that the meter is
registering correctly, the customer may insist that the meter be removed and subjected to
a shop test. If the shop test indicates that the meter is registering correctly, a service fee
as set forth in the Water Rate Schedule will be levied against the customer requesting such
test.
Section 16-5-11 Defective meters
When a meter in service less than thirteen (13) months is proven defective, the charge for
any month affected shall be equal to an average based upon the charges for the three (3)
preceding months or length of service, whichever is lesser. In instances where water
service has been supplied for a period in excess of thirteen (13) months, the charge for
any month affected shall be equal to an average based upon the charges for that month in
the previous year together with one month next preceding and next following the previous
year in question.
Section 16-5-12 Tampering with, damaging meters and appurtenances; unlawful
possession of equipment or reinstatement of service
A. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to knowingly have and keep in his
possession or under his control any turn-off valve key or hydrant wrench to the PWS
system and no person shall, without authority from the Utility Services Department Director,
70
make, construct, buy, sell or in any way dispose of to any person any turn-off valve key or
hydrant wrench for use on the PWS system.
B. It shall be unlawful to remove unmetered water from Town mains without express
approval of the Utility Services Department Director.
C. Water meters shall be sealed by the proper Town representatives in such a manner
as to prevent all tampering with or damage to the mechanism thereof, without breaking the
securing device, and no person shall break or remove a securing device, or willfully
damage or destroy a meter.
D. No person shall destroy, obstruct or damage any meter box; or remove such box
except for the purpose of inspecting meter readings; or destroy the lid or cover belonging
thereto; or place refuse or debris therein.
E. No person whose domestic water service has been discontinued and rendered
inoperable by the Town placing a seal on the turn-off valve of the water meter shall break
or remove such seal in an effort to reinstate domestic water service. Any person who
breaks or removes such seal, in addition to other penalties provided by law, shall pay an
administrative charge as set forth in the Water Rate Schedule prior to the Town reinstating
domestic water service.
Section 16-5-13 Schedule of rates
A. The Town Council may biennially by separate ordinance or resolution set the
schedule of rates to be assessed for domestic water service.
B. Water service rates shall be apportioned to include a user charge relating to the
volume of water usage, applicable taxes and fees, and customer billing and administration.
C. Water service rates shall be allocated in such a manner that is proportionate to the
cost of providing water service to each customer insofar as those costs can reasonably be
determined.
D. In addition to the water service charges listed above, the Town Council may set other
fees or charges as desired.
Section 16-5-14 Customer Billing
A. Monthly statements shall be rendered by the TofQCWD to each customer, billing
periods to normally consist of approximately thirty (30) days. Statements shall be rendered
for each customer based upon the service rendered thereby. Second Notices shall also
inform the customer of the consequences of nonpayment and the telephone numbers of
appropriate personnel authorized to resolve billing disputes. Each statement shall contain
the customer's account number; the reading date; the delinquent date; the present and
previous meter reading; the consumption in thousand gallons; the amount of charges for
71
water services; new account fee or service call fee, if applicable; previous balance, if any;
applicable taxes; and total amount due.
B. First and/or final statements rendered for periods of less or more than thirty (30)
days shall have the minimum monthly water charges prorated daily. In addition to the
prorated water charges, the statement shall include a charge for each thousand gallons of
water metered during said period plus applicable taxes.
C. Any property upon which domestic water services may have been furnished by the
Town, and which may not for any reason have been assessed for such use on the books
of the Town, shall be assessed for the use for which it is in arrears. Upon the failure of the
payment of these charges, the supply of water shall be turned off in accordance with
Section 16-5-15, pending settlement.
Section 16-5-15 Payment of bills; delinquent bills
A. All bills rendered are due and payable upon presentation and are past due
(delinquent) fifteen (15) calendar days after date rendered. If the total of such bill is not
paid within ten (10) days after delinquency, domestic water service is subject to
discontinuance in accordance with subsection B below.
B. Before any discontinuance of water service shall be made, other than for such
purposes as specified in Section 16-5-16 below, the customer shall receive a second notice
of the reason for the discontinuance from the TofQCWD and be advised, also in writing, of
the opportunity to contact TofQCWD customer service personnel to present any objections
within one (1) business day of the due date listed on the second notice. If, after the due
date listed, the customer has not cured the delinquency and/or has not presented any
reasonable objections regarding discontinuance of service, domestic
water services shall be discontinued.
C. Water services shall not be resumed until such delinquent bill and the applicable
service fee as set forth in the Water Rate Schedule has been collected in full from the
delinquent customer. In addition, the delinquent customer may be required to place a new
or additional security deposit with the TofQCWD prior to resumption of domestic water
service.
D. If a customer’s bill remains delinquent after discontinuance of water service in
accordance with subsection B. above, the TofQCWD may assign the account to a collection
agency for collection.
Section 16-5-16 Creation of lien for unpaid charges
A. Delinquent water charges shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such
lien may be imposed. In order to impress and secure such lien, which shall be at the
discretion of the Town water director, the following procedure shall be utilized:
1. The Utility Services Department Director shall give written notice to the owner or
occupant of the property within thirty (30) days after the statement is rendered by either
personally serving or mailing to such owner or occupant, at his last-known address by
72
certified or registered mail, or the address to which the water charges billing was sent. This
written notice shall indicate that the Town may impress and secure a lien on the subject
property unless the owner or occupant lessee brings his delinquent bill current within thirty
(30) days from service or receipt of the letter, and in addition, pays any penalties that may
be due pursuant to Section 16-5-15. The notice shall also contain a statement that the
owner or occupant may appeal the delinquency to the Town Council by filing such appeal
within the thirty (30) day time period after receipt of such notice.
2. If the owner or occupant of the property does not bring his delinquency current or
successfully prosecute his appeal to the Town Council within the thirty (30) days from
service or receipt of the registered or certified letter, the Utility Services Department
Director may prepare duplicate copies of a notice and claim of lien and file one copy with
the county recorder and within a reasonable time thereafter service or mail by registered
or certified mail the remaining copy with the owner or occupant of the property. The notice
and claim of lien shall be made under oath by the Utility Services Department Director or
his duly authorized representative and shall contain the following:
a. A description of the property sufficient for its identification;
b. The name of the owner or reputed owner of the property if known, otherwise
the name of the occupant to whom service was rendered; and
c. The amount of the delinquent bill.
B. From and after the date of its recording in the office of the county recorder, the lien shall
attach to the property until paid. A sale of the property to satisfy the lien shall be made upon
judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The Town shall have the right to bring an action to
enforce the lien in the county superior court at any time after its recording, but failure to enforce
the lien by such action shall not affect its validity. The recorded notice and claim of lien shall
be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all
proceedings prior to the recording therein.
C. A prior recording for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar to a subsequent
recording of a lien for such purposes, and any number of liens on the property may be enforced
in the same action.
Section 16-5-17 Discontinuance of service
In the case of unnecessary waste, fraudulent representation on the part of any water
customer, or in an emergency, the Town reserves the right to turn off water without notice
until all charges have been paid in full and/or waste or emergency is corrected.
Section 16-5-18 Town not liable for damages
The Town shall not be held liable for any damages that may result from the shutting off or
turning on of any potable or non-potable water unit supply piping or main for any purpose
whatsoever, even should no notice have been given, nor for damages caused by any break
or leak in any water pipe.
73
Section 16-5-19 Urban irrigation service; rules and regulations governing service;
applicable rates.
A. Urban irrigation service is available to customers in select areas of the Town.
B. The rules and regulations governing the availability, character, and conditions of
urban irrigation service are promulgated by the TofQCWD and adopted by resolution of the
Town Council. Those rules are available to the public at the TofQCWD or online at
http://www.queencreek.org/.
C. Applicable rates for urban irrigation service within the Town are set forth in the Water
Rate Schedule.
D. No person shall destroy, obstruct, damage or alter any irrigation service without prior
written permission from the Utility Services Department Director.
ARTICLE 16-6 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION
CONTROL
Section 16-6-1 Purpose; authorization
Section 16-6-2 Administration
Section 16-6-3 Definitions
Section 16-6-4 Backflow prevention required
Section 16-6-5 Criteria for determining degree of hazard
Section 16-6-6 Prohibition of cross-connection
Section 16-6-7 Responsibility for backflow prevention control
Section 16-6-8 Backflow prevention assemblies required
Section 16-6-9 Inspections
Section 16-6-10 Notification of violation
Section 16-6-11 Water supply severance; notice
Section 16-6-12 Plan review
Section 16-6-13 Retroactive application
Section 16-6-14 Program fees
Section 16-6-15 Appeals
74
Section 16-6-16 Civil fines and other remedies
Section 16-6-17 Violations deemed a public nuisance
Section 16-6-18 Town not liable for damages
Section 16-6-1 Purpose; authorization
This ordinance sets forth uniform backflow prevention requirements for non-single-family residential
customers of the Town’s Public Potable Water Supply, enables the Town to comply with Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality regulations and creates a Cross-Connection Control Program
(the “Program”) to control contamination from Backflow.
It is decided that danger to the public health, safety, and welfare resulting from contamination or
pollutants of the Public Potable Water Supply System requires that measures be adopted to protect
that system by authorizing Town officials to:
A. Protect the public potable water supply from the possibility of contamination by
preventing the Backflow of contaminants or pollutants into the Public Potable Water Supply System;
B. Promote the awareness and elimination of Cross-Connection, actual or potential, of
a customer’s Auxiliary Water Supply with the Public Potable Water Supply System;
C. Provide for a continuing program of backflow prevention control, that will prevent the
contamination or pollution of the Public Potable Water Supply System;
D. Provide for the monitoring and enforcement of a continuing program of backflow
prevention, that will prevent the contamination or pollution of the Public Potable Water Supply
System; and
E. Comply with the State requirements identified in Arizona Administrative Code, Title
18, Chapter 4, Article 215 (R18-4-215) entitled “Backflow Prevention” that was promulgated by the
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality with an effective date of August 30, 2008, which is
incorporated herein by this reference (hereinafter referred to as “State Rule R18-4-215”).
F. Require non-single-family residential customers to install, test, and maintain
approved backflow prevention assemblies on the plumbing system.
G. Enforce penalties and remedies, including nuisance abatement, civil fines and
termination of service, for violations of this Article by Customers.
Section 16-6-2 Administration
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Utility Services Department Director (the
“Director”) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the Director to other Town
personnel, including but not limited to, Water Division personnel and the Town Civil Hearing Officer.
B. The Town may make rules and regulations not in conflict with the provisions of this
Article.
75
Section 16-6-3 Definitions
The following words and terms, when used in this Article, shall have the following definitions, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
“Approved” means approved in writing by the Director of Utility Services as meeting an
applicable specification stated or cited in this Article, and as suitable for the proposed use.
The term “Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly” means an assembly that has been
approved by the Director of Utility Services. An approved Backflow Prevention Assembly shall have
met the standards established by the American Water Works Association-AWWA C506-78 most
recent revised publication “Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Checkvalve
Backflow Prevention Assemblies”, and shall also have fully complied with the laboratory and field
performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research of the University of Southern California published in the Ninth edition of the “Manual of
Cross-Connection Control” or another third party certifying entity approved by the Director of Utility
Services.
The term “Approval Form” means the writing evidencing the Director’s approval of the type
and location of a Customer’s Backflow Prevention Assembly.
“Assembly” means any item, equipment, device or practice.
“Auxiliary Water Supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the public potable water supply, including, but not limited to, water from another purveyor’s
public potable water supply, treated effluent, wastewaters or industrial fluids.
“Backflow” means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either Backpressure
or Backsiphonage.
“Backpressure” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under
pressure into the distribution pipes of the Public Potable Water Supply System from any source or
sources other than the intended source.
“Backsiphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the
distribution pipes of the Public Potable Water Supply System from any source other than its
intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.
“Cross-Connection” means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures
between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains Potable Water and the
other Nonpotable Water or industrial fluids through which, or because of which, Backflow may occur
into the Public Potable Water System. This would include, without limitation, any temporary
connections such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy
section of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tube.
“Customer” means any person in control of any non-single-family residential use of
premises, facilities, or buildings supplied Potable Water by the Public Potable Water Supply
System.
“Director” or “Utility Services Department Director” The person designated pursuant to
Section 16-2-2 of this Ordinance.
76
“Nonpotable Water” means water that is not safe for human consumption.
“Person” means any individual, owner, official custodian, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, state, municipality, Indian tribe,
political subdivision of the state, federal governmental agency, or any other legal entity, including
their representatives, agents or assigns.
“Potable Water” means any water that, according to standards recognized by the Town of
Queen Creek is safe for human consumption.
“Public Potable Water Supply System” means the system operated by the Town of Queen
Creek that provides potable water to the public.
“TofQCWD” or “Water Division” means the water division of the Town of Queen Creek
Utility Services Department subject to the supervision of the Director.
Section 16-6-4 Backflow prevention required
A. Backflow prevention shall be required at every service connection to a Customer’s system
when the Water Division determines the potable water supplied by the Public Potable Water
System may be subject to contamination, pollution or other deterioration of quality by conditions or
potential conditions within the Customer’s water system.
B. Backflow prevention required by the Water Division shall be sufficient to protect against the
potential degree of hazard to the Public Potable Water System from the Customer’s water system.
Section 16-6-5 Criteria for determining potential degrees of hazard
The potential degree of hazard to the Public Potable Water System from a Customer’s water supply
system, and therefore requiring a Backflow Prevention Assembly, shall be determined using the
following hazard factors:
A. Health: Any actual or potential condition, device or practice which, in the judgment of the
Water Division, may create a threat of contamination to a potable water supply or may create a
danger to the health and well-being of the potable water consumers.
B. Plumbing: An actual or potential plumbing cross-connection in a customer’s water supply
system that has not been protected by an Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly. A plumbing
hazard may be either a pollution or contamination hazard.
C. Non-health: Any actual or potential condition, device or practice which, in the judgment of
the Water Division, may create a threat of pollution to a potable water supply system. The maximum
degree of intensity of pollution to which a potable water supply system could be degraded under
this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to
the distribution system or its appurtenances.
D. System: Any actual or potential condition, device or practice which, in the judgment of the
Water Division may create a threat or severe damage to the physical properties of a potable water
supply system or that would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the
system.
77
Section 16-6-6 Prohibition of cross-connection
It shall be unlawful for any Customer or any other person to cause a Cross-Connection to be made
or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever between the Public Potable Water Supply System
and any other source of water supply without previously obtaining the written approval of the
Director. Any such Cross-Connection that has not been approved, as described above, shall be
strictly prohibited.
Section 16-6-7 Responsibility for backflow prevention control
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Director to protect the Public Potable Water Supply System
by applying the requirements, remedies, penalties and enforcement provisions set forth in this
Article.
1. The TofQCWD shall have the following responsibilities:
(a) The Water Division shall administer and enforce all applicable
CrossConnection control provisions of the Arizona Revised Statutes and the Ninth
edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control (the “USC Manual”) published by
the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and
Hydraulic Research (“USC-FCCCHR” or the “Foundation”). The USC Manual is
hereby incorporated by reference with one copy on file with the Water Division.
(b) The Water Division shall determine whether a facility or activity is a facility or
an activity listed in Section 16-6-8 below and, therefore, requires backflow
protection. The Water Division’s responsibility includes inspection as necessary of
all new and existing non-single-family residential buildings and facilities connected
to the Public Potable Water Supply System.
(c) The Water Division shall require installation by Customer of appropriate
backflow prevention as required by the Town’s building codes.
(d) The Water Division shall approve the type and location of all backflow
prevention assemblies in accordance with this Article 16-6 and all other codes and
ordinances of the Town. Such approval shall be evidenced in a written Approval
Form, a copy of which shall be provided to Customer.
(e) The Water Division shall keep adequate records of each test of an Approved
Backflow Prevention Assembly and any subsequent maintenance or repair thereof
for a minimum of three years.
(f) The Water Division may abate violations of this Article as public nuisances
under Town Code, Chapter 10 Health and Sanitation.
2. The Customer shall have the following responsibilities:
It shall be the responsibility of the Customer, at Customer’s sole cost and expense, to
prevent pollutants or contaminants from entering the potable water system of the
Customer’s building and the Public Potable Water Supply System. A Customer’s
responsibility starts at the point of service delivery from the Public Potable Water Supply
System, including all water piping systems. Customer is required to properly locate, install,
test and maintain each Backflow Prevention Assembly in good working condition and shall
provide the necessary inspections to assure that such assembly is operating properly.
Customer’s responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the following:
78
(a) Customer shall have all backflow prevention assemblies tested annually by
a certified tester. Assembly testing shall be performed by a certified tester. Testing
requirements shall be in accordance with the procedure outlined in the USC Manual.
The Water Division may require more frequent testing if warranted. It is the
responsibility of the Customer to obtain testing and submit all test results to the
Water Division on a timely basis. If such test reveals the assembly to be defective
or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the Customer shall have certified testers
perform any and all necessary repairs to the assembly per the Water Division
specification, at customer’s sole cost and expense.
(b) If the Water Division or Customer becomes aware during the interim period
between annual tests that an assembly is defective or in unsatisfactory operating
condition, the Customer shall cause all repairs, replacement and any retesting so
that the assembly is in satisfactory operating condition, at Customer’s sole cost and
expense.
(c) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the Customer, at the
customer’s sole cost and expense, in compliance with the standards of the building
department as set forth in Chapter 16 of the Town Code.
(d) In the event the Customer’s internal potable water system or the Public
Potable Water Supply System becomes contaminated or polluted due to a Cross
Connection or other cause, and the Customer becomes aware of said
contamination, the Director and the Maricopa County Health Authority shall be
promptly notified by the Customer so that appropriate measures may be taken to
cure the contamination.
(e) If the assembly is out of compliance and has not been tested, a Town official
from the Water Division will schedule a Town-approved tester to test and make any
and all repairs that are needed at the Customer’s expense. This expense will be
added to the customer’s water bill.
(f) Any backflow prevention assembly shall be installed in an accessible location
as close as possible to the service connection with proper clearances above the
ground in accordance with the current set of standard details approved by the Water
Division for backflow prevention assemblies.
Section 16-6-8 Backflow prevention assemblies required
A. Unless otherwise specifically designated by the Director, an Approved Backflow Prevention
Assembly shall be one of the following types:
1. Air Gap: An unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the
opening of any pipe or faucet supplying potable water to a tank plumbing fixture or
other device and the flood level rim of said tank, plumbing diameter of the supply pipe
or faucet and in no case shall be less than one inch.
2. Reduced pressure principle assembly (hereafter “RP”): An assembly containing
two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulic operating,
mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall be
79
equipped with properly located test cocks equipped with brass plugs and tightly closing
resilient seated shut-off valves at each end of the assembly.
3. Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (hereafter “PVB”): An assembly containing
an independently operating, loaded check valve and an independent operating loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall
be equipped with properly located test cocks that are fitted with brass plugs and tightly
closing resilient seated shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly.
4. Double check valve assembly (hereafter “DC”): An assembly composed of two
independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated
shut-off valves at each end of the assembly that are fitted with properly located test
cocks equipped with brass plugs.
B. When any of the following items or activities listed in this section are present or conducted
on premises served by the Public Potable Water Supply System, a potential hazard to the Public
Potable Water Supply System shall be presumed and a backflow prevention assembly, of the type
specified for that item or activity herein, must be placed at each service connection for that
premises. The backflow prevention method shall be in accordance with that specified in Section 7
of the USC Manual and/or identified in the text of the subsection below. The location shall be as
close as practicable to the point of service delivery except that the Customer may request that the
Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly be located internally within the activity of facility. The
Customer must demonstrate that the proposed location will adequately protect the Town’s Public
Potable Water Supply System as well as satisfy the applicable requirements of the Article. For
purposes of this section, the listed facilities, equipment or conditions shall be as defined in Section
7 of the USC Manual, or if not listed in the USC Manual, shall be defined in the Town of Queen
Creek Construction Code. An Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly is required for the activities
and facilities listed below that are connected to the Town’s Public Potable Water Supply System:
Industrial facilities:
1. Aircraft and missile plants (Air Gap or RP)
2. Beverage bottling plants (Air Gap, RP)
3. Bottling plant (RP)
4. Breweries (Air Gap or RP)
5. Canneries, packing houses, reduction plants and food processing plants (Air Gap or
RP)
6. Chemical plant – manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment (Air Gap or
RP)
7. Dye works (RP)
8. Dairies and cold storage plants (Air Gap, RP or DC)
9. Film laboratories 9 (Air Gap or RP)
10. Laundry and dye works (Air Gap or RP)
11. Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabrication plants (Air Gap or RP)
80
12. Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties (Air Gap or RP)
13. Paper and paper production plants (Air Gap or RP)
14. Power plants (Air Gap or RP)
15. Radioactive material or substance-plants or facilities handling (Air Gap or RP)
16. Rubber plants – natural or synthetic (Air Gap or RP)
17. Sand and gravel plants (Air Gap or RP)
18. Semiconductor manufacturing facilities (Air Gap or RP)
19. Manufacturing, processing and fabricating plants using toxic or non-toxic materials
(RP)
20. Mortuaries (RPA)
21. Sewage and storm drain facilities, reclaimed water (Air Gap or RP)
Medical facilities:
22. Research laboratories (Air Gap or RP)
23. Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries, autopsy facilities,
nursing and convalescent homes and clinics (Air Gap or RP)
24. Veterinary hospital, animal research or animal grooming shops (Air Gap or
RP)
Commercial and educational facilities:
25. Buildings: Any structure having a cross connection in violation of the Town of Queen
Creek Plumbing Code or water – operated sewage pumping facilities, auxiliary water
supplies or other like sources of contamination which would create a potential hazard to
the Town’s Public Potable Water Supply System (Air
Gap, RP).
26. Carwash facilities (Air Gap or RP)
27. Motion picture studios (Air Gap or RP)
28. Storage buildings having booster pumps or above – ground storage tanks (Air Gap,
RP)
29. Multiple services – interconnected (Air Gap, RP)
30. Mobile Home Park (RP). Exception: existing mobile home parks unless a specific
hazard is identified
31. Recreational vehicle parks (RP)
32. Schools and colleges with laboratories (Air Gap or RP)
81
33. Retail shopping centers, strip malls; retail and industrial shell buildings (when one
service supplies more than one tenant) (RP). Exception: existing retail shopping
center and strip malls, retail and industrial shell buildings (when one service supplies
more than one tenant) unless a specific hazard is identified
34. Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained (RP)
35. Automotive repair (RP)
36. Auxiliary water systems (interconnected) (RP)
37. Auxiliary water system not interconnected (DC)
38. Beauty shops
39. Buildings with sewage ejectors (RP)
40. Chemically treated potable or non-potable water systems
41. Any connection to a fire hydrant (except fire department equipment) (RP or
Air Gap)
42. Irrigation system ((Premises having separate systems, such as parks, playgrounds,
cemeteries, golf courses, schools, ranches, etc.) (RP)
43. Public swimming pools (PVB)
44. Sewage and storm-drainage facilities (RP)
Portable or temporary service or equipment:
45. Construction sites or construction water services (Air Gap)
46. Mobile equipment utilizing public portable water (e.g., water trucks, street sweepers,
hydro-vac, etc.) (Air gap)
47. Portable insecticides and herbicide spray tanks (Air Gap or RP)
Miscellaneous activities and equipment:
48. Auxiliary water system (Air Gap or RP)
49. Chemically contaminated water systems (Air Gap or RP)
50. Fire System:
(a) Class 1 or 2 when a fire protection system is proposed, a double-check valve
assembly, including two check valves, two OS&Y gate valves, and four test cocks
shell be installed on the supply side of the sprinkler fire protection line. Occasionally,
an FDC will also be required by the Queen Creek Fire Department.
These backflow prevention devices must be UL listed and/or listed by Factory Mutual
Research Corporation. A serviceable check valve is also required on the fire rise;
this check valve must also be UL listed and/or listed by Factory Mutual Research
Corporation. Check valve assemblies are required to be inspected, tested and
maintained at least annually to verify the valves are properly functioning. An annual
82
flow and valve confidence test is also required to be conducted by a qualified and
certified person approved by the Town’s Water Division. The flow test will be equal
to the highest amount of gallons per minute that is required by the system. Test
results shall be provided to the Town’s Water Division and the Fire Marshal within
30 calendar days following the inspection. Any system that fails inspection must be
reported to the Fire Marshal and the system needs repaired immediately.
(b) Class 3, 4, 5 or 6 (RP).
51. Industrial fluid systems. Any industrial fluid system interconnected with the public
water supply and containing any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration that
would constitute a health, system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an
approved water supply (RP).
52. Irrigation systems:
(a) System using a chemical injection system (RP)
(b) System having elevated areas which are higher than six inches below the
PVB or multiple services (RP)
(c) System not subjected to backpressure (PVB)
53. Restricted, classified or other closed facilities including civil works (Air Gap or RP)
54. Solar heating system–direct and auxiliary (RP). Exception: once-through solar
heating systems
C. The Water Division shall determine on a case-by-case basis Backflow prevention
requirements for any facilities, buildings, conditions or activities not listed in this section to prevent
contamination or pollution of the Town’s Public Potable Water Supply System.
D. All assemblies shall be above ground (design spec manual) accessible for testing and
admittance. A pressure vacuum breaker assembly shall be installed properly above ground.
E. Unless a cross connection problem is specifically identified, or as otherwise provided in this
ordinance, the requirements of this ordinance do not apply to single-family residences used solely
for residential purposes.
F. Close as practicable is the point nearest to the service delivery where the assembly can be
installed. The location shall be within 5 feet of service but, in no event, beyond the first tap.
G. An Air Gap separation shall be located as close as practicable to the Customer’s point of
service delivery. All piping between the Customer’s connection and receiving tank shall be entirely
visible unless otherwise approved by the Water Division.
When two or more of the items or activities listed above are present or conducted on the same
premises and served by the same service connection, the most restrictive backflow preventer
required for any of the items or activities present or conducted on the premises shall be required to
be utilized or installed at the service connection.
83
Section 16-6-9 Inspections
A. An inspection shall be conducted to determine whether any Cross-Connections or other
hazard potentials exist and to determine compliance with this Article. The Customer’s water system
shall be available at all times during normal business hours for inspection by authorized personnel
of the Water Division.
B. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at least once a year. A notice shall be
issued by the Water Division to the Customer when a backflow prevention assembly is due for
testing. If the testing reveals the assembly to be defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition,
repairs shall be performed, including replacement of the assembly if necessary, which shall return
the assembly to satisfactory operating condition within 30 calendar days after the date of the notice
issued by the Water Division. The testing and maintenance of each assembly shall be performed
at the sole expense of the Customer.
C. If the Water Division or Customer learns or discovers, during the period between tests, that
an assembly is defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the Customer shall perform any
necessary repairs, including replacement of the assembly, if necessary, which shall return the
assembly to satisfactory operating condition.
D. The testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by an individual certified
and approved by an agency recognized by the Water Division. A tester may be suspended from
testing in Queen Creek for improper testing, maintenance, reporting or other improper practices as
determined by the Water Division.
E. The Customer shall maintain records, on forms provided by the Water Division, of the results
of all tests and all servicing, repairs, overhauls or replacements of the backflow prevention
assembly. A copy of the records shall be promptly submitted within 7 calendar days to the Water
Division after completion of the activity for which the record is made.
F. The Water Division shall have the right to enter the premises of any Customer to determine
whether the Customer is complying with all requirements of this article. Customers shall allow the
Water Division personnel ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
testing, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. Refusing
to allow access or entry for Water Division personnel and unreasonable delays in allowing the Water
Division personnel access, to the Customer’s premises shall be a violation of this article.
Section 16-6-10 Notification of violation
When the Water Division finds that a Customer has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this article, the Water Division may serve (by certified mail) upon that Customer a written Notice
of Violation. Within 15 calendar days of the mailing of this notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted by the Customer to the Water Division. Submission of this plan in no way relieves
the Customer of liability for any violations occurring before or after mailing of the Notice of Violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Water Division to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation.
Section 16-6-11 Water supply severance; notice
A. Whenever a Customer has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Article 166,
water service to the Customer may be severed.
84
B. The Water Division may discontinue water service to any Customer who refuses, or
unreasonably delays, entry or access to Town inspectors for inspection pursuant to section 16-69,
or to any Customer who fails to timely submit records of tests and repairs of a Backflow prevention
assembly.
C. If the Water Division discovers that a Customer has not installed a required Backflow
prevention assembly or that a Backflow prevention assembly has been improperly tested or
maintained, bypassed or removed, or that an unprotected Cross-Connection exists in the
Customer’s water system, the service connection shall be discontinued if the situation is not
remedied within the time specified in the notice sent to the Customer as described in subsection
(E) below.
D. Service connection to a fire sprinkler system shall not be subject to disconnection under this
section, but may be subject to penalties pursuant to this Article.
E. Prior to disconnecting any service connection because a condition set forth in subsection
(A), (B), or (C) above exists, the Water Division shall send a notice of service termination, by
certified mail, to the Customer describing the condition and notifying the Customer that the condition
must be remedied within 30 calendar days after mailing of the notice by the Water Division. If such
condition is not remedied within the 30-day period, the Water Division shall send a second notice
of service termination, by certified mail, to the Customer notifying the Customer that the water
service will be disconnected in 10 calendar days if the condition is not remedied within such time
period. The service connection shall not be restored until the condition is remediated to the
satisfaction of the Director.
F. Notwithstanding the above subsection (E), the Water Division may disconnect, without prior
notice, water service to any Customer when the Water Division discovers that the Customer’s water
system is contaminating the Public Potable Water Supply, or the Customer’s water system may
cause a health hazard to the public water supply. Water service may be restored when the
condition forming the basis for the termination has been remedied to the satisfaction of the Director.
All costs, fees, and expenses incurred, and all surcharges and penalties relating to the termination
and restoration of water service shall be paid prior to the water service being restored.
Section 16-6-12 Plan review
A. All backflow prevention assemblies which will be installed shall be shown and specified on
all required building and engineering plans. Town approval of the intended installation is required
prior to issuance of any building permits.
B. Installation permits for the installation of all backflow prevention assemblies required by the
Town shall be obtained from the Town prior to installation. A separate permit shall be obtained for
each required backflow prevention assembly to be installed, including replacement.
C. Backflow prevention assemblies must be installed as to meet the current set of standard
details and specifications of the Water Division and be tested by a certified tester and shown to be
operating correctly before a temporary, or permanent, certificate of occupancy is issued by the
Town.
D. The Water Division may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions
of this article, whenever the permit is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information
supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any provision of the Uniform Plumbing
Code or this article.
85
Section 16-6-13 Retroactive application
A. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all new Customers and all Customers existing
prior to the enactment date of the ordinance from which this article derives.
B. Customers’ Backflow prevention assemblies installed prior to the enactment of the
ordinance from which this article derives, and which do not comply with the requirements set forth
in this article, shall be replaced with assemblies which comply with the standards set forth herein.
C. All water Customers existing prior to the enactment date of the ordinance from which this
article derives shall comply with the standards set forth herein within a period of time as determined
by the Water Division. The maximum time allowed for compliance shall be ten (10) days from the
date of mailing of notification.
D. A change of ownership, name or type of use will require a new survey of water use. If the
survey determines an assembly is required, installation needs to be completed before granting the
change.
Section 16-6-14 Program fees
The Town may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
Town’s Cross-Connection Control Program which may include:
A. Fees for permit applications;
B. Fees to recover legal costs resulting from enforcement to any Customer noncompliance
including, but not limited to, administrative expenses, investigation, testing, legal
proceedings and filings, and continued monitoring; and
C. Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from
all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the Town.
Section 16-6-15 Appeals
An action or decision of the Director under this Article shall be final, provided that the Customer
shall have the right to appeal to the Civil Hearing Officer under the provisions of Article 5-6 and
Article 5-7 of Chapter 5 Municipal Court of the Town Code; provided such appeal is in writing and
received by the Civil Hearing Officer within 15 calendar days after appellant is notified of such
decision.
Section 16-6-16 Civil fines and other remedies
A. Whenever a Customer has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Article, the
Director may elect to commence an enforcement action as a civil code infraction as provided in
Chapter 5 of the Town code, and to impose a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500 for each day a
violation exists beyond the initial notice constituting a separate offense in the discretion of the Town
Civil Hearing Officer.
B. If a situation, which would otherwise result in discontinuation of water service, is not
remedied within the time provided in the notice of service termination sent to the Customer, the
Director of Utility Services, at his discretion, may install a backflow prevention assembly at the
Customer’s point of service delivery and bill the Customer for all costs, together with all applicable
penalties.
86
C. The Director, at his discretion, may publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the
Town, notice of customers who at least once during the preceding twelve-month period were in
violation with any requirement of this article. The publication shall also summarize any enforcement
action taken.
Section 16-6-17 Violations deemed a public nuisance
In addition to the enforcement process and penalties provided herein, any condition caused, or
permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this article is a threat to public health, safety and
welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance under Town Code Section 10-3-2 and shall
be corrected or abated as required by the Director. Any Person(s) creating a public nuisance shall
be subject to the provisions of Town Code Chapter 10 Health and Sanitation governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the Town for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or
remedying said nuisance. The remedy provided herein shall be in addition to any other remedy
authorized by this article.
Section 16-6-18 Town not liable for damages
The Town shall not be held liable for any damages that may result from the shutting off or turning
on of any potable or non-potable water supply piping or main for any purpose whatsoever, even
should no notice have been given, nor for damages caused by any break or leak in any pipe or
assembly.
ARTICLE 16-7 CONSTRUCTION AND FINANCING OF UTILITIES FACILITIES
Section 16-7-1 Policy
Section 16-7-2 Applicability
Section 16-7-3 Definitions
Section 16-7-4 Plans, specifications
Section 16-7-5 Extension reimbursement agreements authorized
Section 16-7-6 Agreement between town and developer-owner
Section 16-7-7 Agreement in writing; authority to execute
Section 16-7-8 Financing-Generally
Section 16-7-9 Reimbursement extension cost
Section 16-7-10 Bidding for installation of extension lines; approval of costs
Section 16-7-11 Allocation of reimbursable cost-water extension
Section 16-7-12 Allocation of reimbursable cost-sewer extension
Section 16-7-13 Collection of allocated reimbursement costs; payment
87
Section 16-7-14 Service from other source; unassessed parcels; limitation
Section 16-7-15 Dedication of extension line
Section 16-7-16 Expiration of agreement
Section 16-7-17 Administration fee
Section 16-7-18 Projected allocation
Section 16-7-19 Assignability of agreement
Section 16-7-1 Policy
There is hereby established as set forth in this article a policy and orderly program for extension of
the services and facilities of the town water and sewer system to serve and provide for newly
developed areas and subdivisions within the town and those areas and subdivisions outside of the
town for which town water or sewer service is desired and available.
It is in the public’s interest to maximize the use of its public rights-of-way. To this end the town has
adopted master water and sewer plans that plan the size of lines and mains to service large areas.
This eliminates the needs and extra expense of installing and maintaining several smaller lines and
mains within the same public right-of-way. The existing system and currently planned future system
covered by the development fees does not include systems for all sections of the Town’s adopted
service areas.
The development community is required to construct water and sewer lines and mains, and other
facilities, in accordance with the Town’s subdivision ordinance and approved master plans. It is the
intent of this article to establish a method of reimbursement to the initial developer for the additional
cost of providing a water or sewer system in excess of that needed to serve their development.
Section 16-7-2 Applicability
The elements of the extension policy and program stated in this article shall apply to extension of
the town water and sewer systems.
Section 16-7-3 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Cost means the actual construction cost pursuant to a written construction contract for an extension
which is acceptable and approved by the Utility Services Director, or designee.
Developer-owner means any person who is responsible for the development of land (the “project”)
creating a demand on the town’s water and sewer system and engaged in the development of one
or more parcels of land and contracting for a town water or sewer system extension.
Extension means a water or sewer line subject to repayment of certain costs and defined as any
one or more of the following: (i) mains extended beyond the limits of the project, constructed through
the project, or constructed along the frontage or bounder of the project; (ii) mains which serve other
property owners other than the developer-owner who is developing the project; or (iii) mains which
88
are constructed to contain additional capacity to provide adequate flow above and beyond that
required by the project based on the volume of flow and type of waste generated by the project
Participating charge means the proportionate share of the cost (construction contract price) based
on benefits derived in accordance with standards determined by the Utility Services Director and
approved by the town for any existing main.
Subsequent user means any person who connects to, and is serviced by, an existing extension
water or sewer line.
Section 16-7-4 Plans, specifications
Upon development of any property, area or subdivision within the town or of any property area or
subdivision outside of the town that resides within the approved designated water and/ or sewer
service areas for which town water or sewer service is desired and available, all plans and
specifications for water and sewer systems shall be prepared by a professional engineer, registered
in the state, and in accordance with the town’s standards and specifications.
If it becomes necessary to extend the town’s water or sewer system, the cost of the extension will
be the responsibility of the developer-owner. The plans and specifications for the extension must
be approved by the Utility Services Department Director of the town.
Section 16-7-5 Extension reimbursement agreements authorized
The town may enter into an extension reimbursement agreement with a developer-owner who
proposes to install an extension to service his development. Such an agreement shall provide for
the collection, by the town, of a pro rata share of the costs for the extension from subsequent users
of the extension and reimbursement to the developer-owner. The agreement shall comply with the
provisions of this article.
An extension reimbursement agreement may only be entered into for those development projects
which, in addition to complying with the provisions of this article, comply with the town’s planning
objectives.
Section 16-7-6 Agreement between town and developer-owner
Before the extension of any water or sewer main shall be made to serve a subdivision, platted or
unplatted property, or any existing main tapped to provide service for any individual or unplatted
property, the developer-owner desiring such service shall execute an agreement with the town
which shall include the following:
(1) A warranty of workmanship and material for mains and facilities installed which shall run
to the benefit of the town for a period of at least one year from the date of acceptance
by the town;
(2) A diagram of all properties which are expected to be serviced by the proposed
extension. The diagram shall be provided on approved standard quarter-section maps
of the Town of Queen Creek or any other standardized atlas system designated by the
town;
(3) A statement that the town acquires ownership of any main and appurtenances upon
completion and acceptance of the work by the town;
89
(4) A statement that the town’s cost for inspecting such work shall be paid by the developerowner;
(5) A statement of the developer-owner’s proportionate share of the cost for previously
installed mains; and
(6) A statement of the maximum possible reimbursement that may accrue to the developerowner
for the cost of mains to be installed by him but from which others may be served.
If others are served, a participating charge will made at the time of their development.
Section 16-7-7 Agreement in writing; authority to execute
An extension reimbursement agreement shall be in writing and on a form provided by the town.
The provisions of the written agreement shall comply with this article and shall contain the entire
understanding and agreement between the town and the developer-owner. The Town will not
approve and/or execute an agreement after construction or acceptance by the town of the
extension. Such agreements shall be recorded in the Maricopa and Pinal County Recorders’
offices.
The town manager or his designee is authorized to execute the agreement on behalf of the town.
The developer-owner to whom the reimbursement is to be made must be stated on the agreement
at the time of execution and it will be the duty of developer-owner ( the individual to whom
reimbursement is to be made) to keep the Utility Services Department Director advised as to the
correct mailing address, etc. for reimbursement.
The town retains and reserves the right (and ability) to enter into separate special agreements to
cover unique situations where a standard repayment agreement is not applicable.
Section 16-7-8 Financing-Generally
The following provisions related to financing the extension of water and sewer system mains may
be applicable to mains to serve individuals, unplatted areas and subdivisions:
(1) When an existing main will serve the water or sewer system being created for the
subdivision or platted area, any participating charges must be deposited with the town
prior to start of construction for the proposed development.
(2) Where an existing main is to be tapped, a participating charge based upon that portion
of the property to be developed shall be placed on deposit with the town prior to tapping
the existing main.
(3) No person shall be permitted to extend service from his tap to adjacent property owned
by someone else or to property for which a participating charge has not been advanced
and deposited with the town without written approval of the town.
(4) The town will establish a separate account for each reimbursement agreement for the
collection of participating charges and reimbursements to the party who financed the
installation of the main. In no event will the sums reimbursed exceed the contract price
for the installation of the extension.
(5) Should the property or any portion thereof not be served by the main or mains installed
under the agreement, the developer-owner will not be reimbursed for the proportionate
share of the main cost otherwise due from the property.
90
Section 16-7-9 Reimbursement extension cost
The extension costs for which a developer-owner may seek an extension reimbursement
agreement are the actual construction costs (only those costs that do not exceed the contract price
approved by the town), less any oversizing participation paid by the town and the 10 percent
administrative fee provided for in section 16-7-17, associated with installation of the extension. In
the event that the agreed-upon construction costs increase, the repayment agreement may be
amended, in the sole discretion of the town, upon the approval of the additional construction costs
by the town.
The engineering costs for the preparation of plans, specifications, and staking of the extension
incurred by the developer-owner may be included in the agreed construction costs. The developerowner
is not entitled to reimbursement for the costs of installing water and sewer lines within the
boundary of the project.
Section 16-7-10 Bidding for installation of extension lines; approval of costs
The selection of a contractor for the installation of the extension shall be made by competitive
bidding. The bids shall be opened at a location designated by the town on a pre-determined date
agreeable to the developer-owner and the town. The developer-owner shall submit to the town a
notarized copy of all bids received, a copy of the bid tabulation and any information concerning the
projected successful bidder. When awarding the construction work, the developer-owner shall
obtain separate bid prices from their contractor for each item of work identified as eligible for
reimbursement. The Utility Services Department Director and Town Engineer, or designee, has
the authority to adjust any process determined not reasonably justified. Both the town and the
developer-owner shall have the right to reject any and all bids. The construction costs shall be
determined prior to the commencement of construction and shall be approved by the town. No
contract shall be awarded for installation of an extension prior to town approval of the successful
bidder.
After the contractor has been selected to perform the extension installation work, the developer
owner shall submit the total proposed construction costs for the installation plus the projected
engineering costs to the town.
The developer-owner’s engineer shall prepare and submit to the Utility Services Department
Director and Town Engineer, or designee, for review and approval all construction items to be
included in the cost. No construction may commence prior to the town’s approval of these costs.
The final detailed plans and specifications for the extension must be approved by the Town
Engineer prior to construction.
Section 16-7-11 Allocation of reimbursable cost-water extension
The reimbursable costs for an extension of water line shall be allocated, on a footage basis, to all
property, including the developer-owner’s; adjacent to, and which may be served by, the water line
extension.
The developer-owner’s property shall be allocated its proportionate share of the installation costs
of the extension water line. The developer-owner shall not be entitled to reimbursement for this
portion of the reimbursable extension costs.
The front footage for each parcel of property shall be established by the town. The Utility Services
Department Director shall have sole and exclusive control of the connections to any proposed
extension.
91
Section 16-7-12 Allocation of reimbursable cost-sewer extension
The reimbursable costs for an extension of sewer line shall be allocated, on an acreage service
basis, to all property, including the developer-owner’s, which may be served by the sewer line
extension.
The developer-owner’s property shall be allocated its proportionate share of the installation costs
of the extension sewer line. The developer-owner shall not be entitled to reimbursement for this
portion of the reimbursable extension costs.
The acreage service area for each parcel of property shall be established by the town. The
maximum service area to be serviced by the proposed extension and its ultimate branches and
laterals shall be determined by the Utility Services Department Director, or designee, based on
sewer capacity requirements. The Utility Services Department Director shall have sole and
exclusive control of the connections to any proposed extension.
Section 16-7-13 Collection of allocated reimbursement costs; payment
The allocated reimbursement extension costs shall be collected by the town at the time the
subsequent user of the property to which extension costs have been allocated applies to the town
for a permit to connect to the existing extension. The allocated reimbursement extension costs
must be paid prior to issuance of a connection permit or actual connection to the extension.
All funds collected pursuant to the extension reimbursement agreement, less the town’s
administrative fee as provided in this article, shall be placed into a separate account for the
collection and payment of allocated reimbursement extension costs.
Payment of collected reimbursement extension costs shall be made to the developer-owner on an
annual basis each thirtieth day of June.
Section 16-7-14 Service from other source; unassessed parcels; limitation
If any parcel or property to which reimbursement extension costs have been allocated receives
water or sewer service by means other than the extension water or sewer line covered by the
agreement, the reimbursement extension costs allocated to that parcel will not be collected and the
town shall not be responsible to the developer-owner for that amount.
If any parcel of property, which has not previously been allocated a pro rata share of the
reimbursement extension costs, applies to the town for a permit to connect to the extension, the
town shall assess a portion of the reimbursement extension cost, on a front footage or acreage
service basis, to that parcel and collect the amount prior to issuance of the connection permit or
actual connection to the extension.
In no event shall the developer-owner receive an amount which exceeds the total reimbursement
extension costs less the developer-owner’s allocated share of those costs.
Section 16-7-15 Dedication of extension line
The extension reimbursement agreement shall provide that the extension water or sewer lines
covered by the agreement shall become the property of the town upon completion of installation
and acceptance by the town.
92
Section 16-7-16 Expiration of agreement
Agreements must be executed prior to construction of the extension. The term of the extension
reimbursement agreement shall be set in the agreement. At the expiration of the term, the
agreements shall automatically terminate and developer-owner shall have no right to
reimbursement for any connection to the extension after the expiration date. Any balances
remaining unpaid upon termination shall be canceled, and the town shall be fully discharged from
any further obligation under the agreement. No interest shall accrue on any costs advanced by a
developer-owner. There will be no reimbursements for participating charges collected prior to
receipt of the developer-owner’s written request to enter an agreement.
Section 16-7-17 Administration fee
The town fee for administration of the agreement and collection of the allocated reimbursement
costs shall be 10 percent of the allocated reimbursement costs. The town will deduct a 10 percent
administrative fee from each payment received from subsequent users prior to disbursing any funds
to the initial developer-owner. The initial developer-owner pays the administration fee.
Section 16-7-18 Projected allocation
The extension reimbursement agreement shall include a diagram approved by the town designating
the properties which are expected to be served by the extension water or sewer line, the per front
footage (water) and per acreage service (sewer) factors to be used for allocation of the
reimbursement costs and the front footage (water) and acreage (sewer) assigned to each parcel
for purposes of allocating the reimbursement costs.
Section 16-7-19 Assignability of agreement
The agreement shall set forth the name of the person to whom payment of the reimbursement
amount shall be made. The developer-owner may assign to one party only, with the consent of the
town, the right to receive payments under the extension reimbursement agreement if the assignee
purchases or acquires the entire interest of the original property owner who entered into the
repayment agreement and the assignment is in accordance with the specific terms of the extension
reimbursement agreement. No other assignment of any portion of the extension reimbursement
agreement may be made by the developer-owner or his assignee. Such an assignment shall not
relieve the developer-owner from his duties and obligations under the reimbursement agreement.
ARTICLE 16-8 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
Section 16-8-1 Definitions
Section 16-8-2 Approval of plans prerequisite to issuance of building permit
Section 16-8-3 Bond or deposit
Section 16-8-4 Temporary waivers
93
Section 16-8-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the text clearly indicates otherwise:
Off-site improvements means those required improvements in the public right-of-way and shall
include, but not be limited to, asphaltic concrete surfacing, aggregate base, curb and gutter, valley
gutters, concrete sidewalks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm drains and irrigation
facilities when required.
Redeveloped means major additions or major alterations to existing structures, and shall include
new structures on parcels of land having existing structures situated thereon.
Section 16-8-2 Approval of plans prerequisite to issuance of building permit
No building permit shall be issued by the town until plans are submitted indicating that off-site
improvements are planned for the project in conformance with town standards and requirements.
These off-site improvement plans shall be submitted with all other building plans and applications.
Building plans shall be approved in writing by the development department. Off-site improvement
plans shall be approved in writing by the Utility Services Department and Development Services
Department.
Section 16-8-3 Bond or deposit
The Development Services Department shall deny final approval and certificate of occupancy of
any building until the required off-site improvements are completed and have been inspected and
approved by the appropriate town department, unless performance of off-site improvements is
guaranteed by a performance bond, approved by the town attorney and the Utility Services
Department Director, or a cash deposit with the finance and technology department for a sum which
shall be in an amount fixed by the town.
The performance bond or cash deposit shall be returned to the depositor upon the approval of the
town subsequent to the completion of the off-site improvements. It is further provided that the
performance bond or cash deposit, or a portion thereof, the amount of such portion to be determined
by the town, may be retained by the town as compensation for performing the work required in the
approved off-site improvement plans; provided, that the permittee shall have failed, or refused, to
install the work within 30 days after receipt of a notice in writing by the town.
Section 16-8-4 Temporary waivers
If any of the off-site improvements cause a hardship on the town, or it is not practical to construct
the improvements because of the pending formation of an improvement district, the town may
temporarily suspend the off-site improvements upon the property owners entering a contract with
the town to accept an improvement district assessment or to construct the off-site improvements
within 30 days after receipt of a notice to proceed issued by the town.
94
ARTICLE 16-9 WATER AND WASTEWATER CAPACITY CHARGES OFF-SITE
IMPROVEMENTS
Section 16-9-1 Setting and Amending Capacity Charges
Section 16-9-2 Water Capacity and Charges
Section 16-9-3 Wastewater Capacity Charges
Section 16-9-1 Setting and Amending Capacity Charges
The Council may by ordinance or resolution set and amend any capacity charge for water and or
wastewater, subject to all applicable notice and hearing requirements. Applicants should consult
with the Utility Services Department for current charges.
Section 16-9-21 Water Capacity Charge 1
Meter Size Capacity Ratio
Water Capacity
Charge
¾” 1.00 $2,382
1” 1.67 $3,978
1 ½” 3.33 $7,933
2” 5.33 $12,697
3” 10.00 $23,822
4” 16.67 $39,711
Meter sizes and associated fees are for compound meters. Fees for turbine meters and meters
larger than 4-inches are subject to a special calculation.
1Ordinance 700-19 & 702-19
Section 16-9-31 Wastewater Capacity Charge1
Meter Size
Capacity
Ratio
Sewer Capacity Charge
(Residential)
Sewer Capacity Charge
(Non-residential)
¾” 1.00 $2,901 $2,901
1” 1.67 $2,901 $4,845
1 ½ “ 3.33 $9, 660 $9,660
2” 5.33 $15,462 $15,462
3” 10.00 $29,009 $29,009
4” 16.67 $48,358 $48,358
Meter sizes and associated fees are for compound meters. Fees for turbine meters and meters
larger than 4-inches are subject to a special calculation.
1Ordinance 700-19 and 702-19
95
ARTICLE 16-10 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES1
Section 16-10-1 Purpose
The intent and purpose of this article is to facilitate the development and installation of small
wireless facilities in the Town of Queen Creek to supplement existing wireless communications
networks and to increase capacity in high demand areas, while simultaneously promoting and
preserving the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town and protecting and
preserving the aesthetic qualities of the natural and built environment of the Town. Through this
article, the Town seeks to balance the need for increased wireless communications capacity with
the need for reasonable standards to preserve the aesthetic values of the Town and to ensure
safe placement of small wireless facilities.
Section 16-10-2 Definitions
The definitions contained in A.R.S. § 9-591 are incorporated by this reference and shall apply to
this article as if fully set forth here.
Section 16-10-3 Small Wireless Facilities in the Public Right of Way
This section permits the installation of small wireless facilities in the right of way subject to the
following requirements:
A. No monopoles, utility poles associated with small wireless facilities, or small wireless facilities
shall be collocated, installed, modified, or replaced in the public right of way unless the following
requirements are met:
1) An Application is submitted to and approved by the Town pursuant to Section 16-10-
4;
2) All Town requirements as set forth in this article are met;
3) All other applicable codes and requirements are met;
4) A Wireless Facility License Agreement is signed; and
5) A Wireless Facility Site Permit issued.
B. The installation and maintenance of monopoles in the public right of way and small wireless
facilities on utility poles in the public right of way shall be subject to and comply with reasonable
requirements, including the Wireless Facilities Standard Terms and Conditions, the Town’s Design
Standards and Guidelines, and any site-specific requirements developed based upon consultation
with the Town through the site review and permitting process.
96
C. The installation and maintenance of monopoles in the public right of way and small wireless
facilities on utility poles or monopoles in the public right of way shall be subject to rates and fees
pursuant to Section 16-10-5 of this article.
D. In addition to the above requirements, the installation, replacement, and/or modification of
monopoles in the public right of way shall be subject to the requirements of Section 6.9 of the Town’s
Zoning Ordinance.
E. In addition to the above requirements, the installation, replacement, and/or modification of
utility poles that exceed the greater of either 1) ten (10) feet above the tallest existing utility pole
(excluding utility poles supporting only wireless facilities), that is located within five hundred (500)
feet of the proposed site for the new, replacement or modified pole if that existing pole was in place
prior to August 9, 2017, but the new pole cannot be more than fifty (50) feet above ground level; or
2) Forty (40) feet above ground level, shall be subject to the requirements of Section 6.9 of the
Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
G. In addition to the above requirements, collocations of new small wireless facilities that exceed
ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure (defined as including a monopole if
there was an existing one in the ROW) and exceed fifty (50) feet above ground level shall be subject
to the requirements of Section 6.9 of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
Section 16-10-4 Application
A. Prior to the collocation, installation, modification, or replacement of any monopole, utility pole
associated with wireless facilities, or small wireless facility in the public right of way, the wireless
provider must complete and submit an Application to the Town’s Department of Development
Services.
B. The Department of Development Services shall prescribe and provide a regular form of
application for use by Applicants for permits required by this section. The Application shall include
such information and details as the department deems necessary to establish the exact location,
nature, dimensions, duration and purpose of the proposed small wireless facility. If requested, the
Applicant shall include maps, sketches, diagrams, or similar exhibits. The Applicant shall include
proof of liability insurance.
C. The Department of Development Services shall determine if the Application establishes that
the utility poles associated with wireless facilities, monopoles, and/or small wireless facilities that
are the subject of the Application comply with the following:
1) Town Design Standards and Guidelines
2) Town codes, ordinances, regulations, requirements, policies, and guidelines,
regarding undergrounding
3) Town codes, ordinances, regulations, requirements, policies, and guidelines,
regarding public safety
4) Town codes, ordinances, regulations, requirements, policies, and guidelines
regarding spacing new utility poles
5) All other applicable Town codes, ordinances, regulations, requirements, policies,
and guidelines to which law to subject small wireless facilities authorizes the town.
D. If it is determined that the Application does not establish compliance with requirements of
this section, then the Application must be denied.
Section 16-10-5 Rates and Fees
97
A. The Town Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, set and amend any rate, rate component,
charge, or fee authorized by state law for the use of the public right of way and Town utility poles in
connection with small wireless facilities including:
1) Fees for conditional use permit applications
2) Fees for collocation applications;
3) Fees for the use of the right of way;
4) Rates for the use of the Town’s utility poles;
5) Fees to recover legal costs resulting from enforcement to any noncompliance
including, but not limited to, administrative expenses, investigation, testing, legal
proceedings and filings, and continued monitoring; and
6) Other fees as the Town may determine necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein.
B. All rates and fees set or amended pursuant to this article shall be reasonable and shall
not exceed the amounts permitted by state law.
C. The Town shall publish and make available its schedule of rates and fees.
D. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other
fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the Town.
1 Ordinance 655-18
Rev. 2007
CHAPTER 17 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS1
1Ordinance 156-99
ARTICLE 17-1 TITLE
This chapter shall be entitled the Town of Queen Creek Cable Communications Chapter.
ARTICLE 17-2 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the regulation and control of cable television
systems operating within the town by the council, in the public interest; to authorize the council
to grant one or more non-exclusive licenses to operate cable communications systems; to
provide for the use of town streets, public utility easements, public rights of way and public
places by licensee and compensation to the town for use of same; and to require that the
provisions of this chapter be applicable to all licenses granted by the council. It is the further
purpose and intent of this chapter to facilitate the provision of high quality cable television
service to the citizens of the town while minimizing disruptions of the public domain for system
installation and maintenance.
ARTICLE 17-3 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have
the meanings given herein. Words not defined are given the meaning in Section 602 of the
Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Subsection 522, and, if none, their common and ordinary meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The words "must" or "shall" are mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
"Access channel" shall mean one or more channels dedicated in whole or in part for local noncommercial
programming which is set aside for educational use or governmental use without a
charge by the licensee for channel usage and which is not originated by a cable company;
provided that such access programming shall not include:
1. the retransmission of local television broadcast signals, or
2. programming produced by persons unaffiliated with the cable company under the
provisions of Section 612 of the Cable Act.
"Applicant" means any person that applies for a license.
"Application" means a proposal to construct and/or operate a cable system within the town,
transfer a license, renew a license or modify a license. An application includes the initial
proposal plus all subsequent amendments or supplements to the proposal and relevant
correspondence.
Rev. 2007
"Basic cable service" or "basic service" means any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
"Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et
seq., as amended.
"Cablecasting" means a non-broadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the cable
communications system.
"Cable service", unless defined in the license agreement, means:
1. one way transmission to subscribers of:
a. video programming, or
b. other programming service, and
2. subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such
video programming or other programming service.
"Cable television system" or "cable system" unless defined in the license agreement, means a
facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the town. Such term does not
include:
1. Facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
television broadcast stations;
2. A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under
common ownership, control or management, unless such facility uses or crosses
(above or through) any public right-of-way;
3. A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or part, to the provision of
Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. Subsection 201 et seq.,
except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such
facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers or
4. Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
systems. Furthermore, if there is a connection of any such exempt system to a
licensed system such exemption shall cease.
"Change of service" means all requests by existing subscribers for modification to their cable
service, such as additions or deletions of premium services, additional outlets, remote controls
FM service, etc. Such terms shall not include initial installation of basic cable service, total
disconnection of basic cable service or service calls.
"Channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable
system and is capable of delivering a television channel.
"Complaint" is a subscriber or citizen issue, presented in verbal or written form, to the licensee
or the town relating to any aspect of the licensee's performance under this chapter.
Rev. 2007
"Control of licensee or applicant" means the legal or practical ability to direct the affairs of the
licensee or applicant either directly or indirectly, whether by contractual agreement or majority
ownership of an economic interest. In the case of a limited partnership, a change in limited
partner interests shall not constitute a change in control where the limited partners have no
power to participate in the management of the partnership, and the general partner retains full
power.
"Converter" is an electronic tuning device which converts transmitted signals to a frequency
which permits their reception on an ordinary television set.
"Council" means the town Council of the Town of Queen Creek, Arizona, or such representative
person or entity as may be designated initially or at some future date to act on cable television
matters.
"Density" means the number of potential subscriber households per mile of cable system.
Dwelling units shall be counted when they are within 250 feet of any portion of the cable
distribution system including trunk and feeder cable lines.
"Dwelling unit" means any separate and distinct structure or part thereof which exists in finished
form, occupied or capable of year-round occupation, and serves as a residence to one or more
persons. Included in this definition, but not limited to are: all single family homes, each
apartment unit, each condominium unit, patio homes, guest quarters and similar type structures.
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or successor agency.
"Gross revenues", unless defined in the license agreement, shall mean all cash, credits,
property of any kind or nature, or other consideration, less related bad debts up to a maximum
of one and one-half percent annually of such cash, credits and property, received directly or
indirectly by a licensee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any person, firm or corporation in
which a licensee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in a licensee, arising
from or attributable to the licensee's operation of its cable television system within the town,
including, but not limited to:
1. Revenue from all charges for services provided to subscribers;
2. Revenue for all charges for the insertion of commercial advertising upon the cable
system;
3. Revenue from all charges for the leased use of studios;
4. Revenue from all charges for the installation, removal, connection and
reinstatement of equipment necessary for a subscriber to receive cable service;
5. Revenue from the sale, exchange, use or cablecast of any programming
developed for community use or institutional users.
6. Revenue from all charges for the use of or lease of leased access channels or
band width.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
7. Revenue from the production or transmission over the cable system of video
programming by licensee including programming produced by its mobile facilities.
8. Any other income derived from the cable system.
Gross revenues shall not include taxes collected by licensee on behalf of any governmental
authority; any surcharges for underground conversion of cable plant costs; any increase in the
value of any stock, security or asset; the value of complimentary services provided to licensee's
employees and is required by this chapter or any license; and dividends or other distributions
made in respect of any stock or securities, or value received by a licensee or any of its affiliates,
subsidiaries or parent relating to licensee services or through cooperative advertising.
Gross revenues shall not include cash, credit, property of any kind or nature or other
consideration received by a licensee's affiliates, subsidiaries, parent or any person, firm or
corporation ("affiliate") in which a licensee has a financial interest or which has financial interest
in a licensee for any sales of advertising on the cable system, services to provide programming
on the cable system, production services and/or telecommunication services which are cable
services when such services are provided by an affiliate, which has all the following
characteristics: the affiliate is a separate legal entity, with separate employees, with separate
financial records (which may be part of consolidated financial reporting records) and a separate
mission; it makes payments to licensee which meet market standards for the services and
industries involved, even if it does not offer and provide its services to persons other than
licensee in the same industry as licensee; and it was established for valid business purposes
and not with the intent and purpose of circumventing payment of license fees on gross
revenues. Nothing contained in this exclusion from gross revenues shall be interpreted to
exclude from gross revenues such cash, credit, property of any kind or nature or other
consideration which would be considered the licensee's gross revenues derived from the
operation of the cable system under the Cable Act. Except for gross revenue from such sales of
advertising on the cable system, services to provide programming on the cable system,
production services or telecommunication services which are cable services received by such
affiliate, this paragraph shall not exclude from gross revenues any source of gross revenues
which an existing licensee itself is receiving at the time it is granted a license under this chapter.
When a licensee (or an affiliate) holds one or more other cable television licenses in Maricopa
County, Arizona and/or Pinal County, Arizona and receives and allocates gross revenues from
paragraphs 2, 6 and 7 under this definition, then gross revenues derived from paragraphs 2, 6
and 7 under this definition, shall be allocated pro rata to the town based on the ratio of the
number of subscribers of licensee (or an affiliate), in the town to the number of subscribers of
licensee (or an affiliate) in all the jurisdictions in Maricopa County, Arizona and/or Pinal County,
Arizona, in which licensee (or an affiliate) holds a cable license. If a licensee does not allocate
its gross revenues derived from paragraphs 2, 6 and 7 under this definition from such other
jurisdictions then the number of subscribers in such jurisdictions shall not be included in the total
number of subscribers in all other jurisdictions.
"Interconnect" or "interconnect of facilities" is the connection of one or more channels of
licensee's system with other cable systems by direct cable, microwave link, satellite or other
appropriate methods.
"Leased channel" or "leased access channel" means any channel designated in accordance
with Section 612 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Subsection 532, for commercial use by persons
unaffiliated with the licensee.
Rev. 2007
"License" means the non-exclusive right and authority, granted by the council, as described in
this chapter, to construct, maintain and operate a cable television system through use of the
public streets or public places in the town. This term does not include any license or permit that
may be required by the chapter or other laws, ordinances or regulations of the council for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the town or for disturbing the surface
of any street or public thoroughfare.
"Licensee" means the person granted a license agreement by the council and any lawful
successor, transferee or assignee of said person.
"License agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter between the council and a licensee that sets forth the terms and conditions under which
the license will be exercised.
"Malfunction" means an equipment or facility failure that results in the loss of a viewable signal
on one or more channels. A "major malfunction" has occurred when five or more channels are
affected.
"Outage" means an equipment or facility failure that results in a total loss of signal on all cable
channels affecting three or more subscribers within one linear mile during any one hundred
twenty minute period.
"Overbuild" means a cable system constructed to serve subscribers currently served by an
existing cable system, including those parts of an existing system that will be constructed within
six months pursuant to plans filed with the council.
"PEG access channel" or "PEG channel" means any channel set aside for educational use or
governmental use without a charge by the licensee for channel usage.
"Person" means any individual, corporation, joint venture, association, syndicate, trust,
partnership or any other business entity who holds or applies for a license from the council.
"Property of licensee" means all property owned, installed or used within the town by a licensee
in the conduct of a cable television system business.
"School" means any public educational institution, which is accredited by a nationally
recognized institution, including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities.
"Service call" shall result when service problems occur relating to:
1. Fewer than three complaints regarding total loss of signal on all channels within
within one linear mile during any one hundred twenty minutes,
2. A degraded signal or picture on one or more channels, or
3. Property damage by licensee employees or authorized contractors.
"Standard drop" means that cable connection which requires no more than a one hundred and
twenty-five foot drop measured from the nearest point of subscribers home or place of business
to the nearest active tap on the cable system, involving only one outlet and standard materials
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
and does not involve a wallfish. In addition, a standard drop shall exclude custom installation
work including specific subscriber requested work that requires nonstandard inventory or cable
routing that requires construction methods exceeding reasonable underground or aerial work.
"Street" means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of
any public street, road, highway, path, sidewalk, alley, court, easement or other public right-ofway
or public place now or hereafter held by the town, County of Maricopa, County of Pinal or
State of Arizona for the purpose of public travel or public utilities.
"Subscriber" means any individual or entity legally receiving, for any purpose, cable services of
the licensee's cable television system including, but not limited to, the basic service,
redistribution of television broadcast signals, radio signals, licensee's original cablecasting,
community programming, government and education access channels and other services such
as leased channels, data and facsimile distribution, premium and pay per view channels and
police, fire and similar public service communication.
"Town" means the Town of Queen Creek, a municipal corporation of the State of Arizona, in its
present boundaries, and its future boundaries as increased or decreased by law.
"Town manager" means the town Manager of Queen Creek, Arizona, or his designee, as will be
communicated to the licensee in writing, if and when such designation occurs.
"Two-way capability" means the incorporation in a cable system of all appropriate design and
engineering characteristics so that two-way transmission, including addressability, over the
system can be implemented with a minimum of expense.
ARTICLE 17-4 AUTHORITY TO GRANT LICENSE, LICENSE REQUIRED, NONEXCLUSIVE
LICENSE
A. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-505, as amended, the council has the authority to issue nonexclusive
licenses to construct, install, maintain and operate cable communication
systems within the town, and to regulate those cable operations. The council's authority is
also based in common law pursuant to the town's ownership of the fee simple title to the
streets of the town as well as its legal interest in easements and licenses granted to it by
property owners for the purposes of municipal use.
B. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed to require the granting of a
license.
C. No person shall construct, install or maintain a cable system within any street in the town,
or within any other public property of the town, unless a license agreement authorizing
such use of said streets or property is in full force and effect.
D. Any person providing cable services or maintaining a cable system in the town pursuant to
a license granted by Maricopa County, Arizona and/or Pinal County Arizona, prior to the
incorporation of the town, may continue to provide or maintain such system until such time
as the town has granted its first license. If the person providing service or maintaining a
system does not apply for and receive one of the first town licenses, then the person shall
Rev. 2007
have one hundred twenty days from the effective date of the first licenses to provide for
the abandonment or removal of the system.
E. Any license issued by the council shall be non-exclusive, and the council specifically
reserves the right to grant such additional licenses for cable systems as the council
deems appropriate.
ARTICLE 17-5 APPLICATION PROCEDURES
A. Any person desiring to construct, install, maintain or operate a cable communication
system within the town shall submit an application to the council. This application shall be
filed with the town clerk, and must conform to Article 17-9 of this chapter and must
address, at a minimum, the following information:
1. The name, title, address, phone numbers and ownership interests for all owners
holding five percent or more of the applying entity, including key contact and
management personnel.
2. The proposed construction or service area, construction schedule, likely time line,
and construction standards, practices and procedures.
3. The proposed service levels, including channel capacity, program selections,
rates, customer service standards, problem resolution process, customer contact
locations.
4. Other pertinent information the applicant deems appropriate and helpful to the
town in assessing the credibility and worthiness of the proposal.
B. All applications filed with the town clerk remain the property of the town. Applications
submitted may be returned as incomplete if they do not comply with all requirements of
the town. The council reserves the right to issue a request for proposals at any time.
C. Applications for consent to transfer a license or an interest in a license must conform to
the requirements of Articles 17-9 and 17-12 of this chapter, while applications for renewal
must conform to Articles 17-9 and 17-11.
D. An application for modification of a license agreement must conform to Article 17-9 of this
chapter and include, at a minimum, the following information:
1. The specific modification requested;
2. The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the
requested modification on subscribers and others, and the impact on the applicant
if the modification is not approved;
3. A statement as to whether the modification sought is pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
Section 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the
legal standards of said section; and
4. Any other information necessary for the council to make a determination.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
E. To be acceptable for filing, an application must be submitted with any required filing fee,
be properly executed on the forms prescribed by the council, and contain the information
required by this chapter, and meet the requirements of any applicable request for
proposals.
ARTICLE 17-6 STANDARDS FOR GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE APPLICATIONS
A. All applications received that are acceptable for filing shall be placed in a public file with
the town clerk.
B. The council shall give full consideration to each application. The following factors may be
deemed appropriate and shall be considered:
1. The financial qualifications of the applicant and its ability to construct and operate
the proposed system.
2. The need for and quality of the service proposed, including rates to subscribers,
whether or not rates are to be regulated.
3. The technical, legal and character qualifications of the applicant, including
applicant's willingness to abide by the limitations of this chapter.
4. Technical and performance adequacy of the proposed system design, plant and
equipment, including any specific knowledge or experience the council may have
with the applicant.
5. Where an applicant proposes to overbuild an existing cable system, the economic
and technical feasibility of multiple cable systems, the impact on the existing
licensee's system and the public interest, if the application were to be granted.
6. All other factors which may affect the public interest.
C. Thereafter, the council shall make a determination whether to approve or disapprove each
application.
ARTICLE 17-7 LICENSE AGREEMENT
A. Upon the approval of an application by the council, the applicant shall negotiate and
execute a license agreement within sixty days. If the council and the grantee fail to agree
on the terms of a license agreement within the sixty days of the date that the council's
action approving the application, the approval shall expire without further action by the
council. This time limit may be extended by the council for good cause. The license
agreement shall incorporate all terms and provisions of this chapter wherein a
requirement is placed upon the licensee, either expressed or implied by this chapter. The
licensee shall expressly and specifically agree to accept the terms of and be bound by the
terms of this chapter.
Rev. 2007
B. A license agreement shall have the following characteristics:
1. It authorizes use of the public rights-of-way for installing cables, wires, lines and
other facilities to operate a cable system, but does not expressly or implicitly
authorize the licensee to provide service to, or install cable, wires, lines or any
other equipment or facilities upon property without owner consent [except for
compatible easements or rights-of-way pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 541(a)(2)],
or to use publicly or privately owned utility poles or conduits without a separate
agreement with the owners. It also authorizes the licensee so to use, operate and
provide similar facilities or properties rented, licensed or leased from other
persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other
licensee licensed or permitted to do business in the town; provided, however, that
neither the licensee nor the third party shall be relieved of any regulation or
obligations as to its use of such facilities in the streets.
2. It is subject to the paramount right of use of the public rights-of-way by the council
and the public for public purposes. The council reserves the right to authorize use
of public rights-of-way to other persons as it determines appropriate.
3. It is nonexclusive and will not expressly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other
licenses to operate cable systems within the town.
4. It conveys no property right to the licensee or right to renewal other than as may
be required by state or federal law.
5. It constitutes a contract between the licensee and the council once it is approved
by the council and executed by both parties. A licensee contractually commits
itself to comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of the license agreement
and with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders.
6. The term of the license agreement shall not exceed fifteen years commencing on
its effective date.
7. A licensee shall execute a hold harmless agreement as part of the license
agreement which shall set forth the obligation of the licensee over and above the
insurance requirements contained in the license and this chapter.
8. A licensee shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations of the State of
Arizona and the United States Government.
9. Any of the provisions of this chapter may be amended by the council at any time.
This chapter and such amended provisions shall be applicable to all existing
license agreements; provided, however, that this chapter and such amended
provisions shall not be applicable to an existing agreement where it would
contravene a contractual right of the licensee under the license agreement, nor
pose additional contractual burdens on the licensee.
10. All notices and communications from a licensee to the council pursuant to this
chapter or a license agreement shall be sent to the town manager unless the
licensee is otherwise directed.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
11. Insofar as it is not inconsistent with or otherwise preempted by federal or state
regulations, the license agreement shall grant the right and privilege to the
licensee to provide non-cable communications services. Insofar as it is not
inconsistent with or otherwise preempted by federal or state regulations, the
council shall retain all authority to regulate non-cable telecommunication services
to the extent necessary to protect the public interest and to ensure compliance
with all provisions of this chapter.
ARTICLE 17-8 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEMS
A licensee shall conform to the following minimum standards relative to the construction,
operation and maintenance of a cable communications system in the town. It is not the intent of
this article to prevent any licensee from providing more than the required minimum to meet the
standards listed below.
A. Rights of Individuals, Subscribers and Users.
1. A cable system shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principles of
fairness and equal accessibility of facilities, channels, studios and other services
to all residents and other entities having a legitimate use of the system. A
licensee shall not discriminate in terms of rates, terms of service or extension of
service on the basis of age, race, creed, sex, religion, national origin or marital
status. Nor shall a licensee fail to extend service to any part of the town on the
basis of the income of the residents. A licensee shall maintain a business office
open during normal business hours with listed local or toll-free telephone numbers
to allow reasonable access by subscribers and members of the public. Unless a
waiver is granted by the council, said office shall be located within ten miles of the
town's corporate limits. When the office is closed, an answering machine or
similar device, capable of receiving service complaints and inquiries must be
employed.
2. Licensee shall maintain a written record listing date of all complaints, identifying
the subscriber or citizen, describing the nature of the complaint and when and
what action has been taken by the licensee, if any, in response thereto; such
record shall be kept at licensee's office and shall be available for inspection during
regular business hours without further notice of demand of the town manager. A
summary of such records must be retained for not less than one year. The
licensee shall notify each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to service of
the procedure to reporting and resolving complaints.
3. A licensee shall establish procedures for the investigation and resolution of all
complaints including, but not limited to, those regarding the quality of service and
equipment malfunction. A copy of such procedures shall be provided to the
council upon request.
4. A licensee must provide each subscriber at the time cable service is installed, the
following:
Rev. 2007
a. written instructions for placing a service call, filing a complaint or
requesting an adjustment, including the phone number and address of
licensee's office;
b. the telephone number of the town office responsible for administration
of the cable license;
c. a schedule of rates and charges for all available services;
d. copies of the service contract, including disconnect and reconnect
procedures and charges;
e. a subscriber handbook and upon request any other written policies
applicable to subscribers.
5. A licensee shall establish and conform to the following policy regarding refunds to
subscribers and users:
a. If the licensee collects a deposit or advance charge on any service or
equipment requested by a subscriber or user, the licensee shall provide
such service or equipment within thirty days of the collection of the deposit
or charge or it shall refund such deposit or charge within five days
thereafter upon request of the subscriber. The subscriber must be advised
of this right of refund at the time the order is placed.
b. If any subscriber or user terminates any monthly service during a
period of time for which said subscriber or user has made an annual or
other payment in advance, the appropriate pro rata portion of said payment
shall be refunded by the licensee.
6. The following requirements shall apply to disconnections:
a. There shall be no charge for total disconnection of cable service
unless such charge was disclosed at the time the subscriber ordered
service. All cable communications equipment shall be removed within a
reasonable time from a subscriber's property at the subscriber's request,
such time not to exceed thirty days from the date of the request.
b. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber's fee
or other charge, the licensee may disconnect the subscriber's service
outlet; provided, however, that such disconnection shall not be effected until
thirty days after the due date of the charges and shall include a prior
written notice to the subscriber of the intent to disconnect. After
disconnection, upon payment in full of all proper charges or fees, including
the payment of any reconnection charge, the licensee shall promptly
reinstate the service.
7. A licensee may interrupt service on the cable system only for good cause and for
the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after prior
notice to subscribers and the council of anticipated interruption. No prior notice
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
shall be required for the performance of system maintenance work requiring a
maximum of one hour between the hours of six a.m. and twelve midnight, and four
hours between the hours of twelve midnight and six a.m.
8. A licensee shall at all times comply with the subscriber privacy provisions of 47
U.S.C. Section 551.
9. No equipment shall be installed by the licensee for subscriber service without first
securing a service request from the owner or resident of any private property
involved, except in public utility easements.
10. A licensee shall not originate or knowingly permit subliminal transmission at any
time for any purpose whatsoever.
11. A licensee shall provide a notice to each subscriber no less than thirty days prior
to any change in the schedule of rates and charges for all available services.
12. A licensee shall provide leased access channels as required under 47 U.S.C.
Section 532. In the event that said federal provisions should cease to apply, the
council reserves the right to promulgate other leased access requirements which
shall apply, not to exceed those requirements specified in 47 U.S.C. Section 532.
13. A licensee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements
of the FCC, 47 U.S.C. Section 554, state statutes and local regulations, and as
the same may be amended from time to time.
B. Cable System Construction Timetable.
1. A cable system shall be constructed in accordance with the provision of the
license agreement.
2. It is the policy of the council to require construction of a cable system designed to
serve subscribers in an area licensed by the council as rapidly and expeditiously
as possible. The licensee shall immediately upon granting of the license
agreement diligently pursue and obtain all necessary permits from the appropriate
governmental agencies, utility companies and others as necessary to comply with
the provision of this chapter and other federal, state and town laws, codes and
resolutions. However, no construction shall begin until the notification
requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter are satisfied.
3. A cable system shall be constructed pursuant to a construction timetable specified
in the license agreement.
4. Any delay beyond the terms of the timetable specified in the license agreement
will be considered a violation of the terms of this chapter and the license
agreement. Unless the licensee can establish that the delay was due to factors
beyond its control, the licensee may be considered in default of the license
agreement and the town manager may take whatever action the town manager is
entitled to under this chapter and the license agreement.
Rev. 2007
5. The licensee shall not be considered in default of the applicable construction
schedule if the council approves a modification of the schedule change in
advance. In submitting a request for a construction schedule modification, the
licensee must fully explain the reasons for the delay, in writing. The delay must
be disapproved by the council if it is not reasonably justified, would have
unreasonably discriminating results or would unduly delay service to an area.
Such a modification request shall be considered granted unless the licensee is
notified by the council to the contrary in writing within forty-five days of the date on
which the request was filed.
6. The council may require a licensee to report on construction progress and provide
information showing specifically whether the construction schedule is being met
and the reasons for the delay. The town manager shall determine the format to
be used for the report and the frequency of reporting.
7. Where appropriate and reasonable, a licensee shall schedule construction
activities to coordinate with any town construction on streets so as to avoid
unnecessary inconvenience to the public.
C. Line Extension Policy.
Unless the license agreement provides otherwise, a licensee shall be required to extend
its cable system pursuant to the following requirements:
1. Upon reasonable request for service by any person located within any area of the
town that meets density requirements of paragraph 2 of this subsection, the
licensee shall, within ninety days, furnish the requested service to such person,
unless prevented from providing said service due to factors outside licensee's
control, such as permit restrictions, private easement considerations, etc. If such
service has not been implemented within one hundred twenty days of said
request, the council may impose liquidated damages for each day thereafter.
2. The licensee must extend and make cable television service available to every
unserved dwelling unit within any area of the town reaching the minimum density
of at least thirty-five dwelling units per mile of plant as measured from licensee's
nearest activated trunk or feeder line, whether the existing plant is aerial or
underground, except that the licensee shall not be required to install cable where
another authorized licensee has already done so. Licensee shall complete line
extensions to an area reaching a density of at least five homes within 1,056 feet of
existing active cable plant, or where an area has more than seven homes, at least
one home per 151 street feet including the distance to existing active cable plant.
Upon request, this density requirement may be modified by the council for a
specific licensee, provided said licensee demonstrates that it would be
commercially impracticable if licensee's compliance with said requirement would
create a significant adverse impact on the capital costs of licensee's Queen Creek
cable system.
3. The licensee shall prevent unnecessary damage to streets and property by
installing cables or conduits underground in new single family subdivisions at the
same time and in the same trench as telephone, electric or similar services are
installed. Given reasonable notice, the licensee shall install underground cable or
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
conduit in all new subdivisions of five or more dwelling units within the service
area at the same time and in the same trench as telephone, electric or similar
services are installed. Cable need not be installed or activated until the new
subdivision meets the criteria established for line extensions.
4. The licensee must extend and make cable television service available to any
resident requesting connection within the licensee's authorized service area at the
regular installation charge if the connection to the resident would require no more
than a one hundred twenty-five foot drop line, and provided that paragraph 2 of
this subsection is met.
5. With respect to requests for connection requiring a drop line in excess of one
hundred twenty-five feet, the licensee must extend service to such residents at a
one time charge not to exceed the actual costs incurred by the licensee for the
distance exceeding one hundred twenty-five feet.
D. Construction and Technical Standards.
The following general requirements, which are not to be interpreted as imposing
standards in excess of FCC imposed limits, apply to all licensees.
1. In those areas and portions of the service area where the transmission and
distribution facilities of the telephone company and the electric company are
underground or later placed underground, the licensee shall likewise install its
transmission facilities underground.
2. In areas where facilities do not have to be underground, a licensee shall not erect
any new poles along any street or public way of the town except as may be
reasonably required or necessary to fill small gaps in the existing aerial utility
systems and only then with the advance approval of the council.
3. All television signals transmitted on a cable system must include any closed
captioning information for the hearing impaired. Antennas, supporting structures
and outside plant used in the system must be designed to comply with the
recommendations of the Electronics Industries Association and applicable federal
and local regulations on tower structures and outside plant.
4. The licensee may perform at its expense any proof of performance tests designed
to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the license
agreement and the FCC. The town manager may require periodic proof of
performance tests to be performed at the expense of the licensee. Upon request,
the licensee must provide the test results promptly to the town manager.
5. The licensee may advise the town manager when a proof of performance test is
scheduled so that the town manager may have an observer present.
6. A licensee may not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that will
interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the electrical system located in
any building, the cable system of another licensee, or individual or master
antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals.
Rev. 2007
E. Maintenance Specifications.
1. The licensee shall construct, install and maintain its cable system in an orderly
and workmanlike manner. The safety of the general public, the licensee's
employees, the employees of the utility companies and all nearby property owners
shall be a primary concern.
2. All cables are to be installed, to the maximum extent possible, parallel with electric
and telephone distribution facilities. Multiple-cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled to the maximum extent possible.
3. As between licensee and the town, the licensee shall be solely and completely
responsible for the actions taken by any contractor or other agent employed to
construct or install the licensee's facilities on streets as well as on public or private
property.
4. The licensee shall give prior written notice, as set forth later in this article, of its
intent to place underground facilities. Failure to provide such notice may subject a
licensee to liquidated damages pursuant to Article 17-9 of this chapter or other
enforcement sanctions.
5. In addition, the licensee shall comply with all other town, state and federal laws
and regulations which may be applicable to its operations.
6. A licensee shall have available at all hours personnel capable of responding to
emergency conditions requiring immediate repair to any facility owned by the
state, county, town or the gas, electric and telephone utilities, as well as pipeline
companies or similar industries. The licensee shall respond to normal requests
for location of its facilities within forty-eight hours. The licensee shall be a
member of the One Call Notification Center, or comply with state underground
law, for its service area.
7. In the event that licensee property, or the facilities and equipment of unauthorized
cable communication providers, has been installed in a street or other dedicated
public right-of-way without complying with the requirements of this chapter, or the
license has been terminated, revoked or expired, or the use of any licensee
property is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of three months,
licensee or any unauthorized cable communication provider, shall at its sole
expense on the demand of the council remove promptly from the street all
licensee or unauthorized cable communication provider property other than that
which the council may permit to be abandoned in place. Upon such removal of
subject property, licensee or unauthorized cable communication provider shall
promptly restore the street or other public places from which the subject property
was removed to a condition as near as possible to its prior condition. Subject
property no longer in service may be left in place with the approval of and in a
manner prescribed by the council. Upon abandonment of said property in place,
licensee or unauthorized cable communication provider shall deliver to the council
an instrument transferring ownership of the subject abandoned property to the
town. Any cost arising from compliance with this provision shall be borne by the
licensee or unauthorized cable communication provider.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
F. Use of Streets.
1. A licensee must utilize, with the owner's permission, existing poles, conduits or
such other facilities whenever possible. Underground street, sidewalk and
driveway crossings not using existing conduits shall be bored unless specific
council approval is received. A licensee may install its own poles only when
approved by the council and subject to whatever reasonable terms the council
requires.
2. All transmission lines and other equipment must be installed and located to
minimize interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of public and
private property owners. The council reserves the right to issue such reasonable
rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of cable
systems in the public rights-of-way, as may be consistent with this chapter, state
and federal law.
3. The licensee shall have at all times up-to-date route maps showing trunk and
distribution lines. Licensee shall make all such maps available for review by the
appropriate town personnel.
4. Suitable safety devices and practices as required by town, state and federal laws,
ordinances, regulations and permits must be used during construction and
maintenance of a cable system.
5. A licensee must remove, replace or modify at its own expense, any of its facilities
within any public right-of-way when required to do so by the town manager to
allow the town to change, maintain, repair, improve or eliminate a public
thoroughfare. Nothing in this article shall prevent licensee from seeking and
obtaining reimbursement from sources other than the town.
6. A licensee must obtain any required permits before doing any excavation or
causing disturbance to public thoroughfares or private property as a result of its
construction or operations and must restore to their former condition such private
property and public thoroughfares, the latter in a manner consistent with all
applicable rules, regulations, resolutions or other town manager requirements
relative to construction, repair or maintenance in public rights-of-way. If such
restoration is not satisfactorily performed within a reasonable time in the opinion of
the town manager, the town manager may, after prior notice to licensee, cause
the repairs to be made at the expense of the licensee. The town manager may
inspect ongoing construction and require a licensee to halt construction where the
town manager finds the construction to be in non-compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, the license agreement or a permit.
7. Prior to commencement of underground construction a licensee must have
complied with the following requirements:
a. Have received a permit from the council for construction on public property
or rights-of-way;
Rev. 2007
b. Have requested and received clearance from utilities in the area of
construction;
c. Where new construction will be on private property or in public rights-of-way
adjoining private property, have provided no less than seven days written
notice by mail or hand delivered to all such property occupants. The notice
shall include the name, address and toll-free phone number that the
affected person may call for more information or to lodge a complaint.
8. At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit and upon
sufficient notice, the licensee must temporarily raise, lower or cut its wires as
necessary to facilitate such move upon not less than seventy-two hours advance
notice. The direct expense of such temporary move must be paid by the permit
holder, and the licensee may require payment in advance.
G. System Services and Capability.
1. The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to licenses.
The council may require that a licensee exceed these minimum requirements. The
town and all licensees realize that rapidly changing technological advances and
related costs of same may allow for significant enhancements to the services
offered during the term of any license agreement. License agreements may
incorporate provisions for such enhancements as they become reasonably
available to similar sized systems.
a. Except as provided in the license agreement, a cable system must have a
minimum capacity of fifty-four video channels available for immediate or
potential use. Two-way capability may be designed into the system. Upon
request, this minimum channel capacity may be modified by the council for
a specific licensee, provided said licensee demonstrates that it would be
commercially impracticable to comply with said requirement. A licensee
shall have the burden of demonstrating, by clear and convincing evidence,
that compliance with the minimum channel capacity would be commercially
impracticable for its Queen Creek cable system.
b. Standard installation and basic service to public buildings may be required
without charge as set forth in the license agreement. Licensee may be
required to make available, one service outlet to a conveniently accessible
point in each municipal building and any other public building designated by
the town manager. The installation charge to each occupant, if any, would
not exceed licensee's direct cost (time and material). There may also be a
minimum monthly service charge at the above locations.
c. A licensee may design its system to allow the council to interrupt audio
portions of the cable service in an emergency to deliver information to
subscribers.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
d. A licensee must provide standby power for the head end so as to be able to
operate some channels during a power outage for a minimum of six hours
or as provided for in the license agreement.
2. The council may waive minimum requirements for licenses where the applicant
demonstrates that such waiver is in the public interest.
3. The following requirements apply to access and community programming
channels:
a. Applications for a license shall include proposals for the provision of
educational and governmental access channel sufficient to meet community
needs during the term of the license as determined by the council. A
licensee or applicant shall specify what grants, if any, it is willing to make
for studio equipment and facilities to be used for local program production
by all cable access users. Applicants are encouraged to include proposals
for local origination programming by the licensee.
b. All access channel operations must conform to the following minimum
requirements:
i. Access channels shall be carried on the
licensee's lowest priced service offering.
ii. The license may require a licensee or other entity to manage the
access channels and to establish reasonable rules for the use of
access channels consistent with the requirements of this chapter and
the intended purpose of such channels.
iii. The use of any educational access channel shall be made available
free of charge to schools and other qualified educational institutions
for the transmission of local educational programming.
iv. The use of any local government access channels shall be made
available free of charge to the council for the transmission of
government related programming.
v. The licensee shall submit to the council on an annual basis a plan for
publicizing access programs and access use.
c. At the request of a licensee the council may promulgate rules under which
channel capacity dedicated to access use may be used by the licensee
when it is not being used for access purposes.
d. A license shall include a provision for the licensee to provide channel
capacity for community programming on terms and conditions specified in
the license agreement.
Rev. 2007
H. Interconnection.
1. A licensee shall interconnect its cable system with other or all other systems
located in the town, in nearby cities, or in the county upon the request of the
council, where economically and technically feasible.
2. Upon receiving the request of the council to interconnect, a licensee shall initiate
negotiations with the other affected systems in order that technical details be
resolved and costs may be shared on an equitable basis.
I. Local Broadcast Channels.
Each cable system shall carry as part of the basic service local channels broadcast in its
area as required and defined in current FCC regulations. In this regard, those parts of 47
C.F.R. Part 76 relating to carriage of local channel signals as existing, or as may be
amended, shall apply and are incorporated herein by reference.
J. Technology Review.
1. The town and licensee shall meet at periods not exceeding three years or upon
request of either to discuss changes in cable television laws, regulations,
technology, competing services, the needs of the community and other factors
impacting cable television. As a result of these discussions, this license may be
modified by the town and the licensee to respond to the change in laws,
regulations, technology, competing services, the needs of the community or other
factors impacting cable television.
2. If any of the following conditions occur, and upon written request of either licensee
or town, the town manager and licensee agree to meet and discuss in good faith
the terms of a mutually agreeable license amendment:
a. Cable service similar to cable television service offered by licensee is
provided by any entity using the streets and public ways, which is not
subject to similar licensing requirements of the town.
b. The Cable Act is amended to allow licensee to provide intrastate or
interstate telecommunication and any regional Bell operating company to
provide cable service.
c. Any other significant event occurs, including but not limited to a final nonappealable
order or judgement by a court of competent jurisdiction, which
either licensee or town believes may impact the current terms and
conditions of the license.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
The purpose of the meeting and discussion is to use best efforts to reach mutually
acceptable agreement for recommendation to the council for proposed council
action within ninety days of such written request, on how to amend the license to
relieve town or the licensee from any commercial impracticability, which arises
from the condition in question. This provision shall not require that the license be
amended, however it is intended to facilitate a process whereby the parties may
reach a mutually acceptable agreement.
ARTICLE 17-9 FEES, BONDS, LETTERS OF CREDIT, LIQUIDATED DAMAGES AND
APPEALS
A. Application Fee. Each application for a license to be granted under the authority of this
chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee in the amount specified
below, by certified or cashier's check made payable to the town. Non-refundable filing
fees in the following amounts are required:
1. For an initial license or renewal: $2,500.
2. For consent to transfer or change ownership: $2,000.
3. For license modifications:
a. pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 545: $2,500.
b. any other modification: up to $2,000.
B. License Fee.
1. In consideration of the fact the streets of the town will be used by a licensee in the
operation of its cable system within the boundaries of the town and said streets
are valuable properties acquired and maintained by the town at great expense to
its taxpayers, and in consideration of the costs incurred by the town in regulating
and administering each cable license, the licensee shall pay to the town no less
than five percent of the licensee's gross annual revenue, from all sources
attributable to the operations of the licensee within the licensed area. Adjustments
for one-time fees paid may be considered.
2. This payment shall be computed quarterly, for the preceding quarter, as of March
31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year. Each quarterly
payment shall be due and payable no later than thirty days after the relevant
computation date. Each payment shall be accompanied by a financial report
showing in detail the gross revenues of the licensee related to that quarter.
3. Except as provided in paragraph 8 of this subsection, the payment required
pursuant to this article shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed to the
town pursuant to any other applicable ordinance or chapter of the town code,
regulation or law of the county, state or federal government.
Rev. 2007
4. A license fee not received in full by the town within thirty days of its due date shall
be deemed delinquent and subject to a late fee. The late fee for delinquent
payment shall be five percent of the amount overdue plus interest at the rate of
one and one-half percent per month, or parts thereof.
5. Where the licensee fee is based on gross revenues, the licensee shall file, with
each license payment, a statement of the gross revenues for the period on which
the fees are based. Such a licensee must file within three months of the end of its
fiscal year a statement of gross revenues for the preceding year, which is either
audited or certified as accurate by an officer of the licensee. Any payment of
license fees to adjust for a shortfall in the quarterly payments for the preceding
year must be made not later than the filing date for the audited annual statement
of gross revenues. Adjustments for any overpayment will be credited to
subsequent quarterly payments. Interest and late charges (as specified above)
will not be imposed for any payment necessary as a result of the yearly
adjustment if the payment to correct the shortfall does not exceed ten percent of
the total payments made during the preceding year. In the event such payment
exceeds ten percent, the licensee is liable for interest and late charges for the
entire amount due.
6. The town manager shall have the right, upon reasonable notice, to inspect or
audit during normal business hours a licensee's records showing the gross
revenues and other relevant underlying data and information. Upon examination
of such information, the town manager has the right to recompute any and all
amounts paid under a license. Any additional amounts, due the town as a result
of an audit and appeal process specified in the license agreement, shall be paid
by the licensee within thirty days following written notice to the licensee by the
council, which shall include a copy of the inspection or audit report. In the event
that an inspection or audit results in additional monies owed the town in excess of
five percent of the total paid, the licensee shall bear the total cost of the audit, and
late charges and interest on the additional amount due.
7. No acceptance by the council of any payment shall be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount nor shall such acceptance of
payment be construed as a release of any claim the council may have.
8. There shall be allowed as an offset against the license fee due under this article
any amounts licensee paid to the town during the prior quarter in privilege license
(sales) taxes; provided, however, that there shall be no offset to the extent that
licensee made payments of privilege license (sales) taxes on any gross income
(within the meaning of the privilege license [sales] tax ordinance) which is not
included in gross revenues under this chapter. The license shall provide for
suitable procedures and methods for audit of this offset.
C. Performance Bond.
1. Within thirty days after the execution of the license agreement and prior to any
construction work in the public right-of-way, the licensee shall file with the town
manager a performance bond, or a letter of credit in a form acceptable to the town
attorney, in the town's favor in the amount of fifty thousand dollars, or as specified
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
in the license agreement. In the event that licensee fails to comply with any
provision of this chapter or the license agreement, then there shall be recoverable
jointly and severally from the principal and surety any and all damages or costs
suffered by the town. These damages or costs shall include but not be limited to
attorney's fees, cost of any action or proceeding and including the full amount of
any compensation indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of any
property or other costs due and owing the town up to the full amount of such
bond.
2. At such time as ninety-five percent of planned construction in the town is
complete, as specified in license agreement, the council may, at licensee's
request, reduce or eliminate the performance bond requirement.
3. The bond shall be issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the
State of Arizona and shall be in a form approved by the town attorney, and
contain the following endorsement:
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty days
after receipt by the council, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or
not to renew."
4. The rights reserved by the council with respect to the bonds required are in
addition to all other rights and remedies the council may have under this chapter,
the license agreement or any other law.
D. Irrevocable Letter of Credit.
1. Within thirty days after written notification of the award of license by the council,
the selected applicant shall provide the town manager a letter of credit from a
financial institution licensed to do business in Arizona in the amount of ten
thousand dollars, or as specified in the license agreement, as security for the
faithful performance by licensee of all provisions of this chapter and compliance
with all orders, permits and directions of any department of the town.
2. The form and content of such letter shall be approved by the town attorney and
contain the following endorsement:
"This letter of credit may not be canceled or allowed to lapse until
thirty days after receipt by the town manager, by certified mail, return
receipt request, of a written notice from the issuer of the letter of
credit of its intent to cancel or not to renew."
In the event the letter of credit is insufficient to pay the town for any
compensation, damages, penalties, costs or expenses owed it pursuant to this
chapter or the license agreement, the licensee's performance bond may be drawn
upon by the town manager for any amount due the town over and above the
amount of the letter of credit.
Rev. 2007
3. Within fifteen days after written notice to licensee by the town manager that the
town manager has withdrawn any amount from the letter of credit, licensee shall
deposit or pay to the town manager a sum of money sufficient to restore such
letter of credit to the original amount of ten thousand dollars, or as specified in the
agreement.
4. If a licensee fails to pay the town: any compensation within the time fixed by this
chapter or the license agreement; any taxes due; or any damages, costs or
expenses which the town incurs by reason of any act or default of the licensee; or
if the licensee fails to comply with any provision of the license agreement which
failure the town manager determines can be remedied or partially cured by
demand on the letter of credit, the town manager may, following ten days notice to
the licensee, withdraw from the letter of credit the amount so claimed by the town
manager if within such period the licensee has not remedied the matter. The town
manager shall immediately notify licensee of any such withdrawal, the date and
amount.
5. The rights reserved to the town manager with respect to the letter of credit are in
addition to all other rights it may have under this chapter, the license agreement
and any other law.
6. Failure to maintain the letter of credit as required shall constitute a violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Liquidated Damages.
All license agreements shall contain provisions for liquidated damages, in amounts as
mutually agreed upon between the town manager and the licensee, for the licensee's
failure to comply with various requirements of this chapter and the license agreement as
specified below. All references to notices throughout this subsection shall be by certified
or registered mail, return receipt requested.
1.For failure to substantially complete construction or line extensions as required,
unless the council specifically approves a delay caused by the occurrence of
conditions beyond the licensee's control, the licensee shall pay one hundred
dollars per day for each day, or part thereof, the deficiency continues after
licensee has been given notice of such deficiency and seven days within which to
cure it pursuant to paragraph 8 of this subsection.
2. For material failure to provide data, documents, reports and information in a timely
manner as required, the licensee shall pay fifty dollars per day, or part thereof,
that each violation occurs or continues after licensee has been given notice of
such deficiency and seven days within which to cure it pursuant to paragraph 8 of
this subsection.
3. For material failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system
following a request from the town manager to do so, the licensee shall pay twentyfive
dollars per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
continues after licensee has been given notice of such deficiency and seven days
within which to cure it pursuant to paragraph 8 of this subsection.
4. Failure to substantially comply with the material provisions of Article 17-8 of this
chapter, the licensee shall pay one hundred dollars per day for each day, or part
thereof, that the violation continues after licensee has been given notice of such
deficiency and seven days within which to cure it pursuant to paragraph 8 of this
subsection.
5. For substantial failure to remedy any other violation of the chapter or the license
agreement within seven days of receipt of notice of each violation, the licensee
shall pay one hundred dollars per day for each day, or part thereof, that the
violation continues after licensee has been given notice of such deficiency and
seven days within which to cure it pursuant to paragraph 8 of this subsection.
6. For failure to substantially comply with reasonable orders of the town manager,
the licensee shall pay fifty dollars per day for each day, or part thereof, that
noncompliance continues after licensee has been given notice of such deficiency
and seven days within which to cure it pursuant to paragraph 8 of this subsection.
7. Liquidated damages will not be imposed by the town manager if the town
manager finds that the failure of the licensee resulted from conditions beyond the
licensee's control. Liquidated damages may be reduced or eliminated by the town
manager if the town manager finds that the failure of the licensee resulted from
excusable neglect. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in establishing the
existence of such conditions.
8. Prior to assessing any of the liquidated damages set forth in this article, the town
manager shall give licensee seven days written notice of its intention to assess
such damages. In said notice, the town manager shall set forth, at a minimum,
the following:
a. amount to be assessed;
b. factual basis for such assessment; and
c. specific license provision alleged to have been violated.
Following receipt of notice set forth in this article, licensee shall have a
seven day period during which time licensee and the town manager shall make
reasonable efforts to resolve the dispute in question. Collection of liquidated
damages by the town for any breach shall constitute the town's exclusive remedy
for the period for which liquidated damages were collected.
9. The imposition and collection of liquidated damages as set forth above shall not
prevent the town manager from pursuing other remedies for other violations of
either the article or the license agreement for which liquidated damages have not
been imposed and collected.
F. Appeals.
Rev. 2007
1. In the event that licensee contests the town manager's assessment of liquidated
damages, or fails to respond to the above mentioned notices, within fourteen days
the town manager shall convene an administrative hearing as specified in
subparagraph a of this paragraph. Licensee may pay the fine, proceed with this
hearing, or waive its rights to this administrative hearing and proceed directly to
the public hearing before the council, as specified in subparagraph b of this
paragraph.
a. This shall be an administrative hearing, and licensee shall be afforded
procedural due process, including an opportunity to be heard and to
present evidence. Within fourteen days after the conclusion of such
administrative hearing, the town manager shall issue a determination. In
that determination the town manager may:
i. find that licensee is not in violation of this chapter or the license
agreement;
ii. find that licensee is in violation of this chapter or the license
agreement, but that violation was with just cause and waive any
penalty that might otherwise be imposed;
iii. find that licensee is in violation of this chapter or of the license
agreement, take corrective action and foreclose on all or any
appropriate part of the letter of credit or performance bond provided
for elsewhere in this chapter;
iv. find that licensee is in material violation of this chapter and the
license agreement and recommend the council declare the licensee in
violation and terminate the license agreement, provided the council
may take such action only after a public hearing as set forth in
subparagraph b of this subsection.
b. If a public hearing before the council is requested by licensee or is
held pursuant to item 4 of subparagraph a of this paragraph, it shall
be de novo and it shall convene within thirty days of the request
thereof. Licensee shall be afforded full due procedural process,
including without limitation, an opportunity to be heard and to present
evidence. The council's decision, which shall include findings of fact
and conclusions, shall be made not later than thirty days after the
conclusion of the hearing. In that decision, the council may:
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
i. find that licensee is not in violation of this chapter or the license
agreement;
ii. find that licensee is in violation of this chapter or the license
agreement, but that violation was with just cause and waive any
penalty that might otherwise be imposed;
iii. find that licensee is in violation of this chapter or of the license
agreement, take corrective action and foreclose on all or any
appropriate part of the letter of credit and/or performance bond
provided for elsewhere in this chapter;
iv. find that licensee is in material violation of this chapter and the license
agreement and declare the licensee in violation and revoke the
license agreement pursuant to Article 17-10.
ARTICLE 17-10 TERMINATION - REVOCATION
A. Termination.
The license shall terminate, upon the expiration of the term thereof, unless renewal is
successfully applied for, per Article 17-11.
B. Revocation.
1. If a licensee is in material violation of this chapter or in default of the terms of its
license agreement, the town manager may make written demand that the licensee
come into compliance with said requirements within a reasonable period of time,
as specified in Article 17-9. If the licensee is unwilling or unable to do so, the
town manager may recommend the revocation, alteration or suspension of the
license to the council, specifying the reasons for such action.
2. A copy of any such recommendations shall be served by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested upon the licensee, and the licensee shall be given
at least fourteen days notice prior to the date of a public hearing before the
council to consider such action, and the licensee will be given an opportunity to
present evidence and make arguments at such meeting.
3. The council shall consider the recommendations, the response of the licensee,
and hear from any other interested persons, and shall determine whether or not
the licensee is in violation or default of its obligations and, if so, whether such
failure was with just cause.
4. If the council finds that the failure by the licensee was with just cause, the council
shall direct the licensee to comply within such time and manner and upon such
terms and conditions as are reasonable.
Rev. 2007
5. If the council determines that the licensee's failure was without just cause, the
council may declare the license revoked, altered or suspended. The council may
provide a specified period of time for the licensee to come into compliance before
the revocation takes effect.
6. A license may be revoked, altered or suspended by the council on the following
grounds, among others, and taking into account any ameliorating circumstances:
a. Fails to comply with any material provision of this chapter or the
license agreement.
b. Makes willful false or misleading statements in any application.
c. Engages in the practice of any fraud or deceit upon the town or
subscribers.
d. Fails to abide by the privacy provision of this chapter.
e. Fails to make timely payment of any monies due the town pursuant to
this chapter.
f. Unless otherwise provided in the license agreement, fails to
commence construction in the license area within three months and to
commence basic service within six months from the effective date of the
license agreement.
g. Fails to file and maintain the bonds, insurance, records, failure to pay
license fees or assessed property taxes.
h. For repeated material failure to maintain service quality under the
standards prescribed.
i. Fails to restore service after forty-eight consecutive hours after notice
to the licensee or interrupted service to the entire system, except when
such interruption is beyond the control of the licensee.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
C. System Disposal.
In the event of termination or revocation of a license, the licensee involved shall offer to
sell the cable system, at the fair market value, to a new licensee or applicant for a license.
The fair market value shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted
appraisal procedures. The original cost of all tangible and intangible property, as well as
salvage value, book value, replacement cost, cash flow and other factors will be
considered. Under no circumstances shall any valuation be made for any right or privilege
granted by license. Should the licensee fail to negotiate a sale, as described above, the
town may purchase the system at the fair market value for the purpose of leasing to a
qualified operator until a buyer can be found, pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. §9-509.
D. Continuity of Service.
Licensee shall provide continuous service for the entire term of the license agreement to
all subscribers and users in return for payment of the established rates, fees and charges.
If licensee seeks to sell or transfer, or if the town revokes or fails to renew the license,
licensee shall continue to operate the system as trustee for its successor in interest until
an orderly and lawful change of operation is effected. This period of operation shall not
exceed one hundred twenty days from the occurrence of any of the above events.
Revenues accrued during that period of time shall be received by the operator. During
such time, the cable system shall be operated under terms and conditions consistent with
the most recent license agreement and this chapter.
ARTICLE 17-11 RENEWAL
A. If a licensee decides to initiate a formal license renewal process in accordance with 47
U.S.C. Section 546, it must notify the council within thirty to thirty-six months prior to the
license expiration date.
B. In considering a renewal application, the council must consider whether:
1. The licensee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing
license and applicable law;
2. The quality of licensee's service, including signal quality, customer service
complaint resolutions, billing practices (without regard to mix, quality or level of
cable services) has been reasonable in light of community needs;
3. The licensee has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide services,
facilities and equipment set forth in its renewal proposal; and
4. The licensee renewal proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related
needs and interests of the community, taking into account the cost of meeting
such needs and interests.
C. If the council's assessment is that the license should not be renewed, the council may
commence an administrative hearing in accordance with 47 U.S.C. Section 546.
Rev. 2007
D. The provisions of 47 U.S.C. Section (a) - (g) notwithstanding, a licensee may submit an
application for renewal in accordance with Section (h), which affords a cable operator the
opportunity to submit a proposal for the renewal of a license at any time. The council
may, after adequate public notice and comment, grant or deny such proposal.
E. The renewal of a license does not become effective until any renewal fees have been paid
by the licensee.
ARTICLE 17-12 TRANSFERS AND CHANGE OF CONTROL
A. Licensee shall not sell, transfer, assign, exchange or release, or permit the sale, transfer,
assignment, exchange or release of more than forty-nine percent of the cumulative
ownership of the system without prior written authorization from the council. For the
purposes of this article, a merger or consolidation shall be deemed a transfer or
assignment. The town manager shall be promptly notified in writing, within sixty days of
the effective date of any such sale, transfer, assignment, exchange or release which
constitutes more than five percent of the cumulative ownership of the system. Nothing in
this article shall be deemed to prohibit a pledge or hypothecation or mortgage or similar
instrument transferring conditional ownership of the systems assets to a lender or creditor
in the ordinary course of business, unless such interest shall exceed seventy-five percent
of the original cost or the fair market value, whichever is higher.
B. No licensee shall sell, transfer, assign, exchange or release, or permit the sale transfer,
assignment, exchange or release of more than ten percent of the cumulative ownership of
the system, during the thirty-six month period commencing on final award to a licensee by
the council, without expressed written consent of the council.
ARTICLE 17-13 INDEMNITY INSURANCE
A. The licensee shall at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless and defend the
town, its officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees by providing immediate
defense with counsel approved by the council, against any and all claims, suits, causes of
action, proceedings and judgments for damages arising out of construction, maintenance
or operation of the cable communication system.
B. The licensee, within thirty days after written notice of the granting of a license, shall
provide the town with and maintain in full force throughout the term of the license
agreement, insurance issued by a company duly authorized to do business in the State of
Arizona, insuring with respect to the installation, construction, operation and maintenance
of the system as follows:
1. Comprehensive general and automobile liability coverage including, but not
limited to, blanket contractual liability, completed operations liability, broad form
property damage including but not limited to coverage for explosion, collapse,
underground hazard and automobile non-ownership liability. This insurance shall
be written in the following minimum amounts.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Rev. 2007
a. Comprehensive general liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit, bodily
injury and property damage
b. Comprehensive automobile liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit,
bodily injury and property damage
c. Excess liability, covering all the above mentioned hazards, in the minimum
amount of $4,000,000.
2. Workers' compensation coverage as required by the laws and regulations of the
State of Arizona.
3. All insurance policies required herein shall include the town as a named insured
party.
4. Licensee shall be solely responsible for all premiums due and payable for
insurance required herein. Licensee shall provide to the town a certified copy of
the policies listed above.
5. All insurance policies required herein shall be in a form approved by the town
attorney and shall include a sixty day notice of cancellation or modifying
endorsement.
C. The provisions of subsection B of this article, in the discretion of the town, may be
satisfied by proof of self-insurance.
ARTICLE 17-14 ADMINISTRATION
A. Inspection of Records. The council reserves the right during the term of the license
agreement and during normal business hours and upon the giving of reasonable notice to
examine, audit, review and obtain copies of licensee's contracts, engineering plans,
accounting, financial data and service records relating to the property and operations of
the licensee and to all other records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter. The
review and copying of information should be subject to confidentiality protections and FCC
privacy rules.
B. Licensee Rules and Regulations. Copies of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions
adopted by the licensee for the conduct of its business shall be provided to the town
manager, upon request of the town manager.
C. Town Manager. The town manager or his designee shall have responsibility for the dayto-
day administration of cable communication operations within the town as governed by
this chapter and the applicable license agreements. The town manager shall be
empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the council except those actions
specified herein which are reserved to the council or another town office or officer.
Rev. 2007
ARTICLE 17-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Non-Discrimination. Licensee shall not deny service, access or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, users or residents of the town. Licensee shall comply at all times
with all applicable federal, state and town laws, rules and regulations, executive and
administrative orders relating to non-discrimination and equal employment opportunities
and requirements.
B. Laws and Codes. Licensee shall comply fully with all applicable local, county, state and
federal laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
C. Cumulative Rights and Remedies. Except as specified herein, all rights and remedies of
the town manager and the council in this chapter are cumulative and may be exercised
singly or cumulatively at the discretion of the town manager or the council.
ARTICLE 17-16 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE COUNCIL
Without limitation upon the rights which the council may otherwise have and subject to
paragraph 9, subsection B of Article 17-7, the council does hereby expressly reserve the right to
amend any article or provision of this chapter for any reason determined to be desirable by the
council including, but not limited to:
A. New developments in the state of technology of cable communications systems.
B. Any changes in federal or state laws, rules or regulations.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
CHAPTER 18 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 18-1 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section 18-1-1 Fire Department established; authority and duties
Section 18-1-2 Fire Department response outside Town boundaries
Section 18-1-3 Enforcement; annual report
Section 18-1-4 Permits; reviews and inspections
Section 18-1-5 Modifications
Section 18-1-6 Conflicting provisions
Section 18-1-7 Tampering, injuring fire alarm system or pumps and hydrants
Section 18-1-8 Interference with firefighters in performance of duties; disobedience
to orders of firefighters engaged in duties
Section 18-1-9 On-site plans
Section 18-1-10 Explosives and blasting
Section 18-1-11 Fireworks
Section 18-1-12 Violation; penalty
Section 18-1-1 Fire Department established; authority and duties
A. There is hereby established for the Town of Queen Creek a Fire Department. The Fire
Department shall be headed by the Chief of the Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire
Department is hereby granted authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the Town’s
adopted fire prevention code (the “Town of Queen Creek Fire Code” or the “Fire Code”). The
Chief shall be responsible for the direction of all firefighting, fire prevention, and fire service
activities of the Town and be responsible for planning and developing programs to protect the
life and property in the Town from fire. The Chief shall be responsible for establishing
departmental policies and rules necessary for the operation of the Fire Department. The Chief
shall assign, appoint, and designate personnel and maintain training programs.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department may designate members of the Fire Department as
arson investigators who shall, while engaged in arson investigations in this State, possess and
may exercise law enforcement powers of peace officers of this State provided that:
1. The primary duty of arson investigators is the investigation, detection and
apprehension of persons who have violated or are suspected of violating any
provisions of A.R.S. title 13, chapter 17 (A.R.S. § 13-1701 et seq.) relating to
crimes of arson; and
2. Any individual designated as an arson investigator shall have law
enforcement training under the provisions of A.R.S. § 41-1822.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
3. This subsection shall not be construed as granting any powers of peace
officers of this State to arson investigators other than those necessary for the
investigation, detection and apprehension authority as specifically provided
herein.
C. The Chief of the Fire Department shall appoint a Fire Marshal who shall perform the
functions of fire prevention throughout the Town. The Fire Marshal is hereby granted authority
to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the Town’s adopted Fire Code.
D. The Fire Department shall be responsible for extinguishing fires and performing necessary
public services of an emergency nature. The Fire Department shall also maintain effective
operation of Fire Department communications.
E. The Fire Department is hereby granted the authority to:
1. Organize and maintain fire alarm and telephone systems, provide for the
management and control of the same, for the appointment of superintendents
thereof, also to erect and maintain suitable buildings, equipment and
implements.
2. Regulate or prohibit the manufacture, keeping, storing and using of powder,
dynamite, gun cotton, nitroglycerine, fireworks and other explosive materials
and substances.
3. Regulate the storage of hay, straw, oil and other inflammable and
combustible materials.
4. Regulate the use of steam engines, gas engines, steam boilers and electric
motors, and to prohibit their use in such localities as in the judgment of the
Fire Marshal would endanger public safety or health; also to regulate the
installation of gas and electric fixtures and appliances and to provide for
proper inspection of same.
5. Prescribe fire limits and determine the character and height of buildings that
may be erected therein and the nature of the materials to be used in the
construction, alteration or repair of such buildings or in the repair or alteration
of existing buildings within such fire limits.
6. Regulate the construction of and the materials used in all buildings,
chimneys, stacks and other structures; and the construction and use of party
walls; to prevent the erection and maintenance of unsafe or insecure
buildings, walls, chimneys, stacks or other structures, and to provide for their
summary abatement or destruction; to regulate the materials used in and the
method of construction and location of drains and sewers, the materials used
in wiring buildings or other structures for the use of electricity for lighting,
power, heat or other purposes, and materials used in piping buildings or other
structures for the purpose of supplying the same with water or gas and the
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
manner of so doing; to prohibit the construction of buildings and structures
which do not conform to such regulations.
7. Require the owners and lessees of buildings or other structures to place upon
or in them adequate fire escapes and appliances for protection against fire
and for the extinguishment of fires.
8. Prevent the construction and to cause the removal of dangerous chimneys,
fireplaces, hearths, stoves, stovepipes, ovens, boilers, apparatus and
machinery used in any building in the Town; to regulate the carrying on of
manufacturing liable to cause fire; to prevent the depositing of ashes, the
accumulation of shavings, rubbish or any other combustible material in
unsafe places, and to make all necessary provisions to guard against fires.
9. Recover costs for services rendered within and without the Town’s corporate
limits.
10. Perform such additional duties and services as may be required by the Town
Council.
F. The Chief of the Fire Department and officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene
of a fire or other emergency, may direct or assist peace officers in directing traffic there at or in
the immediate vicinity.
Section 18-1-2 Fire Department response outside Town boundaries
The Fire Department is hereby authorized to answer fire alarms, fight fires and provide
emergency services beyond the corporate boundaries of the Town of Queen Creek whenever
the Fire Chief, in his discretion, shall deem it necessary for the protection of lives and property.
The Fire Department is authorized to charge Emergency Medical Equipment and Standby
Personnel fees, and other charges for recovery of costs applicable when Town of Queen Creek
firefighters, paramedics, and equipment are used to provide service outside the incorporated
boundaries of the Town of Queen Creek.
Section 18-1-3 Enforcement; annual report
A. The Fire Code, also referred to herein and within Chapter 7 of the Queen Creek Town
Code as “This Code”, including all related technical codes and standards, amendments, rules
and regulations for the technical codes, appendices and other building regulations adopted by
the Town shall be enforced by the Fire Department of the Town, under the supervision of the
Chief of the Fire Department.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department may detail and assign such members of the Fire
Department as fire prevention inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The Chief of
the Fire Department shall recommend to the Town Manager the employment of technical
inspectors when necessary.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
C. A report on fire prevention activities shall be made annually and transmitted to the Town
Manager, or more frequently as determined by the Chief of the Fire Department and Town
Manager. It shall contain all proceedings under this chapter with such statistics as the Chief of
the Fire Department may wish to include therein and recommendations of amendments to this
chapter and the Fire Code.
Section 18-1-4 Permits; reviews and inspections
The Chief of the Fire Department, Fire Marshal, or designee, including designated fire code
officials, are authorized to receive applications, review construction documents, conduct
inspections and re-inspections, and issue certificates and permits, and stipulate conditions
therefore. Permits shall not be issued when public safety would be at risk, as determined by the
issuing fire code official(s).
Section 18-1-5 Modifications
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be authorized to determine the specific applicability of
the Fire Code adopted by the Town when there are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict
letter of the code, upon written application that a practical difficulty exists; provided, that the
spirit of the Fire Code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Chief of
the Fire Department thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the Fire Department, and a
signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
Section 18-1-6 Conflicting provisions
Nothing in the Fire Code adopted by the Town shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of
other laws which prescribe more restrictive limitations, nor shall the permissive provisions of the
Fire Code be presumed to waive limitations imposed by other statutes or ordinances of the
Town or the State.
Section 18-1-7 Tampering, injuring fire alarm system or pumps and hydrants
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper or injure any part of a fire alarm system or any
reservoir, pumps, pipes, valves, gates and fire hydrants or to use or remove, without permission
of the Chief of the Fire Department, except for the protection of property from fire damage, any
part of the equipment of the Fire Department.
Section 18-1-8 Interference with firefighters in performance of duties; disobedience
to orders of firefighters engaged in duties
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the lawful efforts of any firefighter, or
company of firefighters, including the Fire Marshal, paramedics and fire code officials, in the
performance of their duties, or to engage in any disorderly conduct which might reduce the
efficiency of such firefighters, or to forbid, prevent or dissuade others from assisting such
firefighters in the performance of their duties, or to disobey the lawful orders of the public officer
or firefighters while engaged in extinguishing any fire or responding to an alarm or fire.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
Section 18-1-9 On-site plans
Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review and approval prior
to construction. One set of fire department approved plans shall be on the job site for each
inspection.
Section 18-1-10 Explosives and blasting
Explosives shall not be possessed, kept, stored, sold, offered for sale, given away, used,
discharged, transported or disposed of within hazardous fire areas, except by permit issued by
the Fire Marshal.
Section 18-1-11 Fireworks
Fireworks shall not be used or possessed in hazardous fire areas. The Fire Marshal is
authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed fireworks in violation of this
subsection.
Section 18-1-12 Violation; penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or the Fire Code adopted by the
Town or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
under this article or such Fire Code, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved under this article or such Fire Code or any
certificate or permit issued under this article or such Fire Code, shall severally, for each violation
and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $2500.00, by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, by a term
of probation not to exceed three (3) years, or by a combination of such fine, imprisonment, and
probation. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
or defects forthwith. Each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a
separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.
Article 18-2 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY
18-2-1 Emergency Service Cost Recovery Ordinance
18-2-2 Findings
18-2-3 Purpose and intent
18-2-4 Administration and responsibility
18-2-5 Definitions
18-2-6 Emergency Service Cost Recovery
18-2-7 Recovery of costs for Hazardous Waste Incidents
18-2-8 Notice of Responsibility and Service
18-2-9 Appeal
18-2-10 Method of Collection
18-2-11 Accounting of costs of cleanup
18-2-12 Use of costs paid or collected
18-2-13 Indemnity
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
18-2-14 Effect of criminal or civil proceedings on cost recovery or permit issuance
18-2-15 Professional Emergency Service Contracts
18-2-16 Remedies and non-exclusive charges
Section 18-2-1 Short Title
This Article shall be known as the “Emergency Service Cost Recovery Ordinance”.
Section 18-2-2 Findings
The Town of Queen Creek is authorized to provide services relating to the protection of lives
and property including, but not limited to, fire protection services, rescue services, emergency
medical services, and hazardous material emergency response services.
The Fire Department can be called upon to provide fire-rescue services within and without the
Town’s corporate limits.
These services include actions to mitigate injury to the public health, safety and welfare from
fire, trauma, acute illness, hazardous conditions and other emergencies.
The expenses associated with providing these services can be substantial.
The Town Council of the Town of Queen Creek finds that the costs of providing some of the
services of the Queen Creek Fire Department are an increasing burden on the Town of Queen
Creek.
Section 18-2-3 Purpose and intent
It is the purpose and intent of the Town of Queen Creek to establish rates to cover costs of
services which the Queen Creek Fire Department provides related to motor vehicle accidents,
collisions, motor vehicle fires, motor vehicle extractions, technical rescue incidents, hazardous
materials spills or discharge, wildland fires, non-permitted burns, incidents caused by
negligence and/or willful disregard for established fire and life-safety codes including but not
limited to utility line, and other emergency incidents within and without the Town’s corporate
limits.
The Town of Queen Creek provides services to the community funded through the General
Fund by tax revenues. Reimbursement may be sought for the increased costs of providing such
services, whenever practicable, from parties who, by reason of neglect or malfeasance, cause
incidents requiring police, fire and rescue services, or cause increased costs to the Town for
gaining compliance with municipal ordinances. Cost recovery is a mechanism whereby these
costs may be levied upon responsible parties, rather than the taxpayers of Queen Creek. To
accomplish this, the Town of Queen Creek hereby establishes a cost recovery procedure in this
article.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
Section 18-2-4 Administration and responsibility
The administration of this article is under the direction of the Town Manager and Fire Chief, and
by delegation, the finance director. Each department manager is responsible for tracking costs
associated with cost recovery under their respective supervision and forwarding cost recovery
invoices, calculations and documentation to the finance director, Fire Chief and Town Manager.
The Town of Queen Creek shall, at its sole discretion, determine whether or not town resources
and/or personnel are available for reimbursable services. Furthermore, all persons responsible
for the enforcement or application of this article, shall not be liable for any damage or injury to
persons or property arising out of or relating in any way to the application or enforcement of this
article.
Section 18-2-5 Definitions
“Cost(s) or Charge(s)” shall mean to include, but not be limited to, Town charges and
expenses for emergency personnel salaries and costs and expense of incidents connected to:
emergency incidents, hazardous material incidents, malicious incidents, motor vehicle collision,
non-permitted burns, nuisance incidents, which are determined by the Fire Chief or as
contained in the applicable Queen Creek fee schedule.
“Emergency Incident” shall mean to include, but not be limited to, those incidents that require
fire, rescue and/or medical response in an immediate fashion, following established emergency
response protocols, and includes, but is not limited to: hazardous material incidents, malicious
incidents, motor vehicle collisions, non-permitted burns, nuisance incidents, technical rescue
events, wildland fires and any other type of incident listed or designated in this article or
designated by the Fire Chief.
“Expense of Incident” or “Incident Expense” means the costs and charges incurred by the
Town of Queen Creek in making an appropriate emergency response to an incident. It consists
of all costs directly arising because of the particular incident, including, but not limited to the
actual costs and charges of providing police, firefighting, hazardous material incident
management, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of the incident, as well as
the actual salaries and fringe benefits of the emergency personnel responding to the incident.
Recoverable costs also include the actual costs for damage or destruction to Town of Queen
Creek property, any utility or service charges to the Town from other public agencies resulting
from the incident, and the actual cost of medical treatment for any Town personnel injured
during the response.
“Emergency Personnel” means personnel who are employees of the Town of Queen Creek
Fire Department during their involvement in an emergency or non-emergency incident/event.
“Hazardous Material Incident” means those incidents, including but not limited to emergency
incidents, involving the release, or threatened release or exposure, of hazardous substances as
defined in this article and/or any product that could prove a danger to health or the environment.
“Intentionally Wrongful Conduct” means conduct intended to injure another person or
property.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
“Malicious Incident” means those incidents, including emergency incidents, which stem from
an individual’s intentional purpose to cause property damage, endanger lives, and/or cause the
response of emergency personnel for other than an actual emergency.
“Motor Vehicle Collision” means incidents, including emergency incidents, involving one or
more motorized vehicles including cars, trucks, buses, planes, helicopters, trains, motorcycles,
and the vehicles and trailers being pulled by motorized vehicles.
“Non-Emergency Incident” means those incidents which allow for fire, rescue and/or
emergency medical response in a less urgent fashion, following established non-emergency
response protocols.
“Non-Permitted Burns” means the intentional disposal of debris without the oral and/or written
permission from the Fire Department.
“Nuisance Incident” means those incidents that are of the same nature, on a repetitive basis,
at the same location, due to lack of servicing to mechanical and/or electrical equipment of an
emergency system, or the failure to correct a previously documented fire hazard, or false
reporting of an emergency incident or any other fire department response that is deemed
unnecessary by the Fire Chief, including but not limited to false alarms caused by carelessness.
“Responsible person” or “responsible party” within this article means any person or party:
1. Who, by law is liable or made responsible for the payment to a governmental
agency of its costs and expenses in providing police, fire, rescue and related
emergency services;
2. Whose negligence or intentionally wrongful conduct proximately causes an
emergency incident affecting public health or safety which necessitates an
emergency response or rescue effort by a governmental agency to deal with or
prevent injury to persons or damage to property;
3. Any person who is indebted to the Town by virtue of a duty, charge, cost,
statutory duty, statutory obligation, statutory liability, tax or revenue imposed by
law or ordinance; and
4. If a responsible party is a minor, the parent or guardian of that minor shall be
jointly and severally liable with the minor for the expense of an emergency
incident, as allowed by law.
“Person” or “Party” means any individual or group of individuals; or association, company,
corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind; or any corporation,
general or limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, or governmental or
quasi-governmental entity.
“Technical Rescue Event” means incidents that require rope rescue, confined space rescue
or technical rescue services and/or extraction.
“Special Event” means those non-emergency events that occur within and/or outside the Town
limits that require the presence of Emergency Personnel employed by the Fire Department, or
as requested by the owner of the involved property or event coordinator.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
“Wildland Fire” means any outside fire involving general natural combustible materials, other
than permitted burn, with no restriction concerning area involved, or size of any damaged area.
Section 18-2-6 Emergency Service Cost Recovery
A. The Town of Queen Creek and the Queen Creek Fire Department may recover
costs, charges and expenses of incidents connected to emergency incidents. A responsible
person or party shall be liable to the Town for all incident expenses, as described in this article
or as designated by the Fire Chief, connected to emergency incidents and the following listed
incidents or services:
1. Each person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any
drug, or their combined influence, and whose negligent operation of
a motor vehicle, boat, vessel, or aircraft caused by that influence
proximately causes any incident resulting in an emergency incident, or
whose intentionally wrongful conduct proximately causes any
incident resulting in an emergency incident shall be liable to the Town for
the expense of that emergency incident, not to exceed $2500.00 (twenty five
hundred dollars), or any higher amount as may from time to time be
established by law.
2. The expense of hazardous material incidents, including expenses for the
containment, confinement, clean-up and/or mitigation of hazardous substances,
releases and threats of release or exposure as defined in this article.
3. The expense of emergency incidents for fire suppression activity from a
responsible party for the intentional setting of fire or the spread of fire to
adjoining properties, or for fire suppression costs on occupied or mortgaged
property against which a current, uncorrected notice of violation of a fire hazard
has been issued.
4. The expense of emergency incidents for the rescue or medical treatment, or
both, of persons placed in jeopardy or injured by the negligence or intentionally
wrongful conduct of a responsible party.
5. The expense for injury to public safety personnel, or for damage to public
property.
6. Emergency incidents outside the Town of Queen Creek limits may be invoiced
to the property owner(s) and person(s) receiving assistance from the Fire
Department.
7. Malicious Incidents may be invoiced to the responsible party(s)
8. Motor Vehicle Collisions where extrication is performed may be invoiced per
occurrence. In the event multiple vehicles are involved the costs, responsibility
shall be joint and several among all responsible parties and persons.
9. Motor Vehicle Collisions may be invoiced to the responsible party(s).
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
10. Non-Emergency incidents may be invoiced to the responsible party(s).
11. Non-Permitted Burns may be invoiced to the responsible party(s).
12. Nuisance Incidents may be invoiced per occurrence to the responsible party(s).
13. Permitted Burns that become out-of-control, as determined by the Fire Chief,
due to negligence may be invoiced to the responsible party who was issued the
permit.
14. Special Events services.
15. Technical Rescue Events may be invoiced to the responsible party(s).
16. Wildland Fires caused by negligence may be invoiced to the responsible party
starting the fire.
B. Cost rates shall be invoiced at the determined rates for each resource, supplies,
equipment, apparatus and personnel. The Town Council by separate resolution shall adopt a
schedule of rates as described in this article and the Fire Chief shall have concurrent authority
to designate incidents and services to be charged responsible parties and determine the rates
therefore.
C. After review by the Fire Chief and Town Manager, the director of finance may charge the
expense defined in this article to each responsible party or person. Each responsible party or
person is jointly and severally responsible for all expense defined under this article. The charge
constitutes a debt to the Town of Queen Creek, and may be collected by the Town in the same
manner as in the case of an obligation to a municipality under a contract, expressed or implied.
Section 18-2-7 Recovery of costs for Hazardous Waste Incidents
A. The Fire Chief is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance
or waste unlawfully released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities
within the Town, including but not limited to hazardous material incidents described in this
article. The following described persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the Town for the
payment of all incident expenses incurred by the Town as a result of such cleanup or abatement
activity:
1. The person or persons whose negligent conduct or willful conduct or omission
proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit;
2. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous
substance or waste at the time of such release, discharge or deposit, without
regard to fault or proximate cause; and
3. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the container which
held such hazardous waste or substance at the time or immediately prior to such
release, discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the Fire Chief
or other city official, to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste
unlawfully released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the
Town, the Fire Chief may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy
of the cleanup or abatement. The persons described in subsection A of this section shall be
liable to the Town for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification.
C. The expense of an emergency response to any spill or release of a hazardous
substance, as hereinafter defined, which poses a significant present threat or potential hazard to
human life, property or environment, shall be a charge against the person or entity whose
conduct, or that of its employees, agents or contractors, caused or permitted the incident
resulting in the emergency response. Said charge shall constitute a debt that is collectible by
the public agency incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation
under contract.
D. For the purposes of this subsection, costs incurred by the Town shall include, but shall
not necessarily be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of Town personnel, including
benefits and administrative overhead; cost of equipment operation; cost of any contract labor
and materials. The charge for an emergency response shall be imposed in accordance with a
schedule of fees, pursuant to the recommendation of the Chief of the Fire Department and
Town Manager, adopted by resolution of the Town Council for the Town of Queen Creek, as it
may from time to time be amended. Implementation of such an assessment procedure shall not
be the exclusive remedy of the Town for recovery of such costs. The authority to recover costs
under this subsection shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or
usually provided by the Fire Department.
E. The cost imposed pursuant to this section shall be reasonably commensurate to the
verifiable costs involved in emergency response to and/or prevention, abatement, mitigation or
confinement of spills or releases of hazardous substances within or beyond town limits.
F. The Chief of the Fire Department or his designee shall determine the verifiable costs of
the town for emergency response to hazardous substance spills or releases and shall use such
costs to develop a cost recovery schedule of applicable charges necessary to recover town
costs for such emergency responses. Said schedule shall be the basis for the Fire Chief's
recommendation to the Town Manager and Town Council of the Town of Queen Creek.
G. Payment of any charge hereunder shall not relieve a person or entity, its employees,
agents or contractors from compliance with any other applicable law, rule or regulation.
H. For purposes of this section 18-2-7 a hazardous substance shall be defined as any
material that is identified in:
1. The Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Section 171.8;
2. Hazardous wastes such as any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or
article which is identified or listed by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or appropriate agency of the State to be ?hazardous waste as defined
in 40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 261.1 through 261.33, as and if
amended, except that, for purposes of this ordinance hazardous waste shall
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
include household waste as defined in 40 Code of Federal Regulations Section
261.4B.1.
3. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Section 261.31—261.33; or
4. Any substance which is known by the business handling it to be likely to pose a
significant present or potential hazard to public health, safety or the environment.
I. A material may be added to the list of hazardous substances as defined in section (H)
hereof, upon a finding by the Fire Chief that the material, because of its quantity, concentration
or physical or chemical characteristic, poses a significant present threat or potential hazard to
human life, property or the environment if released into the community.
J. An emergency response shall be defined as a response by a city department or agency
to prevent, abate, mitigate or confine a spill or release of a hazardous substance within or
without the Town’s corporate limits in order to protect human life, property or the environment
from a significant present threat or potential hazard.
K. A release or spill shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, burning, dumping or disposing into the environment
and/or community.
L. Any person or entity, its employees, agents or contractors who causes, permits or is
responsible for a spill or release of a hazardous substance within the town limits, upon
notification of the same, shall immediately cease all activities causing or likely to cause
reoccurrence or continuation of such spills or releases and shall not resume such activities
unless and until so directed by the Fire Chief or his designee.
M. No person or entity, its employees, agents or contractors shall dispose of or store any
hazardous substance on public property, except under direction of the Fire Chief or his
designee.
N. The remedies provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies
provided by law.
Section 18-2-8 Notice of Responsibility and Service
Any notice given for any purpose under this article (“Notice(s) of Responsibility”) shall be
provided, in writing, to the responsible person or responsible party. Invoicing for costs under
this article in connection with Notices of Responsibility shall contain, at a minimum, the date on
which services were rendered by the Fire Department, the due date for payment of the invoice,
the mailing address for payment, an explanation of the services provided, and the cost of
rendered services.
Notice given for any purpose under this article shall be deemed received on the date when
written notice is personally served in the same manner as provided by the Arizona Rules of Civil
Procedure or mailed certified mail return receipt requested. If notice is served by certified mail,
the notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the responsible person or party or the
responsible person’s or party’s statutory agent. In the event that the post office address of the
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
responsible person or party is unknown or if the responsible person or party cannot reasonably
be reached by mail, the town may publish such notice in the newspaper used by the town for
one publication, and such service shall be complete and shall have the same effect and force as
if personally served upon such responsible person or party.
Section 18-2-9 Appeal
Any responsible party, responsible person or person otherwise responsible for costs who
disagrees with the Notice of Responsibility and/or costs invoiced under this article may appeal
to the Town Manager by filing a written request with the Town Manager and Town Clerk no later
than 15 days after receiving the Notice of Responsibility. The written appeal shall provide the
reason for the appeal and describe the specific relief that the petitioner is seeking. The Fire
Chief shall review the request and prepare a recommendation within 15 days. Upon receipt of
the Fire Chief’s recommendations, the Town Manager shall notify the petitioner, in writing, of the
date, time and location of the hearing on the appeal. The Town Manager may affirm, vacate, or
modify the Notice of Responsibility, including the charges connected thereto. The Town
Manager may extend the time for payment for a reasonable period of time. If no timely
statement of appeal is properly made, then the Notice of Responsibility, including charges,
becomes final when the time for appeal lapses. The town is authorized to record the Notice of
Responsibility and connected calculation of charges with the appropriate County Recorder’s
Office.
Section 18-2-10 Method of Collection
The Town Manager shall be authorized to collect the amount of charges imposed pursuant to
this article in the same manner and method as delinquent utility bills and taxes. The Town shall
be empowered to maintain proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount
of charges authorized by this article, including costs, expenses and attorney’s fees in the same
manner as municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount of the charges, costs, expenses and fees
shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure on property as
are provided for municipal taxes.
A. Whenever charges for cost recovery are not paid within a reasonable time following
demand, the Town Manager and the Town Attorney, as applicable, are authorized to prosecute
the claim to judgment in an appropriate court with jurisdiction and to take any other action
appropriate for collection.
B. The Town Attorney is authorized to collect any amounts due by civil or administrative
action or both, together with all costs incurred in the collection of that indebtedness after
demand for payment has been refused.
C. Recovery of costs for emergency incidents is in addition to any separate right of the
Town to recover costs and damages from a responsible party whose negligence or wrongful
conduct causes damage or injury to public property or personnel, or both.
D. The Town Manager, Fire Chief and Town Attorney are authorized to intervene or join in
any action or proceeding, or initiate proceedings, connected to the costs and charges set forth
in this article or pursuant to any other applicable law allowing for the recovery of costs of
services.
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
Section 18-2-11 Accounting for Costs of Cleanup
A public safety official shall keep a record of costs incurred in connection with response,
cleanup, disposal and directly related administration of cleanup of emergency incidents. This
documentation shall be regularly distributed to the Town Manager, Fire Chief and finance
director.
Section 18-2-12 Use of Costs Paid or Collected
Any and all costs paid or collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited by the finance
director in a public services revolving account. The public services revolving account within the
town’s general fund is established, consisting of monies collected from payments levied under
this article and such other funds as the Town Council may deem appropriate. The finance
director shall administer the account. All costs paid or collected pursuant to the article that are
deposited in the public services revolving account shall be designated for the Fire Department
expenditures approved by the Town Council.
Section 18-2-13 Indemnity
Any person who requests emergency action, and any responsible person shall defend,
indemnify, save and hold harmless the Town, its elected officials, officers, employees and
agents, (collectively the Indemnitees) for, from and against any and all claims, demands, losses,
damages, suits, actions, liabilities, fines, charges, penalties, obligations, administrative and
judicial proceedings and orders, judgments, remedial actions of any kind, and all costs and
cleanup actions of any kind, all costs and expenses incurred in connection therewith, including,
without limitation, reasonable attorneys’ fees and professional, expert or consultant fees
(including, but not limited to, such expenses incurred in any attempt to enforce this
indemnification provision and the cost of appellate proceedings(“Claims”), which may arise out
of, in connection with, resulting from or related to in any manner, directly or indirectly, in whole
or in part, out of any emergency incident.
Section 18-2-14 Effect of criminal or civil proceedings on cost recovery or permit
issuance
The initiation of administrative or civil proceedings for cost recovery does not bar the criminal
prosecution of a responsible party for the associated violation. Similarly, criminal prosecution
does not bar administrative or civil collection for cost recovery for the violation giving rise to the
criminal prosecution. The existence of an issued permit shall not bar civil or criminal
enforcement proceedings.
Section 18-2-15 Professional Emergency Service Contracts
The Fire Chief and Town Manager without compliance with formal contract bidding
requirements may enter into professional emergency services agreements with qualified,
Ordinance 497-11 Chapter 18 Fire Prevention and Protection Rev 6/2011
licensed “HazMat” service providers for emergency abatement of hazardous materials incidents.
Such providers shall be selected on the basis of quoted services rates, qualifications and
availability.
Section 18-2-16 Remedies and Non-Exclusive Charges
The remedies provided in this article are not exclusive or in lieu of any other rights and remedies
that the town may have at law or equity. The foregoing charges of this article shall not be the
exclusive charges that may be made by the Town for the cost and expense of emergency
services, but shall only be supplemental thereto. Additional charges may be collected by the
Town pursuant to any other law, including, but not limited to, general taxation, fees, other cost
recovery rights and special assessment.
Section 2. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
Town of
QUEEN CREEK
Subdivision Ordinance
Adopted July 1997
Amended April 1999
Amended October 2004
Amended October 2007
Amended (Ch 7) October 2008
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Town of Queen Creek Subdivision Ordinance was created with the time, input and
dedication of the following groups and individuals:
TOWN COUNCIL
Art Sanders, Mayor
Toni Valenzuela, Vice Mayor Joyce Hildebrandt
Gail Barney Gordon Mortensen
Lisa Coletto-Cohen Jon Wootten
PLANNING COMMISSION
Steve Ingram, Chair
Kathy Trapp-Jackson, Vice Chair Michael Moore
Don Atkinson Steve Sossaman
Jeff Brown Kathy Trapp-Jackson
TOWN STAFF
Tom Condit, PE, Community Development Director
Fred Brittingham, AICP, Planning Manager
James Leubner, Engineering Manager
Mike Pacelli, Traffic Engineer
Michael McCauley, Principal Planner
Terry Fawley, CIP Projects Manager
CONSULTANT
Wayne Balmer, AICP
Community Planning Services, LLC.
October 2007
October 2007 Table of Content Page i
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1 Title, Purpose and Intent ................................................................................. 1-1
1.0 Short Title .......................................................................................................... 1-1
1.1 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................................. 1-1
1.2 Adoption of Exhibits .......................................................................................... 1-1
1.3 Adoption of Appendices .................................................................................... 1-1
1.4 Design Standards and Procedures Manual ……………………………...............1-1
Chapter 2 Administration .................................................................................................. 2-1
2.0 Responsibility .....................................................................................................2-1
2.1 Application ..........................................................................................................2-1
2.2 Filing Fees ...........................................................................................................2-1
2.3 Prohibition of Circumvention ............................................................................. 2-1
2.4 Modifications ......................................................................................................2-2
Chapter 3 Types of Subdivision Developments ............................................................... 3-1
3.0 Rural Development ............................................................................................ 3-1
3.1 Estate Development ........................................................................................... 3-1
3.2 Suburban Development Type A ......................................................................... 3-1
3.3 Suburban Development Type B ......................................................................... 3-1
3.4 Urban Development Type A ............................................................................... 3-1
3.5 Urban Development Type B .............................................................................. 3-2
3.6 Commercial Development ................................................................................. 3-2
3.7 Industrial Development....................................................................................... 3-2
Chapter 4 Platting Procedures and Requirements .......................................................... 4-1
4.0 Outline of Procedures and Requirements .......................................................... 4-1
The Subdivision Process - Flow Chart .............................................................. 4-2
4.1 Stage 1: Pre-Application Conference ................................................................ 4-3
A. Actions by the Subdivider ...................................................................... 4-3
B. Actions by the Town .............................................................................. 4-3
4.2 Stage 2: Preliminary Plat Application ............................................................... 4-5
A. Submittal Requirements ......................................................................... 4-5
B. Identification and Descriptive Data ....................................................... 4-7
C. Existing Conditions Data ....................................................................... 4-8
D. Proposed Conditions Data ..................................................................... 4-9
E. Proposed Utility Methods .................................................................... 4-10
F. Environmental Assessment Data ......................................................... 4-10
4.3 Stage 3: Subdivision Technical Review .......................................................... 4-12
4.4 Stage 4: Preliminary Plat Approval ................................................................. 4-13
A. Preliminary Plat Re-Submission........................................................... 4-13
B. Preliminary Plat Review ...................................................................... 4-15
October 2007 Table of Content Page ii
C. Preliminary Plat Approval ................................................................... 4-16
D. Significance of Preliminary Plat Approval .......................................... 4-17
4.5 Stage5: Final Plat and Improvement Plan Approval ....................................... 4-18
A. Submittal Requirements ....................................................................... 4-18
B. Identification Data ............................................................................... 4-19
C. Survey Data .......................................................................................... 4-19
D Descriptive Data .................................................................................. 4-20
E. Dedication and Acknowledgment ........................................................ 4-21
F. Final Plat Approval ..………………………………………………… 4-21
G. Required Certifications, Signatures, and Notes ................................... 4-22
4.6 Replats and Lot Ties ………………………………………………………….. 4-25
4.7 Abandonment of a Recorded Subdivision ....................................................... 4-25
4.8 Condominium Developments .......................................................................... 4-26
Chapter 5 Planned Area Developments and Development Master Plans …………….. 5-1
5.0 General ............................................................................................................... 5-1
5.1 Planned Area Developments .............................................................................. 5-1
Chapter 6 Subdivision Design Standards and Principles ............................................... 6-1
6.0 Purpose and Design Principles .......................................................................... 6-1
6.1 General ............................................................................................................... 6-2
6.2 Subdivision Site Design Standards .................................................................... 6-2
A. General Design Requirements ............................................................... 6-2
B. Open Space Requirements ..................................................................... 6-7
H. Access Requirements ............................................................................. 6-8
6.3 Street Location and Arrangement ...................................................................... 6-8
6.4 Street Design .......................................................................................................6-9
A. Design of Streets .................................................................................. 6-10
B. Private Street ........................................................................................ 6-10
C. Cul-De-Sac Streets ............................................................................... 6-10
D. Dead-End Streets ................................................................................. 6-10
E. Private Access and Driveways ............................................................. 6-10
F. Street Intersections ............................................................................... 6-10
G. Street Pavement and Structural Design ................................................ 6-11
H. Landscaping ..........................................................................................6-12
I. Pedestrian Circulation ………………………………………………... 6-12
6.5 Lot Planning ..................................................................................................... 6-13
6.6 Easement Planning ........................................................................................... 6-14
6.7 Street Naming .................................................................................................. 6-15
6.8 Drainage ........................................................................................................... 6-15
6.9 Sanitary Sewage Disposal ................................................................................. 6-15
6.10 Water System .................................................................................................... 6-16
6.11 Street Lights ...................................................................................................... 6-17
6.12 Public Utilities .................................................................................................. 6-17
Chapter 7 Improvement Requirements ............................................................................ 7-1
October 2007 Table of Content Page
iii
7.0 Purpose ............................................................................................................... 7-1
7.1 General ............................................................................................................... 7-1
A. Responsibility ........................................................................................ 7-1
B. Streets and Public Easements ................................................................ 7-1
C. Utilities ................................................................................................... 7-2
D. Monuments ............................................................................................ 7-2
7.2 Submittal Requirements ..................................................................................... 7-2
A. General ................................................................................................... 7-2
B. Improvement Plan Submittal Requirements .......................................... 7-3
C. Landscape Plan Submittal Requirements .............................................. 7-4
D. Report Submittal Requirements ............................................................. 7-5
7.3 Improvement Plan Review Process ................................................................... 7-7
7.4 Deferred Improvement Agreements .................................................................. 7-8
A. Subdivisions of 4 or Less Parcels .......................................................... 7-8
B. Remainders ............................................................................................ 7-9
7.5 Assurances by Subdivider .................................................................................. 7-9
A. Agreement by Subdivider ...................................................................... 7-9
B. Assurances of Construction ................................................................. 7-10
7.6 Construction and Inspection ............................................................................ 7-10
7.7 Subdivision Improvement Acceptance ............................................................ 7-12
A. General ................................................................................................. 7-12
B. Final Inspection .................................................................................... 7-12
C. Final Report ......................................................................................... 7-12
D. Procedure ............................................................................................. 7-13
E. Warranty Period on Public Improvements ........................................... 7-13
Appendix Glossary of Terms and Definitions ....................................................... A -1 to A-9
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
SEC. 1.0 SHORT TITLE. This title shall be known as the "The Subdivision Ordinance for
the Town of Queen Creek". (Hereinafter known as “the Subdivision Ordinance”).
SEC. 1.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
A. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious
development of Queen Creek; to ensure adequate vehicular, pedestrian, and
equestrian traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to
major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; to achieve
individual property lots of reasonable utility and livability; to secure adequate
provisions for water supply, drainage, flood protection, sanitary sewerage, and other
health and safety requirements; to ensure consideration for adequate sites for schools,
recreation areas, and other public facilities; to promote the conveyance of land by
accurate legal description; and to provide practical procedures for the achievement of
this purpose.
B. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, it is intended that a common
ground of understanding and a sound and equitable working relationship exist
between the public and private interests and to this end, the independent and mutual
objectives of the public and private interests can be achieved in the subdivision of
land.
SEC. 1.2 ADOPTION OF EXHIBITS. All exhibits within this ordinance are hereby adopted
and shall be incorporated herein as a part of this ordinance.
SEC. 1.3 ADOPTION OF APPENDICES. All appendices within this ordinance are hereby
adopted and shall be incorporated herein as a part of this ordinance.
SEC. 1.4 DESIGN STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES MANUAL. The companion
Design Standard and Procedures Manual which sets forth the engineering design
standards and standard construction details necessary for successful implementation
of this ordinance is also hereby adopted and shall be incorporated herein as a part of
this ordinance. The Town Engineering Manager is also hereby empowered to update
the Design Standards and Specifications Manual as needed, without further action of
the Town Council.
October 2007 Chapter One Page 1-1
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 2.0 RESPONSIBILITY.
A. The Town of Queen Creek Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby authorized to
receive, process and otherwise act upon applications for preliminary or final
subdivision plats, Development Master Plans (DMP) and Planned Area
Developments (PAD), in accordance with this Ordinance.
B. The Town Council shall neither receive nor review an application for preliminary or
final plats, DMP, or PAD until a recommendation on such has been forwarded to the
Council by the Commission. The Town Council shall have final jurisdiction over all
matters pertaining to the implementation of this Ordinance.
C. All applications for action under this Ordinance shall be filed initially with the
Planning Division of the Community Development Department for processing in
accordance with this Ordinance.
SEC. 2.1 APPLICATION.
A. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon land utilization, land
improvement or development, and land use than is imposed by existing provisions of
law, ordinance, contract or deed, this Ordinance shall control.
B. This ordinance shall apply to all subdivisions as defined in the Appendix - Glossary
of Terms and Definitions of this Ordinance.
SEC. 2.2 FILING FEES. The subdivider shall, at the time of filing, pay to the Town the
subdivision application fees established by the Town Council.
SEC. 2.3 PROHIBITION OF CIRCUMVENTION. No person, firm, corporation or legal
entity shall sell, offer to sell, or divide any lot, piece, or parcel of land which
constitutes a subdivision or part thereof, as defined herein, or in the Arizona State
Revised Statutes, without first having recorded a plat thereof in accordance with this
Ordinance. The Town shall not issue any construction and/or building permit for
work on any parcel in violation of this Ordinance.
October 2007 Chapter 2 Page 2 - 1
SEC. 2.4 MODIFICATIONS.
A. Where, in the opinion of the Council, upon recommendation by the Planning
Division and/or the Engineering Division of the Community Development
Department or the Planning and Zoning Commission, there exist
extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership or adjacent
development, or other circumstances not provided for in this Ordinance, the
Council may modify these provisions in such a manner and to such extent as
it may deem appropriate to the public interest.
B. In the case of a plan and program for a Development Master Plan (DMP), or
a Planned Area Development (PAD), the Council may modify this Ordinance
in such manner as appears necessary and desirable to provide adequate space
and improvements for public facilities, traffic and pedestrian circulation,
recreation, light, air, and other service needs of the development when fully
developed and populated and may require stipulations to assure conformance
with the achievement of the approved plan.
C. In modifying the standards or requirements of this Ordinance, as outlined
above, the Council may make such additional requirements as appear
necessary, in its judgment, to secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements so modified.
October 2007 Chapter 2 Page 2 - 2
October 2007 Chapter 3 Page 3 - 1
CHAPTER 3
TYPES OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENTS
SEC. 3.0 RURAL DEVELOPMENT (R1-108 AND LARGER)
Detached single-family residential zoning districts containing lots of at least 108,000
square feet, pursuant to Article 4 of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance:
SEC. 3.1 ESTATE DEVELOPMENT (R1-43 AND R1-54)
Detached single-family residential zoning districts containing lots of at least 43,000
square feet and 54,000 square feet respectively, pursuant to Article 4 of the Town of
Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance:
SEC. 3.2 SUBURBAN DEVELOPMENT TYPE A (R1-35)
Detached single-family residential development as part of an approved Development
Master Plan (DMP), an approved Planned Area Development (PAD), or as a
conventional subdivision pursuant to Article 4 of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance.
SEC. 3.3 SUBURBAN DEVELOPMENT TYPE B (R1-18, R1-15 AND R1-12)
Detached single-family residential development as part of an approved Development
Master Plan (DMP), an approved Planned Area Development (PAD), or as a
conventional subdivision pursuant to Article 4 of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance.
SEC. 3.4 URBAN DEVELOPMENT TYPE A (R1-7, R1-9, R1-5 and R1-4)
Detached single-family residential development as part of an approved Development
Master Plan (DMP), an approved Planned Area Development (PAD), or as a
conventional subdivision pursuant to Article 4 of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance.
October 2007 Chapter 3 Page 3 - 2
SEC. 3.5 URBAN DEVELOPMENT TYPE B (MULTI-FAMILY ZONES)
Detached single-family and multi-family residential development as part of an
approved Development Master Plan (DMP), an approved Planned Area Development
PAD) pursuant to Article 4 of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance, and/or
within the Town Center area in locations which are suitable and appropriate taking
into consideration existing conditions including traffic circulation, future land use
needs and the availability of utilities.
SEC. 3.6 COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Commercial development as part of an approved Development Master Plan (DMP),
an approved Planned Area Development (PAD), a conventional subdivision, and/or
within the Town Center area in locations which are suitable and appropriate taking
into consideration adjacent land uses, scale, the availability of utilities, and traffic
volume and circulation. Commercial development within the Town Center area shall
be developed in accordance to the specific Town Center Design Standards. All other
commercial development shall comply with all design standards addressed in Article
VI of this Ordinance and Articles 4 and 5 of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance.
SEC. 3.7 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
Industrial development as part of an approved Development Master Plan (DMP), an
approved Planned Area Development (PAD), or a conventional subdivision in
locations which are suitable and appropriate taking into consideration adjacent land
uses, scale, the availability of utilities, and traffic volume and circulation and which
provide for large scale developments and/or individual industrial development
pursuant to Articles 4 and 5 of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance.
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 1
CHAPTER 4
PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 4.0 OUTLINE OF PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all subdivision plats located inside the
limits of the Town of Queen Creek shall proceed through the following progressive stages.
STAGE 1 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
STAGE 2 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION
STAGE 3 TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
STAGE 4 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL
STAGE 5 FINAL PLAT AND IMPROVEMENT PLAN APPROVAL
STAGE 6 RECORDATION OF PLAT
This procedure may be modified by the Town based on unique or extraordinary
circumstances. The following flow chart depicts the different stages of the process and the
necessary actions to be taken with each stage.
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 2
The Subdivision Process
Actions by the Town Actions by the Subdivider
? Check Zoning and General
Plan requirements.
? Check Engineering
requirements.
? Distribute copies to Utilities,
Schools, Fire, Post Office,
Town and County Depts.
? Receive and distribute
comments from Town Depts.
and all reviewing agencies.
? Facilitate a Technical
Review Committee (TRC)
meeting.
? Check Zoning and General
Plan requirements.
? Check preliminary
Engineering requirements.
? Distribute copies to Utilities,
Schools, Fire, Post Office,
Town and County Depts.
? Submit application, fees,
required copies of preliminary
plat, all reports and
documentation as outlined in
Section 4.2.
? Submit required copies of the
proposed project concept site plan
with all the required information
outlined in Section 4.1(A).
? Attend the TRC meeting.
? Resubmittal of the preliminary
plat to address the TRC
comments at least 45 days prior
to the P&Z Commission meeting
at which the plat will be
considered.
Technical Review
Committee
Preliminary Plat
Application
Preapplication
Conference
Preliminary Plat
Approval
Final Plat and
Improvement Plan
Submittal
Final Plat
Approval
Recordation of Plat
? Review final plat, CC&R’s,
Assurances of Construction,
landscape plans,
improvement plans, final
technical reports and any
additional documents or
zoning stipulations required
by Town Council.
? Make recommendation to the
Town Council.
? Submit final plans as outlined in
section 4.5.
? Submit improvement plans and
final reports as outlined in Section
7.2.
? Submit title report, CC&R’s,
Assurances of Construction, and
additional documentation as
required by Town Council.
? Record Final Plat and CC&R’s
and other easements, maps of
dedication, tracts and other
documents as necessary
? Submit subdivision mylars,
easements, maps of dedication,
tracts and other related
documents
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 3
SEC. 4.1 STAGE 1 - PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
This stage affords the subdivider the opportunity to obtain preliminary advice and
assistance and informally provides a cursory review of the proposed subdivision with
the appropriate departments prior to the expense of a preliminary plat preparation. It
also affords the Town the opportunity to give preliminary guidance at a time when
potential land development points of conflict can be most easily resolved, subsequent
relations improved, official action simplified, and undue expense and delay saved by
the subdivider.
A. Actions by The Subdivider.
1. The subdivider shall request a meeting together with the Planning Division,
Engineering Division and Public Works staff and submit the required copies
of a “Conceptual Plan” to the Planning Division prior to the pre-application
meeting.
The “Conceptual Plan” shall be printed on 24" x 36", blue line or black line,
and folded to approximately 8 1/2” x 11". This plan shall include at a
minimum the following information:
? Location map.
? Drawing scale and north arrow.
? Location of all adjacent public arterial and collector streets.
? Acreage and land uses of all parcels.
? Tentative lot arrangement.
? Tentative proposal for street design and improvements, including
proposed driveway locations and/or cross access easements.
? Table of land use data (gross and net acres, percent of total acreage in
each land use, underlying town zoning, proposed zoning, and tentative
lot sizes).
? Existing public and/or private water and sewer lines and services.
2. Tentative proposals regarding water supply and sewage disposal.
B. Actions by The Town.
1. The Town shall discuss the proposal with the subdivider in general terms and
provide advice on procedural steps, preliminary design and improvement
standards, and general platting requirements. Depending on the scope of the
proposed development, the Town shall distribute the copies of the
“Conceptual Plans” to the following agencies:
? Community Development Department
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 4
? Public Works Department.
? Queen Creek Water Company.
? Maricopa or Pinal County Environmental Services Division
? Maricopa or Pinal County Transportation Division.
? Maricopa or Pinal County Flood Control District.
? Rural Metro Fire Department.
? The appropriate Public School District(s).
.
2. Check the existing zoning of the proposed development and advise the subdivider if a
zoning change or a General Plan Amendment is necessary or desirable. Review the
proposal and its relationship to adjacent land uses and the General Plan’s goals and
objectives. Determine the amount and type of parks, open space, and other public
open space requirements for the area as determined by the Queen Creek General
Plan; to then determine what space needs shall be reserved or set aside with any
special requirements for such site. Review for preliminary compliance with these
Subdivision Ordinance regulations and any other applicable regulations.
Determine if the size or the complexity of the proposed development would warrant
the preparation of either a Development Master Plan (DMP), or a Planned Area
Development (PAD). If either a DMP or a PAD is required such shall be processed
prior to, or concurrent with, subsequent consideration of a preliminary plat.
If a General Plan Amendment is required such amendment must be obtained prior to
additional processing of the application.
3. Review the relationship of the property to existing major streets, utility systems and
adjacent land uses, and give general/preliminary guidance on other design, planning
and engineering issues.
4. Provide the applicant with the necessary Town application forms, review the
submittal requirements, review the neighborhood meeting requirement, and discuss
tentative timetables for the project.
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 5
SEC. 4.2 STAGE 2 - PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION
The preliminary plat stage of land and airspace subdivision includes detailed
planning, submittal, review, and approval of the preliminary plat. This stage is
intended to resolve all major issues pertinent to the land development according to
the Towns policies, standards and requirements. To avoid delay in processing the
application, the subdivider shall provide the Town with all information essential, as
determined by the Town, regarding the character and general acceptability of the
proposed development.
A. Submittal Requirements.
The following information is required as part of the preliminary plat submittal and
shall be shown graphically on the plans, by notes on the plans, or by supporting
documentation supplied as part of the plan submittal, and may comprise several
sheets showing various elements of required data. All mapped data for the same plat
shall be drawn at the same standard engineering scale, adjusted to produce an overall
drawing measuring 24" x 36" and in conformance with requirements contained in this
Ordinance and by the Town Engineering Manager and other reviewing agencies.
1. The required copies/sets of the proposed preliminary plat and other required
supporting data prepared in accordance with requirements set forth in this
Article shall be filed with the Town. Submission shall include fees as
required in Article II of this Ordinance. Copies of the preliminary plat shall
be reproduced in the form of blue line or black line prints on a white
background. Scheduling of the case for Technical Review Committee (TRC)
meeting shall be dependent upon adequacy of data presented and completion
of processing.
2. If the proposed preliminary plat is within and/or part of an approved DMP or
an approved PAD, copies of the approved site plan, typical floor plans and
elevations, shall also be submitted as supporting documentation.
3. All subdivision submittals shall provide “Identification and Descriptive
Data”, “Existing Conditions Data”, Proposed Utility Methods” and
“Environmental Assessment Report” information by graphic representation or
note. The submittal shall be checked by the Town for completeness and
assigned a case number; if incomplete as to those requirements set forth in
this section, the submittal shall be rejected and the subdivider notified within
fifteen (15) days of the date the application was received. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to be sure their submittal is complete. (The Town does not
accept the burden of being the Engineer’s conscience or to constantly remind
them of their duty to their client.)
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 6
4. If the developer is planning to plat the proposed development in phases, it
must be so indicated on the preliminary plat when submitted for Subdivision
Review. If the developer later decides to phase the development, it will be
necessary to re-submit the new proposed phasing plan for a second review
and approval.
5. A Preliminary Drainage Report. The Drainage Report shall contain the
following information:
a. Delineation of the boundaries of on-site and off-site drainage areas.
b. Drainage pattern of all existing and proposed streets and building
sites. Label by number the drainage concentration points and where
inlets/outlets are to be located.
c. The Q-10 and Q-100 flow volumes at each critical concentration
point. Justify all drainage runoff factors (C-factors) used in the
computations for washes, channels and streets.
d. Runoff flows from adjacent properties onto the property in question
must be described in detail. Drainage area, calculated peak flows,
velocity and other pertinent runoff data must be presented for all
concentration points, channels and washes. The runoff from areas
outside the development may be realigned through the new
development.
e. The retention volume required, and provided. Indicate the method for
draining basins in 36 hours, and who is responsible for maintenance.
f. The location of all drainage easements and tracts.
g. The pre and post development hydrology maps.
NOTE: In some instances a Final Drainage Report may be required by the
Town Engineering Manager as part of the preliminary plat application due
to the specific characteristics of the site.
6. A lot Statistical Table.
7. A Preliminary Landscape Plan for all off-site, open space, trails, transition
area, and retention area landscaping. This preliminary plan should include
cross sections and plant palette. (see Town of Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance, Articles 5.3 and 5.5)
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 7
8. Subdivision fencing detail; depicting the type of fencing being proposed;
including elevations, and general locations. (see Town of Queen Creek
Zoning Ordinance Article 5.2)
9. Conceptual “Residential Design Guidelines” or “Commercial Design
Guidelines” which both narratively and graphically describe the character,
site planning, architecture and landscaping that can be expected from the
development.
10. Documentation that a site records check for potential cultural resources has
been conducted in conjunction with the State Historic Preservation Office.
11. A Geotechnical Report, which shall also include an evaluation for the
presence of subsidence fissures, if required by the Town Engineering
Manager, due to the presence of possible fissures in the area under review.
12. The preliminary water and sewer report
13. A Traffic Impact Analysis Report (TIA) and/or other traffic reports, as
required by the Town Engineering Manager and/or the Town Traffic
Engineer due to the volume of traffic or other traffic related issues generated
by the proposed project.
B. Identification and Descriptive Data.
1. The proposed name of the subdivision shall be clearly indicated and include
the location by Section, Township and Range with reference by dimension
and bearing to two (2) Section or 1/4 Section Corners. Basis of bearings must
be stated on the preliminary plat.
2. Name, address, phone number, and seal of Engineer or Surveyor preparing
the preliminary plat.
3. Name, address, and phone number of developer/subdivider, as well as the
name, address and phone number of the property owner, if different than the
developer/subdivider.
4. Scale, north point (pointing up or to the right), and date of preparation
including any subsequent revision dates.
5. Location map which shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision
to arterial and collector streets.
6. A surveyed boundary, including basis of bearings, bench marks, distances,
lengths and total size of the proposed subdivision,
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 8
C. Existing Conditions Data.
1. Topography by contours and “spot elevations" on Maricopa or Pinal County
datum and related to USC&GS survey datum shown on the same map as the
proposed subdivision layout. Contour intervals shall be one (1) foot and shall
be shown extending a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the external
boundaries of the proposed development so to adequately reflect the character
and drainage of the land.
2. Location of fences, existing structures, wells, streams, canals, irrigation
materials, private ditches (open or covered), washes, lakes, fissures or other
water features and characteristics that could have a bearing on the review.
3. Location, and direction of surface drainage flow, and extent of areas subject
to flooding or storm runoff must be defined, whether such inundation is
frequent, periodic, or occasional. The 100 year flood zone limits shall also be
shown, if they are shown on the current “FIRM” maps.
4. Location, widths and names of all private and public streets, utility rights-ofway
of public record which may exist around the perimeter of the site
boundaries, through or across the site. Show any permanent structures that
are to remain, including water wells, irrigation ditches and public or private
utility lines (water, sewer, power poles) and cross access easements within,
adjacent to or extending from the proposed development.
5. Show all driveways, streets and median openings along the entire site
frontage or within 350 feet of any proposed driveway or street intersection on
the opposite side of the perimeter streets.
6. Name, book, and page numbers of any recorded subdivision adjacent to or
having common boundaries with the proposed development.
7. The existing base zone of the subject and adjacent parcel(s), the zoning case
number, if any, and the case number of any approved DMP or approved PAD
of which the proposed development is a part of if applicable.
8. The gross acreage of the subject parcel(s). Do not include previously
dedicated rights-of-way in this figure.
9. Boundaries and dimensions of the parcel(s) to be subdivided shall be fully
dimensioned.
10. The engineers' calculations for each tributary area of the runoff for 10 year
and 100-year frequency storms. These values are to be indicated along the
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 9
boundary of the parcel for all points of drainage entering and exiting the
property.
11. Show the location, type and recording data for all existing on site easements
and cross access easements or other prior dedications.
D. Proposed Conditions Data.
1. Subdivision street layout including: street design cross sections, preliminary
curve data, curve lengths, proposed street names based on existing projected
alignments wherever possible, proposed Vehicular Non-Access Easements
and pedestrian connections to adjoining developments.
2. Typical lot dimensions (scaled), dimensions of all corner lots, lots on
curvilinear sections of streets, and all lots where the number of sides exceed
four. Each lot shall be numbered individually and the total number of lots or
dwelling units provided. Where plats will consist of a number of
units/phases, utilizing the same subdivision name, the lot numbering shall be
consecutive through the total number of lots or units.
3. Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for open space, parks,
drainage tracts, schools, well sites, or other public or private use with use
indicated.
4. If multiple uses are planned (multiple residential, commercial, industrial, or
office) such areas shall be clearly designated together with existing zoning
classification and status of zoning change, if any.
5. Show minimum setback lines. Where there are lots with more than four sides
or whose shape may be considered atypical, show all setbacks.
6. Proposed storm water disposal system, preliminary calculations, layout of
proposed drainage system and he direction of proposed street drainage. If
retention or detention basins are used for active open space, calculations for
those areas above the 2 year – 6 hour storm event are also required. The
Town Engineering Manager may also require a proposal to provide for the
retention of storm water generated on the property, depending on the
characteristics of the site.
Facilities for retention of storm water shall comply with the requirements of
the Maricopa County Flood Control District and the Town of Queen Creek
Design Standards and Procedures Manual. If deemed necessary by the Town
Engineering Manager due to the characteristics of the site, the drainage report
shall be completed to the standards as outlined in the Final Drainage Report
Checklist.
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 10
7. Compliance with the rules and requirements established by the State
Department of Health or Maricopa County Health Department relating to the
provision of domestic water supply and sanitary sewerage disposal.
8. Delineation the transition area(s) and open space areas as required by Chapter
6 - Sec. 6.2 (B) of this Ordinance.
9. Show the location of any proposed cross access easements.
E. Proposed Utility Methods.
1. Sewage Disposal - A statement regarding the type of facilities proposed shall
appear on the preliminary plat. Also show the preliminary sewer layout
indicating line sizes and manhole and cleanout locations.
2. Water Supply - A statement as to the water supply for the development shall
appear on preliminary plat accompanied by a Certificate of Assured Water
Supply issued by the Director of Water Resources. The preliminary layout of
the water system shall be shown, indicating fire hydrants, valves, meter
vaults, water line sizes and locations.
3. Electric Supply - A statement as to the electric supply for the development
shall appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements or potential
pole relocations and any existing or proposed 69kv lines, or larger, shall be
shown on the preliminary plat.
4. Gas Supply - A statement as to the gas supply for the development shall
appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements shall be shown on
the preliminary plat.
5. Telephone Service - A statement as to the telephone service for the
development shall appear on the preliminary plat. Any necessary easements
shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
6. Garbage Service - A statement as to the garbage service for the development
shall appear on the preliminary plat.
7. Cable Television - If applicable, a statement as to the cable television service
for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat.
F. Environmental Assessment Data:
The purpose of the Environmental Site Assessment is to provide a written and
graphic analysis of the environmental characteristics of the site so that the Town of
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 11
Queen Creek can evaluate the future use of the site. A Phase One Environmental
Report shall be submitted by the applicant to identify any hazardous waste site
within the proposed subdivision. Environmental site assessments are required for all
preliminary plat applications. This study shall include written reports and maps that
provide the information outlined below:
1. The Phase One Environmental Report shall:
? Describe the site and identify uses or activities which might indicate the
presence of disposed hazardous substances, and;
? Include a review of readily available information, including but not
limited to, engineering, regulatory, and historical records of the site,
interviews with the current and any past owners of the site, present and
past tenants and neighbors,
? Include a review of the regional geology and hydrology of the site and
the site's vicinity, including, but not limited to, available records for
groundwater contamination both up/and down gradient from the site,
obtainable reports of compliance violations and/or containment
discharges in the site's vicinity,
? Location of any known environmentally adverse conditions within one
mile of the property, including earth fissures, and:
? Reference the data, records and source of information.
2. The Applicant's Consultant shall:
? Manually-observe the site surface closely for evidence of potential
contamination such as soil stabilizing, discarded chemical containers,
vegetative distress, and;
? Interview the tenants on or adjacent to the site with respect to their use of
hazardous substances on the site, and;
? Investigate the registration status of any existing underground storage
tanks or drywells on or adjacent to the site;
? Identify any adverse environmental impacts, and:
? Research of the site and public records and reports to identify and locate
any geological subsidence fissures located on, or within one mile of, the
site.
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 12
SEC. 4.3 STAGE 3 - TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
In order for a preliminary plat to be scheduled for a particular Technical Review Committee
(TRC) meeting, a complete preliminary plat application must be received and accepted by the
Town.
A. Upon receipt of a preliminary plat application the Town shall determine if the
application is a complete submittal. If complete, the Town shall forward copies of
the preliminary plat to the adjacent jurisdictions, the US Postmaster, Williams
Gateway Airport, the adjacent Indian Communities, and to those entities outlined in
Section 4.1(B) for their review and comments. The reviewing agencies shall transmit
their written comments and recommendations to the Town.
B. The Town shall host a Technical Review Committee (TRC) meeting where the
applicant is provided an opportunity to meet with the representatives from all
applicable utilities and other interested governmental agencies to receive comments
regarding the preliminary plat application. At the TRC meeting the applicant may
also receive written comments from the Town, detailing the extent to which the plans
are required to be revised in order for the Town to schedule the preliminary plat for
consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Revisions caused by the
comments received at the TRC meeting or by voluntary action of the applicant may
require additional TRC meetings. Additionally, circumstances may exist where the
project may experience delay due to the applicant’s time line in addressing agency
comments.
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 13
SEC. 4.4 STAGE 4 - PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
The preliminary plat approval stage involves the re-submission of the preliminary plat to
address the Technical Review Committee (TRC) comments. Included in this stage is the
review of the resubmitted plans, reports, and required studies and acceptance of the
preliminary plat. The subdivider shall provide the Town with all information essential to
determine the character and general acceptability of the proposed development. The
following submittal requirements pertain only to conventional plats for which rezoning
is/was not a condition of approval. Consult with the Planning Division for the submittal
requirements, time requirements and rezoning procedures for those subdivisions involving
rezoning, PAD, DMP, and other land use exceptions.
A. Preliminary Plat Re-submission.
1. The applicant shall resubmit full-sized copies/sets of the preliminary plat, one
(1) 8 1/2” x 11" transparency of each sheet/exhibit, and one (1) 8 1/2” x 11"
photo mechanical transfer (PMT) of each sheet/exhibit and all other required
or requested supporting data to the Town. Preliminary plats that correctly
contain all of the information requested or required by the (TRC), as
determined by the Town, shall be scheduled for Planning and Zoning
Commission hearing. Incomplete or incorrect resubmittals could cause
delays in the preliminary plat being presented to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Scheduling of the case for Commission hearing shall be
determined by the Town and shall be dependent upon adequacy of data
presented and completion of processing.
2. As a prerequisite to the commission hearing for any preliminary plat, PAD or
DMP, the applicant is required to hold at least one neighborhood meeting at
least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to their scheduled planning commission
meeting. The purpose of the meeting is to provide a means for the applicant,
surrounding neighbors and homeowners associations to review preliminary
development proposals and solicit input and exchange information about the
proposed development with the intent to resolve potential conflicts prior to the
required formal hearings.
Neighborhood meetings shall be held at a location near or on the development
site. The meeting shall be held on a week day evening or weekend day at a
reasonable time and in a publicly accessible place.
Notification requirements for preliminary plats; notice of the meeting shall
be provided by the applicant as follows:
1. The development site shall be posted with at least one sign having a
minimum sign area of sixteen (16) square feet with black copy on a
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 14
white background not less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the
date of the neighborhood meeting. Sites that exceed five (5) acres in
size and/or have frontage on more than one (1) street shall post
additional signs at the rate of one additional sign per every ten (10)
additional acres or one sign for each street with a maximum of four
(4) signs per project. Such signs shall be clearly legible and wherever
possible placed adjacent to the right of way of a public street. The
notice shall contain the date, time, and location of the meeting and a
summary of the request. It shall also have contact information for the
application’s representative. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to use reasonable efforts to maintain the sign once it has
been placed on the property.
2. Mailing a notice by first class mail not less than thirty (30) calendar
days prior to the scheduled commission meeting and not less than
fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the neighborhood
meeting to:
A. All property owners of record, chairpersons and management
association of homeowners associations, and any
neighborhood associations on record with the town at a
distance determined in table
B. The above noted property owners and management
association names shall be obtained from Maricopa county or
Pinal county assessor’s office, as appropriate.
3. A meeting summary shall be submitted to the community
development department not less than seven (7) calendar days prior
to the planning commission meeting with a written summary of the
issues and discussion from the meeting and list of attendees.
October 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 15
Table 1 Notification Requirements
Type of case* Distance requirement
Minor general plan amendments 900’
Major general plan amendment 1200’
Rezoning, 5 acres and less 900’
Rezoning, above 5 acres 1200’
Site plan, 5 acres and less 900’
Site plan, 5 acres and above 1200’
Indoor conditional use permit, up to 2,500 square
feet of building/leased area
900’
indoor conditional use permit, above 2,500 square
feet of building/leased area
1200’
Outdoor conditional use permit, 5 acres and less 900’
Outdoor conditional use permit, above 5 acres 1200’
Board of adjustment case 900’
*any case that is part of another application with a larger notification distance, the larger notification distance will be required
4. An applicant has 120 days from the date of the (TRC) meeting, or 120
days from the date of receipt of later redlines, in which to resubmit
said plans. Failure to resubmit plans which address all of the redlines
shall cause the application to be null and void and fees will not
refunded.
3. An applicant shall be required to submit a new preliminary plat application,
including fees and another review of the subdivision by the (TRC), if the resubmittal
is not in substantial conformance to the original application.
Substantial non-conformance is considered to be, but not limited to, the
following:
? An increase or decrease in the number of lots or units by more than 5%
? A substantial change in the size or configuration of the development
parcel.
B. Preliminary Plat Review
1. Zoning. The subdivision shall be designed to meet the specific requirements
for the zoning district within which it is located. However, in the event that
rezoning is necessary for the preliminary plat to conform to the Zoning
District regulations, or if a DMP or PAD approval is sought, said action shall
be initiated concurrently with the preliminary plat by the property owner or
his authorized agent. In any event, any such zoning amendment required in
relation to the preliminary plat shall have been adopted prior to a preliminary
plat approval.
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 16
2. Planning. The subdivision shall be designed to comply with the Design
Principles of this Ordinance and the goals and objectives of the Queen Creek
General Plan. In the event that an amendment to the General Plan is
necessary for the preliminary plat to conform to the specific land use,
circulation, or open space elements, said amendment(s) required in relation to
the preliminary plat shall have been adopted prior to a preliminary plat
approval.
3. Utilities and Services . As a prerequisite of preliminary plat approval by the
Town, the subdivider shall have reviewed tentative concepts and possible
requirements with the County Health Department, the Town Engineering
Division, the Queen Creek Water Company or private water company
servicing the development, Salt River Project, U.S. West Communications,
the cable television company(s) servicing the development, Southwest Gas
and Rural Metro Fire Company for general approval of the preliminary plat
design.
C. Preliminary Plat Approval.
1. When all requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied, the case will
be scheduled for presentation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Planning Division report shall be submitted for Commission review
and action.
2. The Commission shall consider the preliminary plat, (TRC) comments and
the Planning Division report and recommendations. If satisfied that all
objectives have been met, the Commission may recommend approval of the
preliminary plat to the Town Council.
3. If the plat is generally acceptable, but requires minor revisions before
proceeding to the Town Council for preliminary plat approval, the
Commission may recommend conditional approval and the required revisions
noted in the minutes of the meeting and in the written Commission report
submitted to the Town Council.
4. If the Commission finds that all of the objectives and requirements of this
Ordinance have not been met, the Commission may recommend that the
preliminary plat be continued pending revisions, or recommend to the Town
Council denial of the preliminary plat. Resubmittals due to revisions, for the
same parcel or any part thereof, shall follow the aforementioned procedure.
5. The Town Council shall consider the preliminary plat, the Commission
requirements and recommendations, and the Planning Division report and
recommendations. If satisfied that all objectives and requirements of this
Ordinance have been met, the Town Council may approve the preliminary
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 17
plat and make a record of the Town Council’s approval on the copy of the
preliminary plat retained in the offices of the Planning Division.
6. If the plat is generally acceptable, but requires minor revisions, the Town
Council may conditionally approve the preliminary plat and the required
revisions noted in the minutes of the meeting. At the direction of the Town
Council, the plat may be approved subject to the revisions in accordance with
the stated conditions.
7. If all or certain identified and significant objectives and requirements of this
Ordinance or General Plan have not been met, the Town Council will have
grounds to deny the preliminary plat.
D. Significance of Preliminary Approval.
Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for the subdivider to submit the
final plat and the improvement plans and specifications for the proposed project.
Preliminary approval is based on the following terms:
1. Subject to the Basic Approval. The basic conditions under which
preliminary approval of the preliminary plat is granted will not be
substantially changed prior to the expiration date.
2. One (1) Year Approval with Extension. Approval of a preliminary plat is
valid for a period of one year from the date of Town Council approval. A
request can be made for a single, one year extension of the original
preliminary plat approval. An extension of the preliminary plat approval may
be granted by the Zoning Administrator upon receipt of a letter from the
subdivider stating the reason for an extension prior to the expiration date.
Requests for extensions are predicated on the plat continuing to meet current
Town development standards, payment of a continuance fee and the
submission of an updated assurance of construction. Should the requested
extension not be approved by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may
appeal this determination to the Town Council.
3. No Authority to Record. Preliminary approval, in itself, does not assure
final acceptance of streets for dedication nor continuation of existing zoning
requirements for the development or its environs nor constitute authorization
to record the plat.
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 18
SEC. 4.5 STAGE 5 - FINAL PLAT AND IMPROVEMENT PLAN APPROVAL.
This stage includes the final design of the subdivision, engineering of the public
improvements, and submittal by the subdivider of the final plat, final reports, and plans for
all of the required subdivision improvements, to the Town, the County Departments, and the
utility companies for approval; including the submittal of the final plat for review and action
by the Town Council.
A. Submittal Requirements.
1. Final Plat Preparation.
a. The final plat shall be presented in accordance with requirements set
forth in this section, and shall substantially conform to the approved
preliminary plat and applicable zoning stipulations.
b. Pre-Final Review. The subdivider shall file with the Town full size
(24”x36") blue or black line copies of the final plat along with copies
of the approved D.M.P. or P.A.D. (if applicable) for review by the
Town, together with a letter of transmittal, indicating “Pre-Final
Review Requested” the Town shall review the plat for substantial
conformity to the approved preliminary plat and refer copies of the
pre-final submittal to the reviewing agencies who shall make known
their recommendations in writing.
c. Final Review. The subdivider shall file with the Town full size
“mylars” (4 mil thickness), full size blue or black line copies, one
81/2”x11” copy thereof, of the final plat. The final plat shall be
drawn in black ink on polyester "mylar", measuring exactly 24" x 36"
with a left hand margin of 2 inches and be drawn to an accurate
engineering scale from an accurate survey. The applicant shall also
submit a computerized drawing of the final plat in a file format
required by the Town of Queen Creek.
2. Improvement Plans. Improvement plans, reports and other documents, shall
be prepared and submitted in accordance with the procedures and standards
established within the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and
Procedures Manual and Chapter 7 of this Ordinance. If the submittal is
complete, the Town shall distribute sets of the plans to the appropriate
reviewing departments, agencies and utility companies who shall make
known their recommendations in writing.
3. Deed Restrictions. The subdivision covenants, conditions and restrictions
(CC&R’s) shall be submitted to the Town for review as part of the final plat
and improvement plan submittal package. These CC&R’s shall include
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 19
provisions to govern the disbanding of the Home Owners Association (HOA)
and the method of assurance that the proposed streets, landscaping, storm
drainage facilities and other assets of the Association will be maintained in
perpetuity.
4. Title Report. The subdivider shall, at the time of filing the application(s) for
the final plat and improvement plans, submit an American Land Title
Association (A.L.T.A.) Title Report completed within the previous sixty (60)
days, certifying that the applicant has title for all of the land being
subdivided.
5. Filing Fees. The subdivider shall, at the time of filing the application(s) for
the final plat and improvement plans, pay the Town the final plat application
fee, improvement plan review fee, and the recordation fee, in accordance with
Article II of this Ordinance, which are established by the Town Council.
B. Identification Data. The following identification data shall be required as a part of
the final plat submittal.
1. A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its location by number
of Section, Township, Range, and County.
2. Name, address and seal of the Arizona-Registered Land Surveyor preparing
the final plat.
3. Scale, north arrow, and date of final plat preparation.
4. The name, address and telephone number of the property owner.
5. Name, address and seal of the Arizona registered civil engineer responsible
for the engineering of the proposed subdivision.
C. Survey Data. The following survey data shall be required as a part of the final plat
submittal.
1. The corners of the plat shall be located on the monument lines of abutting
streets; boundaries of the parcel(s) to be subdivided fully balanced and
closed, showing all bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey
in the field. The surveyor of record shall also provide a copy of the computer
closure, properly stamped and signed showing registration number. All
dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
2. Any excepted parcel(s) within or surrounded by the plat boundaries shall be
noted as "Not a Part of This Subdivision" and show all bearings and distances
of the excepted parcel as determined by an accurate survey in the field. All
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 20
dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
3. Location and description of cardinal points to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referenced. Each of two
separate corners of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by course and
distance to separate section corners or quarter-section corners. All
subdivision survey data including boundary bearings and distances and lot
closure and area calculations shall be submitted to the Town by an Arizona
registered Land Surveyor.
4. Location of all physical encroachments upon the boundaries of the tract.
5. Total subdivision gross acres, benchmark information and basis of bearing
information.
6. Total number of lots, tracts and parcels, and the size, in square feet, of each
lot, tract or parcel. The size of lots, tracts or parcels greater than ten acres in
size may be expressed in acres.
D. Descriptive Data. The following descriptive data shall be required as part of all final
plat submittals.
1. Names, centerlines, right of way lines, courses, length and width of all public
streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and utility easements; radii, point of
tangency, curve lengths, and central angles of all curvilinear streets, and
alleys, radii of all rounded street line intersections.
2. All drainage easements and/or tracts shall be shown on all residential plats.
No structure shall be allowed in these easements that will obstruct drainage.
All major drainage ways shall be dedicated drainage easements, right-of-way
or tracts as determined by the Town Engineering Manager. Commercial and
industrial plats which provide self-contained and privately owned
underground drainage systems and structures shall be required to provide
private drainage easements within their sites. Public drainage easements shall
be required for all retention basins which accept drainage from a public street.
Any channel or wash within a residential or commercial project site that has a
Q100 storm event flow of 100 CFS or greater shall be contained within a
drainage easement designated as a tract.
3. All lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers throughout the plat. All
"tracts" and "parcels" shall be designated, lettered, or named and clearly
dimensioned; parcels which are not part of the subdivision shall be so
designated. Ownership and maintenance responsibility for common open
space areas and tracts shall be indicated on the plat.
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 21
4. Location, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs, and central angles of all sites to be
dedicated to the public with the use clearly indicated.
5. Location of all adjoining subdivisions with name, date, book, and page
number of recordation noted, or if unrecorded, so noted.
6. Any proposed private deed restrictions to be imposed upon the plat or any
part or parts thereof pertaining to the intended use of the land, and to be
recognized by the Town, shall be noted on the plat (see Sec.4.5 (G) for
details).
7. All existing private easements within, on, or over the plat shall be indicated,
dimensioned, and noted as to their use. The location and widths of all
easements for right-of-way provided for public services, utilities, or drainage,
and any limitations of the easements.
a. The following notation shall be placed on all final plats that provide
drainage easements: “No structure of any kind shall be constructed,
nor any vegetation be planted or allowed to grow within on or over
any drainage easement, which would obstruct or divert the flow of
storm water. The Town may, if it so desires, construct and/or
maintain drainage facilities on or under the land of the easement”.
E. Dedication and Acknowledgment.
1. Dedication. There shall be required as part of the final plat submittal a
statement of dedication of all streets, alleys, drainage ways and drainage
detention/retention basins, pedestrian/bicycle ways, equestrian trails and
easements, and other easements for public use, including sanitation, utility,
fire and other emergency related vehicles, executed by the person or persons
holding title of record, by persons holding titles as vendees under land
contract, by the spouse(s) of said parties, lien holders and all other parties
having an interest in the property . If lands dedicated are liened, the lien
holder shall also sign the plat. Dedication shall include a written location by
Section, Township and Range, of the tract. If the plat contains private streets,
a public easement shall be reserved which shall include the right to install and
maintain utilities in any approved private street, including refuse collection,
fire and other emergency services.
2. Acknowledgment of Dedication. Execution of dedication shall be
acknowledged and certified by a Notary Public.
F. Final Plat Approval.
1. Upon approval of the improvement plans and all related engineering
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 22
documents, reports and other information, and receipt of a request for Town
Council action from the Town Engineering Manager, the Town Clerk shall
place the plat on the agenda of a Council meeting, where upon the Town
Council shall approve or deny the plat.
2. If the Town Council approves the plat, the Town Clerk shall transcribe a
Certificate of Approval upon the plat, over the Mayor's signature, first
making sure that the other certifications required by this section have been
duly signed.
3. When the certificate of approval by the Town Council has been transcribed
on the plat, the Engineering Division shall retain the recording copy until the
Town Engineering Manager certifies that the improvement plans have been
approved; a computer closure of the plat has been received; the Engineer’s
estimated cost of said improvements have been approved by the Town
Engineering Manager; the subdivision improvement construction assurances
are in the form and amount to the satisfaction of the Town Community
Development Director and that any drainage or other restrictive covenants
have been signed, notarized and received from the subdivider.
4. Upon receipt of the recording fees and documents listed in Subsection 4.5 F.3
the Town shall then cause the final plat to be recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder of Maricopa County or Pinal County (whichever county the
development is located in).
G. Required Certification, Signatures, and Notes
Multiple notations are required to appear on a final plat. The notations that are
standard on every final plat include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Assurance Statement as Follows:
Assurance Statement:
Assurance in the form of a cash, performance or subdivision bond or
irrevocable letter of credit in an amount of “$_________” has been deposited
with the Town Engineering Manager to guarantee construction of the required
subdivision improvements.
2. Conveyance and Dedication Statement as Follows:
Conveyance and Dedication:
Know all men by these presents that (owner's name), as owner, have
subdivided (or re-subdivided) under the name of (name of subdivision), (add
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 23
Section, Township and Range) of the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian,
Maricopa County, Arizona as shown platted hereon, and hereby publishes
this plat as and for the plat of said (subdivision name), and hereby declares
that said plat sets forth the location and gives the dimensions of all lots,
easements, tracts and streets constituting the same, and that each lot, tract and
street shall be known by the number, letter and name given each respectively,
and that (owner's name), as owner, hereby dedicates to the public for use as
such the streets and hereby grants to the public the drainage and public utility
easements as shown on said plat. In witness (owner's name), as owner, has
hereunto caused its name to be signed and the same to be attested by the
signature of (owner or designated signatory and title)
By: Date:
Owner's Name and Title
3. Notary Acknowledgment Statement as Follows:
Notary Acknowledgment:
State of Arizona )
County of Maricopa/Pinal )
On this, the day of , (year), before me the
undersigned (title) personally appeared (Name) who
acknowledges that he/she executed the foregoing instrument for the purposes
contained therein.
In witness whereof I hereunto set my hand and official seal
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
4. Town Approval Signatures Blocks as Follows:
Town Approval:
Approved by the Town Council of Queen Creek, Arizona, this day of
, (year).
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 24
By: Attest: ____________
Mayor Town Clerk
Department Approvals:
This plat was approved as to form by the Town Engineering Manager and the
Town Planning Manager.
By: date:
Town Engineering Manager
By: date:
Town Planning Manager
Surveyors Certification:
This is to certify the survey and subdivision premises described and platted
hereon were made under my direction during the month of , (year)
that the plat is correct and accurate, that the monuments shown hereon have
been located or established as described and lot corners shall be permanently
set.
(Surveyor's
name and registration number) (Stamp)
(Surveyor's address)
6. Certificate of Assured Water Supply as follows for all plats. This requirement
may be waived by the Town Engineering Manager for commercial plats
based on site specific conditions or other information related to the project.
Assured Water Supply
The Arizona Department of Water Resources has granted a Certificate of
Assured Water Supply, DWR File No. ________
7. Deed Restriction Information as Follows:
Covenants, Codes and Restrictions for (name of subdivision) Queen Creek,
Arizona are recorded in (document recording number) , (county name)
County Records.
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 25
SEC. 4.6 REPLATS.
A. Any plat involving either of the following two conditions shall be processed in
accordance with Section 4.5 of this Ordinance as provided in Section 4.1 of this
Ordinance.
1. Dedication of land for a public street or any off-site public improvements.
Dedications shall comply with all procedures set forth in Chapter 4 of this
Ordinance.
2. Abandonment of a street, alley or public utility easement or other recorded
easement in a previously recorded subdivision. Replatting of the affected area,
if required, shall be processed concurrently with the abandonment and
recorded immediately subsequent to the recordation of the abandonment
B. The merger of two lots through the use of a lot tie shall comply with the
requirements and procedures set forth in this Chapter, as well as the lot tie/merger
agreement shown in the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and
Procedures Manual.
C. Division of a single lot into two separate parcels, shall comply with the requirements
set forth in this Chapter and processed as a “lot split”.
SEC. 4.7 ABANDONMENT OF A RECORDED SUBDIVISION.
A. The abandonment of all or part of a recorded subdivision approved pursuant to the
laws of the State of Arizona may be initiated by written petition to the Town Council.
The petition shall be signed by all owners of real property in said subdivision
requesting abandonment of all streets, alleys and easements within said subdivision
and giving the legal description and recording information thereof.
B. Applications for the abandonment of a recorded subdivision are filed with the Town
Engineering Manager and referred for recommendation to the appropriate Town staff
and utility companies. After Town Council approval of the abandonment of any
streets, alleys and easements within the subdivision, and after Town Council approval
of the abandonment resolution for the recorded subdivision, and after the
abandonment resolutions are recorded with the County Recorder's Office, the
subdivision is removed from the official maps.
C. Abandonment of public right of way and public use easements may be initiated by
submission of a right of way or easement abandonment application signed by all
property owners adjacent to, or whose land includes, the public way or easement
proposed for abandonment to the Town Council. All such requests will be referred to
the Town Engineering Manager for review and recommendation. The Town
September 2007 Chapter 4 Page 4 - 26
Engineering Manager will consult with appropriate Town and utility company staff to
evaluate the affect of the abandonment on present and future transit and utility
systems planned for the area. After Town Council approval of the abandonment of
any street, alley or other public right of way or public use easement, the abandonment
resolution shall be recorded with the County Recorder's Office, and the right of way
or use easement abandoned..
SEC. 4.8 CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENTS.
A. The application requirements, processing and approval regulations contained within
this Ordinance shall apply to all condominium developments.
B. Condominium subdivisions shall also comply with the provisions of this ordinance
and The Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance. The location of all building shown
on the plat and the manner in which the airspace is to be divided in conveying the
condominium shall be clearly defined and a plat completed as would be done for any
other subdivision of property.
C. In order for the condominium subdivision application to be considered complete, the
applicant shall provide to the Town any plans, specifications, reports and/or analysis
needed to show that the proposed condominium subdivision is in compliance with
this Ordinance and The Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance, including but not
limited to grading plans, site plans, floor plans, elevations, and landscape plans,
drainage reports and traffic impact analyses.
October 2007 Chapter 5 Page 5 -1
CHAPTER 5
PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENTS AND
DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLANS
SEC. 5.0 GENERAL.
A. The purpose of a Planned Area Development (PAD) or a Development Master Plan
(DMP) is to provide for the orderly development of land while permitting flexibility
in the design and development of residential, commercial, and/or industrial
environments of a quality which could not be achieved by traditional lot by lot
development under conventional subdivision design. In areas of environmental
sensitivity such as the San Tan foothills, Queen Creek or the Sonoqui Wash, or in an
effort to preserve open space or agricultural areas free of development that may
otherwise occur, a PAD or DMP utilizing a cluster development option is
recommended. Use of a PAD or a DMP will allow development of residential
subdivisions with lots that are smaller and arranged differently than would otherwise
be required by the zoning district within which the project is located.
Any rezoning necessary for the development of a PAD shall be processed in
conjunction with, or prior, to consideration of a preliminary plat. Approval of the
DMP is to be done in conjunction with a rezoning request, or as a separate second
step, in the development of the property in question. Approval of a DMP separate
from a rezoning case will be processed as using the same standards as would be
required for a rezoning request, as described in Article 3 of the Town of Queen Creek
zoning ordinance.
B. Any PAD development shall abide by the subdivision design standards and principles
outlined in Chapter 6 of this Ordinance unless otherwise modified by the Town
Council at the time of zoning approval.
SEC. 5.1 PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT.
A. An application for a PAD shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Division.
In addition to the submittal requirements outlined in Chapter 6 of this Ordinance,
any application for a PAD shall submit the information, and provide the design
elements and amenities as set forth in the Planned Area Development Overlay
District of the Zoning Ordinance. Additional information may be necessary as
requested by the Planning Department to adequately review the project.
B. The development progression, for review and approval, of the subdivision of land
utilizing a PAD follows the same progressive stages (Stages 1-5) as outlined in
Chapter 4 of this Ordinance.
C. As a prerequisite to the commission hearing for any planned area development,
development master plan or cluster development, the applicant is required to hold at
October 2007 Chapter 5 Page 5 -2
least one neighborhood meeting at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to their
scheduled planning commission meeting.
The purpose of the meeting is to provide a means for the applicant,
surrounding neighbors and homeowners associations to review preliminary
development proposals and solicit input and exchange information about the
proposed development
Neighborhood meetings shall be held at a location near or on the development site.
The meeting shall be held on a week day evening or weekend day at a reasonable time
and in a publicly accessible place.
Notification requirements for planned area developments; notice of the meeting shall
be provided by the applicant as follows:
(1) The development site shall be posted with at least one sign having a minimum
sign area of sixteen (16) square feet with black copy on a white background not less
than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the neighborhood meeting. Site
that exceed five (5) acres in size and/or have frontage on more than one (1) street
shall post additional signs at the rate of one additional sign per every ten (10)
additional acres or one sign for each street with a maximum of four (4) signs per
project. Such signs shall be clearly legible and wherever possible placed adjacent to
the right of way of a public street. The notice shall contain the date, time, and
location of the meeting and a summary of the request. It shall also have contact
information for the application’s representative. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to use reasonable efforts to maintain the sign once it has been placed on the
property.
(2) Notice shall be provided by first class mail not less than thirty (30) calendar days
prior to the scheduled commission meeting and not less than fifteen (15) calendar
days prior to the date of the neighborhood meeting to:
A. All property owners of record, chairpersons and management association
of homeowners associations, and any neighborhood associations on record
with the town at a distance determined in Table 1.
B. The above noted property owners and management association names
shall be obtained from Maricopa County or Pinal County assessor’s office, as
appropriate.
(3) a meeting summary shall be submitted to the community development department
not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the planning commission meeting with
a written summary of the issues and discussion from the meeting and list of
attendees.
October 2007 Chapter 5 Page 5 -3
Table 1-Notification Requirements
Type of Case* Distance Requirement
Minor General Plan Amendments 900’
Major General Plan Amendment 1200’
Rezoning, 5 acres and less 900’
Rezoning, above 5 acres 1200’
Site Plan, 5 acres and less 900’
Site Plan, above 5 acres 1200’
Indoor Conditional Use Permit, up to 2,500 square
feet of building/leased area
900’
Indoor Conditional Use Permit, above 2,500
square feet of building/leased area
1200’
Outdoor Conditional Use Permit, 5 acres and less 900’
Outdoor Conditional Use Permit, above 5 acres 1200’
Board of Adjustment Case 900’
*Any case that is part of another application with a larger notification distance, the larger notification distance will be required
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 1
CHAPTER 6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS AND PRINCIPLES
SEC. 6.0 PURPOSE AND DESIGN PRINCIPLES
A. The purpose of the Subdivision Ordinance is to create functional, attractive
developments, minimize adverse impacts on the community, and to ensure that future
subdivisions will conform to the community's expectations. To accommodate this
purpose, all subdivision plats shall conform to the following standards which are
designed to result in a well-planned community.
B. The design standard section of the Subdivision Ordinance is to provide the
development community with a consistent set of standards to guide the physical
development and the visual quality of the community. The standards stem from six
main design principles which are policy statements and the basis for the design
standards.
1. DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
a. To reflect, maintain, and enhance the friendly small town rural
characteristics of Queen Creek and it's surroundings.
b. To create a distinctive, high quality environment.
c. To encourage the design of sustainable development.
d. To provide the public utility infrastructure needed to accommodate
new neighborhoods and structures with the utility systems required to
accommodate the needs of their future occupants
e. To promote connectivity of people, neighborhoods, community
facilities and services, and the open space network of the community
via the equestrian, bicycle, and pedestrian trail system.
f. To encourage traditional neighborhoods and residential developments
that vary in density, lot sizes, housing type, architectural style, and
provide open space.
g. To provide and maintain a functional and efficient traffic circulation
system.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 2
SEC. 6.1 GENERAL
A. Every subdivision shall conform to the goals, objectives, and policies of the General
Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, other ordinances and regulations of the town, and to the
Arizona Revised Statutes. In the event two or more requirements conflict, the most
restrictive requirement shall apply.
B. Where the area proposed for development contains all or part of a park, a school, flood
control facility, or other public site, as shown on the General Plan or as recommended
by the Town Council, such site shall be reserved for acquisition by the appropriate
-463.01 (D) and (E
An agreement should be reached between the subdivider and the appropriate public
agency regarding time, method, and cost of such acquisition. Dedication of such sites
by the developer may be considered by the town.
C. Every subdivision and new development shall also meet the adequate public facilities
requirements of the Town described in Chapter 5, Section 5.1 Adequate Public
Facilities of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance. All new subdivisions at
the time of rezoning shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this article.
SEC. 6.2 SUBDIVISION SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
A. General Design Requirements
Every residential, commercial and industrial subdivision shall reflect:
a. The development takes into consideration the General Plan and any area specific
plans approved for the site, as well as the other regulations controlling the
development of the subject land.
b. The development of the site shall be based, among other criteria, on an
environmental site assessment. To the maximum extent practicable
development and other disturbance activities shall be located:
i. To preserve the natural features of the site (such as significant
vegetation and rock outcroppings), and:
ii. To avoid areas of environmental sensitivity (such as slopes in
excess of 30%), and:
iii. To avoid undisturbed wash channels and to minimize
disturbances and alterations of the natural features.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 3
iv. To avoid disturbing significant native vegetation.
c. The following specific areas shall be preserved as undeveloped open space, to
the extent consistent with the reasonable utilization of land, and in accordance
with applicable state and local regulations:
i. Land in a floodplain, as defined by state and local regulations;
ii. Habitat of endangered wildlife, as identified on federal and state lists:
iii. Land areas that have been identified to include subsidence fissures.
d. The development shall be designed to:
i. Avoid adversely affecting ground water and aquifer recharge;
ii. Limit cut and fill grading
iii. Avoid unnecessary impervious cover;
iv. Prevent flooding;
v. Provide adequate access to lots and sites;
vi. Mitigate adverse effects of noise, traffic, drainage and utilities on
neighboring properties;
vii. Conform to the Storm Water Pollution Protection Plan
Residential Subdivisions
1. Regardless of the density of the individual developments, single family
residential subdivisions, and condominium or multi-family subdivisions may
be required to provide open space, provide transition areas, provide
landscaping, and provide physical connections to adjacent neighborhoods and
to the community open space network and trail system.
2. Those portions of the community open space network and/or trail system
adjacent to, or within, the area proposed for development shall be
incorporated by that development. Construction of these open spaces and/or
trails shall be the responsibility of the subdivider/developer and shall be part
of the subdivision improvements. These trails shall be part of a "tract" and
maintained by a Homeowners/Property Owners Association with the
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 4
exception of the Sonoqui Wash Trail, Queen Creek Wash Trail, and those
minor trails as specifically delineated in the Queen Creek General Plan which
shall be dedicated to the public.
3. The development, through the Planned Area Development (PAD) process as
described in Article 4.10 of The Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance,
upon the requisite findings, may vary lot areas and dimensions, yards, and
setbacks from the standards specified in the zoning district(s), in effect over
the area considered for subdivision provided that such variations are approved
by the Town Council prior to or in conjunction with the preliminary plat
approval for the subdivision.
4. Landscaped areas shall be maintained between rear and side street lot lines
which adjoin Arterial and Major Collector rights-of-way to a depth equal to
the streetside yard setback required by the zoning district of the subdivision,
or 30 feet, whichever is greater.
Commercial and Industrial Subdivisions
Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be designed according to the
same principles governing the design of residential developments; namely,
buildings shall be located according to topography; factors such as drainage,
traffic, noise, odor, and surrounding land uses considered in siting buildings;
sufficient access shall be provided; adverse impacts buffered; and open space,
and landscaping provided.
B. Open Space Requirements
The purpose of these open space regulations is to provide open space within each
subdivision please refer to Article 5, Section 5.5 of the Town of Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance for additional requirements.
1. If the subdivision is part of a Development Master Plan (DMP) or a Planned
Area Development (PAD), that has been approved by the Town, the open
space requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
approved DMP or PAD as described in Article 4, Section 4.10 of the Town of
Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance.
2. Open space area shall mean any area of land which can be enjoyed by people.
Open space could include landscaped or hardscaped plazas, paseo and
promenades connecting commercial parking areas to adjacent commercial
uses, any parking area landscaping that exceeds that which is required by the
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 5
Zoning Ordinance, fountains, and sitting areas all meant to provide an open
park like atmosphere. Also playgrounds, golf courses, bicycle trails (but not
bike lanes within the public right-of-way), pedestrian trails (not residential
sidewalks unless detached from the curb - creating a “boulevard strip” or as
specified in Sec. 6.2(b)(3)), equestrian tracts and trail heads, and the required
transition areas. Open space does not include parking areas, vacant or
undeveloped lots.
3. If the subdivider/developer chooses to utilize a tree-lined street cross section,
as depicted in the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures
Manual the entire ”boulevard strip” area, inclusive of that portion of the
public right-of-way starting from the back of curb and including any
easement specifically granted for landscaping or pedestrian purposes, may be
calculated as part of the required open space.
4. If a frontage road design is utilized as shown in the Town of Queen Creek
Design Standards and Procedures Manual, then the minimum landscape area
between the frontage road and the arterial or major collector may be
calculated as part of the required open space. If the development backs to an
arterial or major collector road, as addressed in Sec. 6.2(H), then the thirty
(30) foot minimum non-buildable landscape parcel or easement may be
calculated as part of the required open space.
5. Open space intended to fulfill these open space requirements shall be
calculated upon the net acres of the subdivision whether residential,
commercial, or industrial. Net acres are defined as: total acres exclusive of
the area required for arterial or collector street right-of-way dedications, tracts
and school/public site reservations.
6. The open space areas shall be designed in such a manner as to be easily
accessible to all lots. Accessible means 1/6 of a mile or 880 feet between any
one lot and an entrance area allowing people, bikes or equestrians to enter
into the open space area or view the open space area.
7. Retention or detention basins shall not qualify as required open space area
unless 50% or more of the active/usable area is above the 2-year-6- hour
storm. The exception to this standard is for commercial and industrial
developments which shall be permitted to calculate the retention or detention
area as part of the required open space area.
a. Retention/detention basins shall be given a "natural" character where
possible in accordance with the Town's requirements. Such storm
water basins shall be constructed with/of natural materials.
Terracing, berming and contouring is required to naturalize and
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 6
enhance the aesthetics of the basin, as shown in the Town of Queen
Creek Design Standards and Procedures Manual.
b. Retention/detention basins shall be designed to have Tot Lots, Play
Courts and similar facilities above the 2 year, 6 hour storm water
surface level.
c. Retention/detention basins slopes in residential areas shall be
designed to prevent erosion and appear natural. Maximum slopes
shall be (1) foot vertical to (6) feet horizontal and meander at the top
of slope to minimize the rectangular box look. Modifications from
this criterion require approval of the Town Engineering Manager. In
commercial and industrial areas, slopes with a maximum ratio of (1)
foot vertical to (4) feet horizontal for basins which are not visible to
the public may be permitted with the approval of the Town
Engineering Manager.
d. Retention basins less than two (2) net acres (actual retention area)
shall be limited to a maximum depth of three (3) feet below the top of
the basin slope. Basins greater than two (2) net acres shall be limited
to a maximum depth of (1) one percent of the narrowest basin
dimension. Total depth of basins shall not exceed four (4) feet
without approval of the Town Engineering Manager.
e. Retention basins located in buffer area tracts shall be limited to a
maximum depth of two (2) feet.
f. Underground retention shall be utilized when the required on-lot
retention volumes cannot be met by use of conventional surface
retention basins.
g. Pedestrian and bicycle paths shall be designed to be above the 2-year-
6-hour storm event.
h. Drainage channels with earthen or rock lining shall have their side
slopes limited to a maximum of (1) one foot vertical to (4) four feet
horizontal. Channels located in commercial and industrial areas
which are not visible by the public and provide a concrete or other
impermeable surface lining may have a side slope of up to a
maximum of (1) one foot vertical to (2) feet horizontal, subject to
approval by the Town Engineering Manager.
i. The following statement shall appear on the final plat of all
subdivisions with common area retention basins: “All retention
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 7
basins must be maintained to drain within (36) thirty-six hours after a
storm. The owners of any such basin failing to meet this requirement
must take corrective action to bring the basin into compliance.”
8. Required open space for all types of subdivisions shall be as prescribed in the
following Table 1:
TABLE 1 - OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT
REQUIRED PERCENTAGE
OF OPEN SPACE
Rural Development (R1-108 and larger)
0 %
Estate Development (Rural-43 and R1-54)
2 %
Suburban Development-Type A (R1-35)
5 %
Suburban Development-Type B (R1-18, R1-15 and
R1-12)
7.5 %
Urban Development-Type A (R1-7and R1-9)
20 %
Urban Development-Type B (multi-family zones)
100% 1st Floor F.A.R.
50% 3rd Floor F.A.R.
Commercial Development (*)
15 %
Industrial Development
10 %
(*) Except those tracts located within the designated Town Center Area which shall abide by
the open space requirements of the Town Center Zoning District.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 8
H. Access Requirements.
1. Every lot shall have frontage onto a fully-improved, publicly- dedicated and
accepted right-of-way that meets the Town of Queen Creek street standards as
shown in the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures
Manual. Private streets that meet Town of Queen Creek street standards may
provide frontage to lots if the development is approved through the Planned
Area Development (PAD) process.
2. Rural and Estate subdivisions shall, where possible, front onto and take
access from collector and local streets. Where arterial access is required to
accommodate new subdivisions, the need for frontage roads will be evaluated
by the Town Engineering Manager and Traffic Engineer.
3. Suburban and Urban type developments shall be designed to either:
a. Provide lots that front to local streets as set forth in the Circulation
Element of the General Plan; or
b. Utilize a frontage road and provide lots that face and take access from
the frontage road.
4. Pathways, which include pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian ways, or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community
facilities shall have a minimum right of way width of 20 feet for circulation.
Pedestrian ways may be used for utility purposes.
5. For Suburban and Urban developments a non-buildable parcel, easement or
additional right-of-way equal to the street side setback of the Zoning District,
or thirty (30) feet, whichever is greater, shall be platted between any street
side or rear-yard property line of any developable lot and the right-of-way
line of any Major Collector or Arterial Street.
6. Commercial and industrial lots which are developed and platted as part of a
Planned Area Development (PAD) which designates and incorporates private
driveways or roadways as tracts on the subdivision plat and in the project
Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&R’s) will be deemed to have
access to a public right-of-way.
SEC. 6.3 STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT
A. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and orderly movement
of traffic and pedestrians; meet, but not exceed the needs of present and future
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 9
population served; have a simple and logical pattern with a minimum number of culde-
sacs; respect natural features and topography, and; present an attractive
streetscape.
B. In residential subdivisions, the road system shall be designed to serve the needs of the
neighborhood, discourage local street use by through traffic, and provide connectivity
to adjacent developments and unsubdivided land as appropriate.
C. The development of roadways built to Arterial or Major Collector street standards
shall match the Circulation Element of the Queen Creek General Plan, and shall also
be required where needed as recommended by the Town Engineering Manager and
approved by the Town Council.
D. Street layout shall provide for the continuation of such streets as the General Plan or
Town Engineering Manager may designate. Local streets shall be designed to
discourage their use by through traffic, although connectivity may be required for
pedestrian access.
E. Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed Arterial or
Major Collector right-of-way, non-buildable landscaped parcels or tracts equaling at
least the depth of the minimum street side-yard setback of the base Zoning District,
or thirty (30) feet, whichever is greater, shall be platted with non-vehicular access
easements along the Arterial or Major Collector right-of-way.
F. Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to produce desirable
lots of maximum utility, streets of reasonable gradient, and the facilitation of
adequate drainage.
G. Where private streets are approved through the PAD process, such streets shall be
constructed to Town public street specifications and shall be placed into specific
"street tracts" of land. Statements shall be contained on the plat and in the Deed
Restrictions, the Homeowners Association By-laws and the Covenants, Conditions
and restrictions (CCR’s) that those streets are declared private subject to an easement
authorizing use by emergency and public service vehicles, and remain the permanent
responsibility of the Homeowners Association. If at any time the streets are proposed
to be dedicated to, and accepted by the Town, the streets must first have been
designed and constructed to standards specified by the Town for public streets, and
demonstrate they have been maintained to the current public street maintenance
standards, as determined by the Public Works Manager
H. Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial subdivisions as approved by the
Town Council. Where needed, they shall have a 20 foot minimum width.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 10
SEC. 6.4 STREET DESIGN.
A. Design of Streets: The design of streets shall conform to standards established by
this Ordinance and the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures
Manual”.
B. Private Street. Private streets shall conform to above stated design standards unless
otherwise approved by the Town Council. Private streets shall be placed within their
own parcel or tract of land and shall only be approved through a (PAD). Where site
conditions necessitate unique design solutions, modifications may be recommended
by the Town Engineering Manager for consideration by the Town Council.
C. Cul-de-sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall be constructed as specified in the Town
of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures Manual. The Town Engineering
Manager may recommend an equally functional design for vehicular turning and
backing areas where extreme conditions justify. The maximum length of cul-de-sac
streets shall be 600 feet or 20 homes and 1,200 feet or 40 homes if all homes are fire
sprinkled, as measured from the intersection of right-of-way lines to the extreme
depth of the turning circle along the street centerline. An exception may be made
where topography justifies but shall not be made merely because the subdivision has
restrictive boundary dimensions, wherein provision should be made for extension of
street pattern to the adjoining unplatted parcel and a temporary turnaround installed.
(Cul-de-sac specifications are detailed in the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards
and Procedures Manual)
D. Dead-end Streets: Dead-end streets will not be approved except in locations
recommended by the Town Engineering Manager as necessary to future development
of adjacent lands.
E. Private Access and Driveways: Access from private property to any dedicated
street shall be constructed in accordance with permits issued by the Town. Width of
driveway at the property line shall be a minimum of 12 feet and a maximum of 40
feet. The width will depend on the access to be served i.e., residential or
commercial/industrial uses. Minimum driveway spacing shall be as defined in the
MCDOT Roadway Design Standards Manual. Exceptions to this requirement may be
approved by the Town Engineering Manager based on unusual site constraints.
F. Street Intersections:
1. Streets intersecting an arterial or collector street shall not vary from 90
degrees by more than 10 degrees. Intersection of all other streets shall not
vary from 90 degrees by more than 15 degrees.
2. Local streets intersecting collector or arterial streets shall have a tangent
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 11
section of centerline at least 150 feet in length measured from the right of
way line of the major street, except that no such tangent is required when
local street curve has a centerline radius greater than 400 feet with the center
located on the major street right of way line. Where topographic conditions
make necessary other treatment to secure the best overall design and
vehicular sight visibility, these standards may be varied by the Town Council
upon the recommendation of the Town Engineering Manager.
3. Street intersections with more than four legs are not allowed.
4. Street jogs with centerline offsets less than one hundred and twenty-five
(125) feet shall not be allowed.
5. Minimum intersection spacing shall be as defined in the MCDOT Roadway
Design Manual, unless otherwise approved by the Town of Queen Creek
Design Standards and Procedures Manual.
6. A thirty three (33) foot by thirty three (33) foot triangle shall be provided at
each property line corner of the intersection involving two collector streets,
two arterial streets or arterial and collector streets. A twenty (20) foot by
twenty (20) foot triangle shall be provided at each property line corner of the
intersection of two local streets and local streets to collector or arterial street.
7. All street intersections shall be designed to meet the minimum sight distance
visibility requirement standards for horizontal curvature, vertical curvature
and other obstructions as defined in the current edition of the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
manual.
8. No berms, wall, monuments, signs or landscaping over twenty-four (24)
inches in height as measured from the top of the curb, shall be permitted
within the intersection sight triangle, or stopping distance area, as defined in
the Current Edition of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets, published by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
9. Exceptions to these requirements may be approved by the Town Engineering
Manager based on terrain or other site specific conditions.
G. Street Pavement and Structural Design:
1. The traveled way of all streets shall be surfaced with asphaltic concrete. The
placing of asphaltic concrete shall be accomplished under generally accepted
construction techniques provided in Section 321 of the MAG Standard and/or
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 12
as shown in the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures
Manual. Alternative pavement standards may be approved by the Town
Engineering Manager, based on specific site conditions.
2. The thickness of base and surface treatment for all streets shall be based on
soil analysis and pavement thickness design as recommended by the
developers Geotechnical Engineers Soils Report and/or as provided in the
Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures Manual, whichever
is most structurally competent.
3. All developments shall submit a soils report and pavement recommendation
prepared by an Arizona Registered Geotechnical Engineer. The pavement
report will recommend at least two alternative structural sections for each
street and driveway classification. Additional asphalt may be substituted for
untreated base at a ratio recommended by the Geotechnical Engineer.
H. Landscaping:
Landscaping shall be installed as specified in the Town of Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinance. The placement of landscape materials and street design shall be
coordinated to ensure placement of landscaping, berms, walls and other features do
not obstruct sight line distances as defined in other sections of this code, and do not
obstruct visibility of traffic control devices.
I. Pedestrian Circulation Systems:
1. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets located in multi-family,
commercial and industrial zoning districts.
2. Sidewalk Standards:
a. Meandering walkways may be required by the Town Engineering
Manager to coordinate with adjacent improvements. Meanders should
maintain a 1 foot minimum distance from the property line or the back
of the sidewalk easement, and should be curbside at all intersections,
and at all industrial, commercial and multi-family driveways.
b. The unobstructed sidewalk widths shall be as shown in the Design
Standards and Procedures Manual for the type of street required.
3. Sidewalks shall be developed in the following manner:
a. Sidewalks shall be required to be located on both sides of all urban
arterial and collector streets, regardless of their location, zoning or the
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 13
number of lots on the street.
b. Sidewalks shall be required to be located on at least one side of any
local street that is within or abuts a single family residential zoning
district that has developable lot area averaging over 18,000 square
feet.
d. Sidewalks to complete existing or planned pedestrian linkages, or
sidewalks leading to a significant pedestrian generator, shall be
required to be located in accordance with an adopted pedestrian
sidewalk or trail plan.
e. Sidewalks may be located outside of the road right-of-way and
within an easement.
e. Exceptions to these sidewalk standards may be approved by the Town
Engineering Manager if the circumstances of the specific application
are such that sidewalks are either not required or their use modified
based on topography, adjacent existing or planned land uses or other
site specific conditions.
For additional information on the Town’s street design and construction standards
addressed in this section (Section 6.4) please refer to the Town of Queen Creek Design
Standards and Procedures Manual.
SEC. 6.5 LOT PLATTING.
A. Conventional single-family residential lots shall not have a width-to-depth ratio
greater than one to three. Lot dimensions for single family residential lots which are
part of a “cluster” development or PAD will be determined at the time of project
approval.
B. All residential, commercial and industrial lots must be developable without the need
of a variance, waiver or further discretionary approvals from the Town. Prior to plat
approval the Town may require additional documentation, including but not limited
to engineered concept plans, for lots with questionable developability.
C. Corner residential lots shall generally be designed larger to accommodate the
increased setback requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
D. Residential side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines,
except where other treatment may be justified in the opinion of the Town
Engineering Manager, based on site specific conditions.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 14
E. Residential lots extending through the block and having frontage on two parallel
streets which are both local streets or one of which is a local street and the other is a
collector street shall not be permitted; except where approved by the Town
Engineering Manager based on site specific conditions.
F. Where steep topography (exceeding 15% in grade), unusual soil conditions, drainage
problems, abrupt changes in land use or traffic safety based on sight and visibility or
inadequacy of public facilities that would not allow a lot to be buildable without a
variance or waiver, the Town Council may deny the creation of the lot.
G. Individual residential lots on curvilinear streets shall have rear lot lines consisting of
a series of straight lines with the points of deflection occurring at the junction of side
and rear lot lines, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineering Manager.
SEC. 6.6 EASEMENT PLANNING.
A. Easements will be required for all private utilities outside of the street right-of-way
and shall be placed along lot lines as required by the utility companies and/or as
directed by the Town Engineering Manager..
B. Where a stream, wash or important surface drainage course abuts or crosses a
development, dedication of a drainage easement of a width sufficient to permit
widening, deepening, relocating, or protecting and maintaining said water course
shall be required. Drainage easement width shall be approved by the Town
Engineering Manager, and where appropriate, the Maricopa and/or Pinal County
Flood Control District based upon the hydrological analysis of a 100 year frequency
storm.
C. All drainage channels, washes, or ditches which convey a100 year frequency storm
flow volume exceeding a flow rate of one hundred (100) cubic feet per second shall
be designated as Tracts with drainage easements. When it is determined by the Town
Engineering Manager that the topographic conditions and wash alignments on the
parcel will result in extraordinary development constraints, a drainage easement may
be accepted, without a Tract designation.
D. All storm water retention basins shall be designated as drainage easements.
E. Vehicular cross-access easements shall be required where deemed necessary by the
Town Engineering Manager and Town Traffic Engineer to accommodate lot planning
issues, minimize driveway locations and provide vehicular accessibility to adjacent
properties.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 15
F. Sidewalk easements of a minimum of five (5) feet in width shall be required when
the proposed sidewalk is not contained within the public right of way. The final
sidewalk easement width will be determined by the Town Engineering Manager.
SEC. 6.7 STREET NAMING
A. Street names shall comply with the overall Maricopa and Pinal County street naming
systems for section line and half section line roads, as well as per the Town of Queen
Creek Street Naming and Lot Numbering System shown in the Town of Queen Creek
Design Standards and Procedures Manual.
B. Street names should be consistent with the natural alignment and extension of
existing named streets.
C. The developer shall propose the street names at the preliminary plat submittal stage
and the names shall be recommended by the Commission and approved by Council.
D. Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections and be in place by the time
the street pavement is ready for use. Specifications for design, construction, location,
and installation shall conform to the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and
Procedures Manual.
SEC. 6.8 DRAINAGE
A. Proper and adequate provision shall be made for disposal of storm water; this shall
apply equally to grading of private properties and to public streets. Existing major
water courses shall be maintained as drainage ways. Drainage systems shall meet the
requirements of the "Drainage Design Manual" for Maricopa County Arizona,
Volumes I, II & III.
B. Post development flows can not exceed pre-development flows in peak runoff,
volume, or velocity and may not concentrate sheet flows without down stream offsite
control.
C. If drywells are necessary they shall be spaced as far a part as possible and only 50%
of the percolation capacity can be used in calculating the required number of drywells
to be utilized. In addition, a private maintenance plan shall be prepared that provides
for routine inspection and maintenance to the approval of the Town Engineering
Manager.
SEC. 6.9 SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 16
A. Subdivisions within the Town sewer service area shall install sewer collection lines,
and all dwelling units shall be required to connect to the collection system. If there is
no sewer main available at the time of final plat submittal, a septic system shall be
installed following the standards established by Maricopa County Environmental
Services and/or the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality for Pinal County.
B. Subdivisions not in the Town sewer service area shall submit a sewer service plan
acceptable to Maricopa County Environmental Services and/or Arizona Department
of Environmental Quality for Pinal County.
C. Septic tanks shall be approved by Maricopa County Environmental Services or the
Arizona Department for Environmental Quality for Pinal County.
D. Sewer lines shall be approved by the Town Engineering Manager and by Maricopa
County Environmental Services and/or the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality for Pinal County.
E. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be
placed behind the right-of-way line or two (2) feet behind the public utility easement,
which ever is greater.
F. Sanitary sewer lines shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide service
connections to abutting unsubdivided land.
G. Every developable lot shall have a separate sewer service lateral, except those lots on
an approved septic system.
SEC. 6.10 WATER SYSTEM
A. Each lot or building unit shall be supplied with potable water in sufficient volume
and pressure for domestic use and fire protection purposes. Design and construction
of any and all facilities relating to the supply, storage, transmission, treatment and
distribution of potable water within or outside of any subdivision must meet with the
written approval of the Town Engineering Manager, water provider and Fire
Department.
B. All design and construction must meet all applicable Town, private water provider
and Maricopa County Environmental Services Department specifications and
requirements in force at the time of plan renewal and approval. If it is necessary for
the Town to apply specifications or requirements not in force at the time of plan
review, but necessary to achieve the orderly and proper development of any portion
of the public/private water system, the Town reserves the right to enforce such
specifications and requirements to insure and protect the public welfare.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 17
C. The developer of a subdivision may be required by the Town of Queen Creek to
supply to the public/private water system an amount of potable water from new
sources and an amount of new water storage facilities to offset the demand on the
existing or planned public/private water system imposed by owners of property or
building units within the subdivision.
D. The Town assumes no liability for providing water to any proposed or actual
subdivision.
E. Water specifications and requirements relating to fire protection are established by
the private water companies and/or the public/private Fire Department. At a
minimum fire protection must be provided in accordance with the currently adopted
Uniform Fire Code.
F. Line Sizing: Minimum size lines for water lines shall be 4 inches without hydrants
and 6 inches with hydrants. Minimum eight inch lines shall be required on dead-end
hydrant lines longer than 300 feet.
G. Valves: There shall be a minimum of three valves at crosses, two valves at tees and
one valve at each fire hydrant tee. Shutdown valving shall be arranged such that no
more then four valves are required to make a shutdown in any section of waterline.
No more than 30 homes nor two fire hydrants shall be out of service during a water
line shutdown.
H. Services:
1. Minimum service tap, service pipe and meter shall be 3/4 inches and shall
serve only one property. A minimum one inch service tap, pipe and meter
servicing a single property shall be required on cul-de-sacs in excess of 600
feet in length, for fire sprinkled residences and for all Suburban
Developments zoned R1-35 and larger.
2. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities
shall be placed behind the right-of-way line or two (2) feet behind the public
utility easement, which ever is greater.
I. Fire Hydrants: Maximum spacing for fire hydrants shall be 500 feet in single family
residential areas and 300 feet in all other residential, commercial and industrial areas.
Fire hydrants shall be required along arterial and major collector roadway frontages at
a minimum spacing of 660 feet, located alternately on each side of the road.
J. Water distribution lines shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide
service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.
October 2007 Chapter 6 Page 6 - 18
SEC. 6.11 STREET LIGHTS.
A. Fixture type, height etc. shall meet the specific criteria established by the Town of
Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures Manual. Street lights shall be
installed at all entrances to a neighborhood and at other locations specified by the
Town Engineering Manager. Determinations of the need for lighting will also be
coordinated with town crime prevention programs and other community needs.
B. Street Light Improvement Districts (SLIDS) are required for most urban residential
subdivisions and may be required by the Town Engineering Manager as needed in
commercial or industrial projects. The need for rural subdivision roadways to be
lighted will depend on the geometric layout, pedestrian/vehicular traffic volumes
and night-to-day accident rations and other pertinent information with the final SLID
determination made by the Town Engineering Manager.
SEC. 6.12 PUBLIC UTILITIES
A. Except as exempted in Section 7-6-3 of the Town Underground Electric, Telephone,
Cable and Communication Lines Ordinance No. 69-95, all existing and new utility
and telephone lines, electric utility distribution feeders, cable television lines, and all
other communication and utility lines adjacent to or within new residential,
commercial, or industrial subdivisions or other areas to be developed within the town
shall be installed underground at the time of development of the property as part of
the required off-site and on-site improvements. The developer of the property shall
be responsible for the costs of the underground construction in accordance with the
underground policy of the serving utility.
B. When as a result of the subdivision development, it is necessary to relocate, renew or
expand existing facilities within or adjacent to the platted area, the subdivider shall
make the necessary arrangements with the serving utility for these installations to be
placed underground. The subdivider shall arrange with the serving utility for, and be
responsible for, the cost of underground service lines to approved street light
locations.
C. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be
placed to the right-of-way line or the public utility easement which ever is greater.
D. Underground utilities shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide
service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 1
Eff date - October 3, 2008
CHAPTER 7
IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
SEC.7.0 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this section to define the responsibility of the subdivider in the
planning, construction and financing of improvements; and to establish
procedures for review and approval of these improvements.
SEC. 7.1 GENERAL
A. Responsibility. The subdivider shall be responsible for all costs, including review
fees, for the installation of the improvements as a stipulation of zoning,
preliminary plat, or site plan review and at least but not limited to the following
improvements:
1. Public/Private Sewers
2. Public/Private Water Supply Systems
3. Grading/ Drainage/Storm Drains
4. Streets/Private Access Ways
5. Alleys (where applicable and approved)
6. Utilities
7. Street Lights
8. Monuments
9. Landscaping
10. Traffic Signals
B. Streets and Public Easements. All streets and public easements within the
boundary lines of the subdivision shall be improved to cross-sections, grades, and
standards outlined in the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures
Manual, or as approved by the Engineering Manager. Where there are existing
streets adjacent to the subdivision, subdivision streets shall be improved to the
intercepting paving line of such existing streets, or to a matching line determined
by the Engineering Manager; transition paving shall be installed as required by
the Engineering Manager. When a subdivision includes a major street which is
not paved or where there is no paved street between the subdivision and a paved
major or collector street, an interim paved two lane street at least twenty-four feet
wide with approved pavement transitional tapers shall be constructed to a
standard approved by the Town Engineering Manager for the major street,
collector or local street right of way to the nearest paved major or collector street.
When an interim access road is required, temporary paving shall be installed in
compliance with the pavement recommendations from a geotechnical report. Such
an interim road shall have sufficient culverts and drainage facilities to allow a 25
year frequency storm to pass under the road section and a 100 year frequency
storm to pass over the road section at a depth not to exceed 6" of water. Dead-end
streets extending 200 feet or more and dead-end interim access roads shall be
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 2
Eff date - October 3, 2008
graded and surfaced with a temporary 40 foot radius turning circle at the road
terminus.
C. Utilities. The subdivider shall be responsible to make the necessary arrangements
with each of the serving utility companies involved for the installation of the
underground facilities. Letters of verification from serving utility companies
indicating that the appropriate arrangements have been made shall be submitted to
the Town Engineering Manager at the time the final subdivision plat is submitted
for approval.
D. Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be installed in accordance with current
Town standards at all corners, angle points, and points of curve; at all street
intersections, and at all corners, angle points and points of curve of all
conservation easements. After all improvements have been installed, a Registered
Land Surveyor shall check the locations of the monuments and certify their
accuracy.
1. Iron pipes shall be set at all lot corners, angle points and points of curve
for each lot within the subdivision within one year of final plat approval
and prior to any lot sales. Permanent brass cap in concrete monuments
shall be set for all subdivision points which are located in the public rights
of way. These are to be placed according to MAG standards.
2. Blue Reflective Markers shall be placed on the road surface across from
each fire hydrant and valve in accordance with the Town of Queen Creek
Design Standards and Procedures Manual.
SEC. 7.2 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
A. General:
1. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have a Registered
Professional Engineer prepare a complete set of engineering plans and
reports for construction of all required improvements and a Registered
Landscaped Architect prepare a complete set of landscape plans. Such
plans shall be based on the approved preliminary plat and be prepared in
conjunction with the final plat and in accordance, with all applicable
Town, County or State standards.
2. All Improvement plans submitted to the Town of Queen Creek for
approval must be submitted on 24"x 36"sheets of blue or blackline paper
prints. The scales chosen for plans shall be such that existing features,
proposed construction and any other information to be provided will be
depicted in a clear, uncluttered, understandable manner. Water system,
sewer system and street paving improvements should be drawn at a
horizontal scale of 1 inch equals 20, 30 or 40 feet and a vertical scale of 1
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 3
Eff date - October 3, 2008
inch equals 2 feet, unless the Town Engineering Manager approves the use
of another scale. Plans for other purposes may require the use of a larger
or smaller scale.
3. Water improvement plans shall be submitted on a separate set of plans, but
shall also show on the paving plans. Paving and sewer plans may be
combined. Separate grading and drainage plans shall be submitted.
B. Improvement Plan Submittal Requirements:
1. The following materials shall be submitted as an initial submittal with
final plat. In addition to the items below the required Plan Review fees
shall be paid at the time of the second plan submittal.
? Improvement Plan Review Fee
? Final Plat Review Fee
? The Final Plat
? The Water Improvement Plans
? The Sewer Improvement Plans
? The Paving, Grading, and Drainage Improvement Plans
? The Landscape Improvement Plans
? The Drainage Report
? The Soils Report
? The Traffic Report
? The Boundary Closure
The final plat should be in final form showing all information including
dedication statement, ratifications, and signature blocks.
2. Subsequent submittals will require that the redline check prints be
submitted in addition to the number of sets outlined in the transmittal sheet
requirements.
3. Final submittal requirements are as follows:
? Improvement Plans and Landscape Plans Mylar Cover Sheets
? The required copies of the Final Plat (paper prints)
? 8 ½” X 11" copy of the Final Plat
? 8 ½” X 11" copy of the Final Landscape Plan
? Title Report (current to the date of Final Plat Recordation)
? Assurance of Construction (refer to Sec.7.5 for specifics)
? Utility Companies Clearance Letters
? Copies of approved engineering reports
? Compact Discs (CD’s) in PDF format of the approved improvements
and final plat.
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 4
Eff date - October 3, 2008
4. Submittal requirements for recordation of the plat are as follows:
? Recording Fee
? The required Photo Mylars, 4 mil in thickness, (not ammonia process)
for County’s Records
? The required copies of the Approved Improvement Plans (paper prints)
and Engineering Reports
C. Landscape Plan Submittal Requirements:
1. Final Landscape Plan: Shall be prepared by a Registered Arizona
Landscape Architect and show the name of the developer and the project
engineer on the Plan. The Plan shall be submitted along with the final plat
and improvement plan submittal and shall at a minimum contain the
following:
a. Final Irrigation Plans
b. Plant Location: Call out the location of all
proposed species and inorganic ground covers, sidewalks, paths,
curbing, fencing, walls, benches, ramadas, fountains, and
waterways. For fencing and walls, provide a final graphic
representation as to what is intended relative to the fencing and
wall themes.
c. Right-of-way landscaping is required. The
entire area of the right-of-way, between street property line and
back of curb (B.O.C.) and/or pavement except for approved
driveways, walkways and bike paths, shall be landscaped.
d. Plant Species: Call out all proposed plant
species and inorganic ground covers in a list on the landscape plan.
e. Plant Sizes: Call out the various sizes of all
proposed plant and inorganic ground covers in a list on the
landscape plan.
f. Plant Quantities: Call out the exact
quantities for each species of plants and inorganic ground cover
per each size. Indicate the total number of trees, shrubs, and
ground cover plants proposed. For trees and shrubs, specify the
quantity that are of different sizes.
g. Paths, Trails, and Sidewalks: Call out the
material types, width and depth of the trail surfacing of all
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 5
Eff date - October 3, 2008
proposed trails and walks.
h. Walls/Fencing: Call out the type and
location where all common wall/fencing (perimeter subdivision)
and entry monumentation is proposed. Indicate exact material
types for all fencing and walls and entry monumentation proposed.
A separate 24" X 36" wall/fence sheet is preferred and shall be
submitted along with the improvement plan submittal. Walls,
fences and any other structures over two (2) feet in height shall not
be located within the vehicular sight line triangles, right of way or
any easements.
i. Identify existing lots, streets, fences, walls,
wells, or other features as may be applicable.
D. Report Submittal Requirements:
2. Final Drainage Report: Three copies of a final drainage report shall be
submitted as a part of the improvement plan submittal for all
developments. For projects where additional Flood Control District
Agency review is required, additional two (or more) copies may be
required, as determined by the Town Engineering Manager. The report
shall be a complete report and not an addendum to the preliminary
drainage report. The format shall be as previously described and also
include all items listed in the Queen Creek Final Drainage Report
Checklist and the Town of Queen Creek Design Standards and Procedures
Manual.
3. Water Report: The required copies of the final water report shall be
submitted with the final plat. This report shall include the following
items.
a. Additional water improvements needed for new source, storage,
transmission and distribution.
b. Location and size of the closest existing water line. Static residual
pressures and location shall also be taken at all “nodes”, fire
hydrants, and connection points of different size water main lines.
c. The location of all existing fire hydrants within 1000 feet of the
proposed subdivision and the number and location of all proposed
fire hydrants.
d. Line size and flow calculations for each use classification.
4. Geotechnical Report: The required copies of a geotechnical report shall
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 6
Eff date - October 3, 2008
be submitted which identifies any special geotechnical hazards, and
develops recommendations to mitigate these potential hazards with regard
to the grading, foundations, pavement design and other construction
proposed. The report shall address, at a minimum, the following items:
a. The geotechnical hazards portion of the report shall consider at a
minimum; earth fissures, expansive soils, soil creep, landsliding,
and groundwater.
b. The grading and foundations portion of the report shall include
data regarding the distribution and engineering characteristics of
the various soil materials; data about groundwater levels; an
opinion regarding the geotechnical feasibility of the development
as planned; recommendations about any needed mitigation
measures for geotechnical hazards, grading criteria, cut and fill
slope design criteria, foundation design criteria and any other
pertinent information.
c. The pavement design portion of the report shall include data
regarding the distribution of various subgrade materials and the
testing method used to determine soil classifications and
characteristics. The design procedure and all assumptions used to
determine the pavement section shall be presented. The selected
design procedure shall not result in a lesser pavement section than
the minimum allowed in the Town of Queen Creek Design
Standards and Procedures Manual.
5. Traffic Studies: All traffic study information shall be prepared by a
Professional Engineer registered in the State of Arizona and having
adequate experience in the regular practice of transportation engineering.
All letters and reports submitted with regard to traffic analysis shall be
sealed by the Engineer responsible for their preparation.
a. The required copies of a traffic impact analysis shall be provided
with the preliminary plat submittal. Each copy shall be a
complete, bound reproduction of the original report prepared by
the Engineer, with all figures and appendices presented in the same
manner and scale as the scaled original.
b. All trip generation analyses shall be calculated based on the latest
edition of the Trip Generation report published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, unless an alternative method has been
approved in advance by the Town Traffic Engineer.
c. If the number of peak hour trips generated by the development is
100 or greater, a complete traffic study shall be required. If the
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 7
Eff date - October 3, 2008
number of peak hour trips generated is less than 100, a letter,
sealed by the Engineer, documenting the trip generation
calculations may be required in lieu of a complete traffic study.
The Town Traffic Engineer may require a partial or complete
traffic study to be provided for projects with a peak hour
generation of less than 100 trips, if deemed necessary because of
unique site conditions, existing traffic conditions, or safe access
concerns.
d. The complete traffic study shall be prepared in accordance with the
most recent published version on the MCDOT Traffic Impact
Procedures, with the following additional requirements:
1. Background traffic volumes used in the analyses
shall include other developments in the area that have been
approved by the Town, or which are deemed likely to occur
based on their status in the approval process.
2. “Existing conditions” traffic volume data shall have been
collected in the field no more than one year prior to the date
of the submittal of the traffic study for first review, unless
otherwise approved by the Town Traffic Engineer. If a
project is returned to the pre-application stage of the
approval process for any reason, or is dormant for more
than six months, then an updated traffic study may be
required and will be considered to be a first submittal.
Updated “existing conditions” traffic volume data may be
required at any time during the review process if deemed
necessary by the Town Traffic Engineer due to a significant
change in traffic patterns.
2. The proposed project and/or mitigation measure shall be
adjusted as necessary in order to maintain acceptable
Levels of Service for all movements. The minimum
acceptable Levels of Service, unless otherwise approved by
the Town Traffic Engineer, shall be as follows:
i. Level of Service ‘C’ for all movements on an
existing or proposed public road.
ii. Level of Service ‘C’ for all movements on a site
driveway or public roadway at the intersection with any
public Local or Collector roadway.
iii. Level of Service ‘E’ for all movements on a site
driveway or private roadway at the intersection with any
public Arterial roadway.
4. Additional information may also be required based upon
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 8
Eff date - October 3, 2008
the nature of the project, as determined by the Town
Engineering Manager and/or the Town Traffic Engineer.
SEC. 7.3 IMPROVEMENT PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
A. Copies of plans shall be submitted to the Town and shall be distributed by the
Town to the appropriate agencies.
B. The Town staff will review and comment on the submittal for accuracy,
completeness, compliance with the preliminary plat and/or site plan and all
stipulations made by town staff, the Planning Commission, and/or Town Council,
the requirements of the Subdivision Technical Review Committee, and the
requirements by other agencies, as well as conformance with all Town Codes.
C. All improvement plans, reports and other documentation will be returned to the
Engineer and Landscape Architect of record for corrections, additions and
revisions.
D. Prior to the recording of the plat the following items must be submitted before
final plat approval:
1. A signature block of approval of engineering plans signed by the Town
Engineering Manager.
2. A certification that an Agreement, if required, between the Town and
subdivider has been executed.
3. A letter of agreement between the serving utilities and the developer.
4. Required assurances for construction (such as a performance bond, cash,
or irrevocable letter of credit), sewer buy in fees, cash in lieu of
construction, or any type of shared cost participation fee.
5. Developer cost participation agreements and fees.
6. A certificate of assured water supply
7. All other easements, maps of dedication, warranty deeds and other legal
documents which need to be recorded.
E. If the engineering plans have not been approved within 90 days, the Council may
require that the final plat be resubmitted.
SEC.7.4 DEFERRED IMPROVEMENTS
A. Subdivisions of four (4) or Less Parcels: The frontage improvements may
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 9
Eff date - October 3, 2008
be deferred when deemed appropriate by the Town Engineering Manager.
Deferral will be allowed when the Town Engineering Manager finds that
construction is impractical due to physical constraints, timing of future adjacent
improvements or the surrounding neighborhood is absent similar improvements.
When improvements are deferred, the subdivider shall pay cash in lieu for the
future installation of all improvements as determined by the Town. This shall not
relieve the owner from any other specific requirements of the Subdivision Final
Plat or this Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Remainders: Where remainders are made part of a Subdivision Final Plat,
the subdivider may enter into an agreement, per a recommendation by the Town
Engineering Manager, with the Town to construct improvements within, and
along exterior boundaries of the remainder parcel at a future date and prior to the
issuance of a permit or other entitlement for development of a remainder parcel.
The improvements shall be at the subdivider's expense. In absence of an
agreement, the Town may require completion of the construction improvements
within a reasonable specified time following approval of the Subdivision Final
Plat upon a finding that completion of the improvements is necessary for the
following reasons:
1. The public health and safety; or
2. The required construction is a mandatory prerequisite to the orderly
development of the area.
SEC. 7.5 ASSURANCES BY SUBDIVIDER
A. Agreement by Subdivider:
1. The subdivision improvements in an approved development may be
constructed in practical increments in accordance with a Council approved
Phasing Plan subject to provisions for satisfactory drainage, traffic,
circulation, utilities, landscaping and other elements of the total
development plan.
2. The improvements shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the Town and shall be completed within an agreed specific time period.
3. The subdivider shall give adequate Assurance for Construction for each
phase in accordance with this Ordinance and to the satisfaction of the
Town and Town Attorney.
4. Once a construction permit has been issued for improvements under the
Assurance of Construction, work shall proceed without interruption until
the improvements are accepted by the Town.
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 10
Eff date - October 3, 2008
5. Any construction activity shown on approved plans that has been
discontinued for a period of one hundred and eighty (180) days, or not
completed by the subdivider in accordance with an agreed upon time
period, may be completed by the Town. The construction cost for
completion of the project will be recovered from the subdivider.
6. When in the opinion of the Town it is in the best interest of the Town to
delay installation of the required development improvements to coincide
with adjacent work, the Town may require payment of the estimated cost
of said improvements in-lieu of construction by the developer. The timing
of this payment will be specified by the Town.
B. Assurances of Construction:
1. The Town Council shall require that the applicant provide cash, a
performance bond from a corporate surety licensed to do business as a
surety in Arizona, or an irrevocable letter of credit, at the time of
application for final subdivision approval in the amount sufficient to
secure to the Town the satisfactory construction, installation, and
dedication of the required improvements. The amount of the financial
guarantee shall be one hundred and ten percent (110%) percent of the cost
of the installation and materials necessary to complete the subdivision,
which also includes a ten percent (10%) contingency cost.
2. Such financial guarantee shall comply with all statutory requirements and
shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and
manner of execution, as set forth in this Ordinance. The entire length of
time during which the required improvements must be completed shall be
incorporated into the financial guarantee, and the financial guarantee
document shall be automatically extended on an annual basis until such
improvements are formally accepted by the Town Engineer. The Town
shall require that ten percent (10%) of the total cost of off-site
improvements be retained by the Town for a period of one (1) year from
the Date of Acceptance of said improvements by the Town.
SEC. 7.6 CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION
A. All improvements whether public or private shall be constructed to the latest
Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction as written and
promulgated by the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG) and/or the
latest standards, details and specifications adopted by the Town.
B. All improvements shall be constructed with the inspection and approval of the
Town. All construction shall require a Town construction encroachment permit.
Construction shall not begin until a permit has been issued for such construction,
and if work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 11
Eff date - October 3, 2008
after notifying the Town.
C. Utilities must be installed either in public dedicated rights-of-way or public utility
easements or easements dedicated specifically by the land owner for such usage
and maintenance.
D. All underground utilities to be installed in streets and public access ways, shall be
constructed prior to the surfacing of such street or private access way.
E. The developer shall provide for an Arizona Registered Engineer to be present on
the site for sufficient time to assess compliance with the plans and specifications
for each element of construction.
F. The Town shall be notified 48 hours prior to any construction on the project site.
G. The Town shall be notified upon completion of all underground utilities within
the street right-of-ways and prior to any street preparation work. Interim as-built
plans of the utilities and all passing tests results shall be submitted for review.
Upon review and approval of the supplied information, the developer may
proceed with the installation of street improvements.
H. The developer's engineer shall request that Town personnel perform inspections
of the subgrade base prior to placement of the overlaying materials. In addition,
the Town inspectors will perform periodic inspections throughout the course of
the construction. These inspections or approvals do not signify that the Town has
accepted any of the improvements for maintenance.
I. The developer's engineer shall submit weekly progress reports to the Town
throughout the construction. The weekly progress reports shall include the results
of all tests taken during the week.
J. Testing during the construction phase of the project shall be done as required by
the Town.
K. No work shall be undertaken in the public right of way without first submitting
for review and approval a Temporary Traffic Control Plan and obtaining an
Encroachment Permit from the Town.
L. All required traffic control devices, street name signs and pavement markings
shall be in place prior to opening a street to public use. Paved streets not yet open
to public use shall be barricaded and signed “construction access only”.
SEC. 7.7 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT ACCEPTANCE
A. General: Upon completion of all subdivision improvements and installation of
monumentation, a final inspection shall be performed by Town personnel.
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 12
Eff date - October 3, 2008
B. Final Inspection: At completion of the project, a final inspection shall be
requested with the Town. At the time of request for the final inspection, one set
of mylars and two sets of blueline as-built drawings shall be submitted along with
a compact disc (CD) in a PDF format of the as built drawings, a final engineering
report, and a one-year construction assurance warranty to the Town. The as-built
drawings shall be certified and contain the following statement:
"I certify that the construction inspection and "as-built" plan preparation
were performed by me or under my direct control and supervision. The
construction details as shown on the as-builts are accurate and complete to
the best of my knowledge and belief."
Arizona Registered Engineer/Surveyor Date and Seal
C. Final Report: A final report shall be submitted upon completion of the project.
The final report shall be compiled by the developers’ engineer and shall include
the following:
1. A brief statement of the testing on the project and a statement as to
whether the observations and tests indicate that the various materials in
place comply with the plans and specifications.
2. A summary of all field density test and compaction tests on trench
backfill, on street subgrade and base material and on any fill material.
3. Asphalt and pavement mix design and all results of marshall, gradation,
and asphalt content and compaction tests
4. All concrete mix designs and all test results on air content, slump, unit
weight, compressive strength at 7 and 28 days;
5. All line pressure, bacteria and manhole test information.
6. Any other tests or information that may be required as a part of the
specifications or that may add to the integrity of the report.
D. Procedure: The following procedure will be followed for final acceptance of the
improvements:
1. Town personnel shall make a final inspection of all public improvements
in the project. The developer will be notified of any items that are not in
conformance with the Town specifications, and shall bring the items into
conformance.
2. The as-built plans and final report will be reviewed by Town assigned
Rev date - September 2008 Chapter 7 Page 7 - 13
Eff date - October 3, 2008
personnel. Any additional information needed will be noted and the plans
will be returned to the developer for revision and resubmittal as mylars.
3. When the public improvements have passed the final inspection, the "asbuilt”
plans and final report have been stamped and approved and the one
year construction warranty has been provided, the Town Engineer shall
accept the public improvements for maintenance.
E. Warranty Period on Public Improvements: The warranty period begins on the
day the Town Engineer approves and accepts the public improvements. During
the warranty period the developer is responsible for repair work of any of the
public improvements. The Town assigned personnel will periodically inspect the
public improvements and will notify the developer of the necessary repair work.
The developer is responsible for having the repair work completed prior to the
end of the warranty period. Upon completion of the warranty period and
successful repair of any necessary warranty items the remainder of the assurances
retained by the Town will be released.
APPENDIX - GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
ABUTTING: The condition of two adjoining properties having a common property line or
boundary, including cases where two or more lots adjoin only at a corner or corners.
ACCESSORY USE: A use, building, structure, part of a building, or part of a structure which is
subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building, structure or use on the
same lot, including a private garage. If a building otherwise qualified as an accessory building is
attached to the main building by a common wall or roof, such building shall be considered part of
the main building.
ACRE: An area of land containing 43,560 square feet.
ALLEY: A public passageway affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
BASIN, DETENTION: A storm water storage facility which temporarily stores surface runoff and
releases it at a controlled rate through a positive outlet. A detention basin and park may be joined to
serve both recreational needs and as a water storage facility.
BASIN, DRAINAGE: A geographical area which contributes surface runoff to a particular
concentration point. The terms "drainage basin", "tributary area" and "watershed" are used
interchangeably.
BASIN, RETENTION: A storm water storage facility which stores surface runoff. Stored water is
infiltrated into the subsurface or released to the downstream drainage system or watercourse (via
gravity outlet or pump), or evaporated after the storm event. A retention basin and park may be
joined to serve both recreational needs and as a water storage facility.
BERM: An earthen mound, either natural or man-made.
BICYCLE LANE: A paved area located within a street right-of-way and between the curbs which
is designated for bicycle or other non-motorized traffic.
BICYCLE TRAIL: A paved or improved surfaced trail, located outside of a street right-of-way,
utilized for bicycle, pedestrian or other non-motorized traffic. Public utility maintenance vehicles
may be permitted use if joint access is allowed.
BICYCLE WAY: A paved area located within a street right-of-way but not between curbs which is
designated for bicycle or other non-motorized traffic.
BLOCK: A piece or parcel of land or group of lots entirely surrounded by public or private streets,
streams, washes, parks, or a combination thereof of sufficient magnitude as to interrupt the
continuity of development.
BUILDABLE: A lot or parcel that has the area, shape, slope, street frontage, or other attribute in
October 2007 Appendix Page A-1
October 2007 Appendix Page A-2
order for a permitted use, based on the lot or parcel's Zoning District, to be developed, without the
need for any variance from the Town Zoning Ordinance.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line which separates the buildable area and area in which the
primary building or structure, or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed or otherwise
established.
CHANNEL: A depression designed to transfer water from one location to another. Channels may
be either a component of the natural environment transferring water down stream or man-made to
transfer storm water within a development to a storm water retention basin..
CHORD: A straight line joining two points on a curve.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development pattern in which uses are grouped together rather
than distributed evenly throughout a parcel as in conventional lot-by-lot development.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Queen Creek.
CONCEPT PLAN: A preliminary development plan or plat used to present an initial proposed
development and initiate discussion about the proposal.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL: An affirmative action by the Commission or Council indicating
that approval will be forthcoming with satisfaction of certain specified stipulations.
CONDOMINIUM: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the
remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate
portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements
are vested in the unit owners. (The term “condo” may be used in the ordinance.)
CONSERVATION EASEMENT: A conservation easement is an agreement for the protection of
open space, historic buildings, archaeological sites, ecologically significant lands, scenic highways
and/or hiking, biking and equestrian trails.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Development other than a Planned Area Development.
COUNCIL: The Town Council of the Town of Queen Creek.
COUNTY: Maricopa County, Arizona and/or Pinal County, Arizona.
DEPARTMENT: The Community Development Department, which includes the Planning,
Engineering, Building Safety Division and Neighborhood Preservation Divisions of the Town of
Queen Creek.
DEVELOPMENT: The utilizations of land for public or private purpose.
DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN: A preliminary master plan for the development of large or
complicated areas, the platting and development of which is expected in progressive stages.
October 2007 Appendix Page A-3
Development Master Plans shall be subject to Commission recommendation and Council approval.
EASEMENT: A grant by the owner of the use of land by the public, a corporation, or person for
the specific uses designated.
ENGINEER: The Engineering Manager of the Town of Queen Creek or his designated
representative.
ENGINEERING DIVISION: The Engineering Division of the Community Development
Department of the Town of Queen Creek.
EXCEPTION: Any parcel of land which is not owned by the subdivider or not included in the
recorded plat. All such exceptions must be noted on the final plat as “not a part of this subdivision”.
EXHIBIT: Any graphic representation noted as "Exhibit" within this Ordinance that is used to
illustrate and exemplify certain standards and regulations contained within the language of this
Ordinance. If an exhibit and text of the Ordinance conflict, the written text of the Ordinance shall
control.
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL: Approval of the final plat of a subdivision. Such final approval must
be approved by the Engineering Manager and Planning Manager and certified on the plat by the
signatures of the Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk.
FLOODPLAIN: As defined by the Maricopa County Flood Control District and as shown on
Federal Emergency Management Act (FEMA) flood insurance maps or an approved flood control
study.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The ratio of gross building floor area to the net lot area of the
building site.
GENERAL PLAN: A comprehensive plan, or parts thereof, providing for the future growth and
improvement of the Town of Queen Creek and for the general location of street, schools and
recreation areas, public buildings sites, and other physical development.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: Maricopa and/or Pinal County Department of Health Services.
IMPROVEMENTS: Required installations, pursuant to this Ordinance and zoning stipulations ,
including but not limited to: grading, sewer, water, utilities, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, trails,
alleys, street lights, traffic control devices and landscaping; as a condition to the approval and
signing of the final plat, precedent to recordation.
IMPROVEMENT PLANS: A set of plans setting forth the profiles, cross-sections, details,
specifications, and instructions and procedures to be followed in the construction of public or private
improvements in the Town of Queen Creek that are prepared and bear the seal of an Arizona -
Registered Land Surveyor, Engineer, Architect or Landscape Architect in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat, and zoning stipulations, and in compliance with standards of design and
construction that are to be approved by the Engineering Manager, other Town Departments, the
October 2007 Appendix Page A-4
County Departments, and all applicable utilities.
IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS: A set of regulations and exhibits setting forth the details,
specifications and instructions to be followed in the planning, design and construction of required
improvements.
IRRIGATION FACILITIES: Includes laterals, ditches, conduits, pipes, gates, pumps and allied
equipment necessary for the supply, delivery and drainage of irrigation water and the construction,
operation and maintenance of such.
LAND SPLITS: The division of improved or unimproved land, whose area is two and one-half
acres or less, into two or three parcels of land for the purpose of sale, lease, or conveyance.
LOT: A single piece of property located in a recorded subdivision, having frontage on a publicly
dedicated and accepted street or a private road approved by the Town, which is described and
denoted as such.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: The intersection of two or more lot lines, or angle point or change in direction of
a lot line.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of the area of a lot which is occupied by all buildings or other
covered structures using the roof outline for all outer dimensions.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear
lot lines; and for triangular shaped lots, the shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line and
a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of
not less than ten (10) feet.
LOT, IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, place, work of art or other object or
improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real
property.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, KEY: A lot adjacent to a corner lot having its side lot line in common with the rear lot line of
the corner lot and fronting on the street which forms the side boundary of the corner lot.
LOT LINE: Any line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street right-ofway.
In the case of a corner lot, the narrower of the two lot lines adjoining a street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from, the front lot line; except
that in the absence of a rear lot line as is the case of the triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line may be
considered as a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line,
October 2007 Appendix Page A-5
having a length of not less than ten (10) feet.
LOT LINE, SIDE: The boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT THROUGH: A lot having a part of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) streets, and which is
not a corner lot, (Also known as a “double frontage lot”). On such lot, both lot lines are front,
except that where a non-access easement has been established on such a lot, the front lot line shall be
considered as that lot line most distant front the lot line containing the non-access easement.
LOT WIDTH: For rectangular lots, lots having side lot lines not parallel, and lots on the outside of
the curve of a street, the distance between side lot lines measured at the required Minimum front
yard line on a line parallel to the street or street chord; and for lots on the inside of the curve of a
street, the distance between side lot lines measured 30 feet behind the required minimum front yard
line on a line parallel to the street or street chord.
MCDOT: Maricopa Department of Transportation
NAOS: Natural Area Open Space
OFF SITE: Not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same
ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval.
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land unimproved or improved and set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for the public or private use and enjoyment.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Open space usable by all people within a certain development and
such area is owned in common by all property owners in that development.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC: An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a municipality,
municipal agency, school district, state or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE: Land which can be enjoyed by people. This could include landscaped
or hardscaped plazas, paseo and promenades, fountains and sitting areas meant to provide an open
park like atmosphere. Also playgrounds, golf courses, bicycle trails (but not bike lanes), pedestrian
trails (only those sidewalks detached from the curb - creating a “boulevard strip”), and equestrian
tracts or easements, and trail heads. Usable open space does not include parking areas and vacant or
undeveloped lots.
OWNER: The person or persons holding title by deed to land, or holding title as vendor under a
land contract, or holding any other title of record.
PATHWAY: Path; course; route; track; footway; and equestrian trail.
PEDESTRIAN WAY: A public walk dedicated entirely through a block from street to street and/or
providing access to a school, park, recreation area, trail system, or shopping area.
October 2007 Appendix Page A-6
PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (PAD): A development of 40 or more acres, in which
flexibility can be permitted in the zoning standards, in order to encourage more creativity and
sustainable design, thereby providing usable open spaces within and about the development and
enhancing the rural character of the Town.
PLAT: A map which provides for changes in land use or ownership.
1. Preliminary Plat: A tentative map, including supporting data, indicating a proposed
subdivision design, prepared by a registered civil engineer, or a registered land surveyor, in
accordance with this ordinance and the Arizona Revised Statues. A preliminary site plan for
a condominium development shall be considered a preliminary plat.
2. Final Plat: A final map of all of a subdivision, including supporting data, in substantial
conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor, in
accordance with this Ordinance and the Arizona Revised Statutes.
3. Recorded Plat: A final plat bearing all certificates of approval required by this Ordinance
and the Arizona Revised Statues and duly recorded in the Maricopa County Recorder's
Office and/or the Pinal County Recorder's Office.
4. Reversionary Plat:
a. A map for the purpose of reverting previously subdivided acreage to unsubdivided
acreage, or;
b. A map for the purpose of vacating rights of way previously dedicated to the public
and abandoned under procedures prescribed by the Town Code, or:
c. A map for the purpose of vacating or redescribing lot or parcel boundaries previously
recorded.
PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE: An initial meeting between subdivider and municipal
representatives which affords subdivider the opportunity to present their proposals informally and
discuss the project and address any items of controversy or requirements before the preliminary plat
is submitted.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL: Affirmative action on a preliminary plat, noted upon prints of the
plat, indicating that approval of a final plat will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of specified
stipulations; and which constitutes authorization to submit final engineering plans and the final plat.
PRIVATE ACCESS WAY: Any private street or private way of access dedicated as a tract to one
or more lots or air spaces which is owned an maintained by an individual or group of individuals and
has been improved in accordance with Town standards and plans approved by the Engineering
Manager. A private access way is intended to apply where its use is logically consistent with a
desire for neighborhood identification and control of access, and where special design concepts may
be involved, such as within planned area developments, hillside areas and condominiums.
October 2007 Appendix Page A-7
RECORDER: The Recorder of Maricopa County and/or Pinal County.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any public or private access way required for ingress or egress, including any
area required for public use pursuant to any official plan; rights-of-way may consist of fee title
dedications or easements.
ROADWAY EASEMENT: A recorded conveyance to the public over a described area for
roadway related uses.
SKETCH PLAN: A preliminary presentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient
accuracy to be used for discussion purposes and identification of any items of controversy or issues
of concern.
SERVICE EASEMENT: An area provided for in the subdivision design at the rear of retail,
commercial or multi-family dwelling use of sufficient size and accessibility to facilitate the
provision of necessary services.
STREET, ARTERIAL: Principal major streets designed to accommodate significant traffic
volumes and provide town wide traffic circulation. Arterial streets are typically “section line”
streets, and other locations designated in the Town General Plan.
STREET, COLLECTOR: Collector streets are an intermediate level of street designed to provide
access between the low traffic volume local streets which are located within the neighborhoods of
the Town, and arterial streets which are designed to accommodate a significant traffic volume.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A local street having one end permanently terminated in a vehicular
turnaround, or an equally convenient form of turning, and backing areas as may be recommended by
the Engineering Manager.
STREET, FRONTAGE: A local street parallel to an arterial or collector road which intercepts the
residential traffic and controls access to the arterial and collector roads.
STREET, LOCAL: Provides for direct access to residential or other abutting land; primarily for
local traffic movement with connections to collector and/or major streets.
SUBDIVIDER: A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndicate, trust, or other legal
entity that files the application and initiates proceedings for a subdivision in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance and statutes of the State of Arizona, except that an individual serving as
agent for such legal entity is not a subdivider; and said subdivider need not be the owner of the
property as defined by this Ordinance. The Town Council may itself prepare or have prepared a plat
for the subdivision of land under municipal ownership.
SUBDIVISION
A. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing, sale, lease, or
conveyance whether immediate or future, into four or more lots, tracts or parcels of land; or,
if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided into two or more lots, tracts or
parcels of land, or, any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded
October 2007 Appendix Page A-8
plat, which is divided into two or more parts. "Subdivision" also includes any condominium,
cooperative, community apartment, townhouse, patio home, or similar project containing
four (4) or more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right
of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon.
B. “Subdivision" does not include the following:
1. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between adjoining property owners if such
sale or exchange does not create additional lots.
2. The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes regulating the partitioning
of land held in common ownership.
3. The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within a building or trailer
park, nor to mineral, oil, or gas leases.
TECHNICAL REVIEW: The detailed review of proposed preliminary plats for compliance with
Town Codes, Ordinances, Engineering Standards, Design Standards, or conditions of approval by
the Commission or Town Council. Other utilities and public agencies are invited to review the plat
as it relates to their conditions of service or need.
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE: The selected group of technically qualified individuals
made up of Town staff and other public or private agency's and utility's responsible to insure
compliance with ordinances, codes, regulations, etc. as they relate to the subdivision process.
TOWN: The Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
USABLE LOT AREA: That portion of a lot usable for, or adaptable to, the normal uses made of
property, excluding any areas which may be covered by water, are excessively steep, or are included
in certain types of easements. Areas covered by water shall include areas within the defined flood
plain, or are within the perimeter of a given pond of water which will remain after the development
is completed.
U.S.C. & G.S.: United States Coast and Geodetic Survey.
UTILITY SERVICES: Service to the public of water, sewer, gas, electricity, telephone and cable
television. The foregoing shall be deemed to include facilities and appurtenances to the above uses
but shall not include public utility treatment and generating plants or offices.
VIEW FENCING: Any fencing or wall which is adjacent to a designated open space area, public
trail, or transition area except when adjacent to an arterial or collector shall be constructed in such a
manner as to achieve 50% openness overall. Any fencing or wall which is adjacent to an arterial or
collector road, whether public or private, shall be constructed in such a manner as to achieve 33%
openness overall.
WATER SUPPLY ASSURANCE (100 YEARS): Subdivision proposal must include evidence of
meeting Arizona Department of Water Resources requirements for 100 year assured supply.
October 2007 Appendix Page A-9
ZONE: A district classification established by The Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance which
limits or permits various and specific uses.
ZONING CLEARANCE: The approval by the Planning Manager of a plan that is in conformance
with the Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING DISTRICT: A zone area in which the same zoning regulations apply throughout the
district.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance.
Original adoption January 6, 1999. Updated May 1, 2019
Acknowledgements
In February 2014, the Town of Queen Creek initiated a proc ess to modernize the Town’s Zoning
Ordinance. The purpose of this effort is to update the existing document by removing outdated
framework, ensuring that policies are consistent throughout the Town codes and that the ordinance
is aligned with the Town’s Vision in a manner that infuses c urrent and relevant zoning prac tic es,
policies and design elements.
The result is a modern Zoning Ordinance that is: organized in a logical format; easier to read and
understand; uses graphics and images that accurately depict the character and heritage of our
community as examples to current and future residents, businesses, and developers.
Mayor and Council
Mayor Gail Barney
Vice Mayor Julia Wheatley
Council Member Craig Barnes
Council Member Robin Benning
Council Member Jeff Brown
Council Member Dawn Oliphant
Council Member Emilena Turley
Planning and Zoning Commission
Chair Alex Matheson
Vice Chair Gregory Arrington
Commissioner Stephen Sossaman
Commissioner Shaine Alleman
Commissioner Chris Webb
Commissioner Nichelle Williams
Commissioner Josh Ehmke
Town Staff
John Kross, Town Manager
Bruce Gardner, Assistant Town Manager
Chris Anaradian, Development Services Director
Brett Burningham, Planning Administrator
Keith Newman, Planner II
Consultants
Gammage & Burnham, P.L.C.
ReSEED Advisors, L.L.C.
Matrix Design Group
Amendments
Standards within this Ordinance may be amended, altered, modified, and repealed by the Town when judged to
be necessary to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town.
*Date is of Town Council Approval. Effective date of Ordinance is thirty (30) days from the date listed.
Amendment Date Ordinanc
e
Sign Regulation Text Amendments October 20, 1999 173-99
Public/Quasi Public Zoning Ordinance December 12, 1999 179-99
Accessory Uses Text Amendments July 5, 2000 184-00
Fencing Amendments August 2, 2000 186-00
Use Categories Text Amendments November 1, 2000 190-00
Driveways Text Amendments December 6, 2000 192-00
Legal Front Line Text Amendments December 6, 2000 194-00
Ham Radio Text Amendments January 17, 2001 193-00
Flag lot Text Amendment December 5, 2001 213-01
Supplemental Use Regulations Regarding Development / Construction
Temporary Uses Text Amendments
March 6, 2002 218-02
Repeal of Article 5 Section 5.2, Flag lots March 20, 2002 217-02
Flag Pole Text Amendments May 1, 2002 219-02
Front Porches/Courtyards Text Amendments May 15, 2002 220-02
Temporary Signs Text Amendments August 7, 2002 223-02
Parking Standards Text Amendments November 6, 2002 227-02
Tennis Courts Text Amendments October 16, 2002 229-02
Front Porch Amendment December 18, 2002 233-02
Residential Fence Standards February 19, 2003 240-03
Detached Accessory Dwelling Units March 5, 2003 241-03
Accessory Building Electrical Meters June 18, 2003 263-03
Regulations for Real Estate Signs Text Amendments February 18, 2004 279-04
Uses for Religious Assemblies Text Amendments March 3, 2004 283-04
Williams Gateway Airport Overlay District August 18, 2004 292-04
Landscaping, Screening, and Buffer Yard Standards September 15, 2004 296-04
Specific Zoning District Performance Criteria November 3, 2004 301-04
Superstores and Big Box Retail Uses November 3, 2004 301-04
Use Regulations, Table 4.6-1 November 3, 2004 302-04
Group Care Homes November 3, 2004 302-04
Residential Architectural Design Standards May 18, 2005 315-05
Lot Coverage Dimensional Standards, Table 4.7-2 April 19, 2006 347-06
Lot Coverage Definition April 19, 2006 347-06
Neighborhood Meeting Notification April 19, 2006 350-06
Indoor Amusement, Table 4.6-2 May 17, 2006 355-06
Religious Institutions October 18, 2006 370-06
Solid Fence/Wall Standards April 4, 2007 382-07
Animal Regulations and Equestrian Privileges May 16, 2007 385-07
Open Space Percentages June 6, 2007 388-07
Site Plan Review Process July 18, 2007 391-07
Solid Fence and Landscaping Standards December 19, 2007 415-07
Parking, Loading and Bicycle Storage Standards April 16, 2008 420-08
Sign Regulations April 16, 2008 427-08
Legal Non-Conforming Uses May 21, 2008 430-08
Flagpoles June 18, 2008 432-08
Pawn Shops & Payday Loan Businesses September 17, 2008 437-08
Temporary Uses/Fireworks Sales & Display December 1, 2010 490-10
Medical Marijuana Dispensaries & Cultivation December 1, 2010 492-10
Temporary Use and Special Event Signs December 1, 2010 493-10
Off-Site Temporary Real Estate Signs November 16, 2011 504-11
Political Signs November 16, 2011 505-11
Home-Based Occupations June 6, 2012 512-12
Temporary Real Estate Signs & Model Home Complex Definition July 18, 2012 515-12
Complete Zoning Ordinance Modernization July 15, 2015 573-15
Miscellaneous Textual Errors January 20, 2016 587-16
Residential Design Review Application/Approval Process January 20, 2016 588-16
Open Space Requirements for Commercial & Industrial Districts January 20, 2016 589-16
Group Care Homes January 20, 2016 590-16
Residential Subdivision Entry Monument Sign Height January 20, 2016 591-16
Residential Subdivision Signs January 20, 2016 592-16
Minor and Major Planned Area Development (PAD) Amendment Criteria March 16, 2016 593-16
Minimum Standards for Landscaping in the Public Right of Way and
On-site Areas
March 16, 2016 594-16
Landscape Buffers/Setbacks March 16, 2016 595-16
Detached Accessory Buildings March 16, 2016 596-16
Animal Unit Definition July 20, 2016 602-16
School Signage Requirements July 20, 2016 603-16
Landscape Buffer Setbacks Table July 20, 2016 604-16
Parking Lot Landscape Islands For General Commercial And Industrial
Zoning Districts
July 20, 2016 604-16
Household Pets July 20, 2016 605-19
Bees and Beekeeping July 20, 2016 605-19
In-Vehicle Service Facility Noise July 20, 2016 605-19
Large Format Retail Parking Lot Landscape Islands July 20, 2016 605-19
Neon Window Signs July 20, 2016 606-19
Fuel Service Station Electronic Message Signs July 20, 2016 606-19
Temporary Signs Quality and Materials July 20, 2016 606-19
Special Event Temporary Signs July 20, 2016 606-19
Community Mailbox Design July 20, 2016 607-19
Agribusiness Definition April 19, 2017 628-17
Code Enforcement Fines and Penalties April 19, 2017 629-17
Neighborhood Meeting Notice Signs April 19, 2017 630-17
Consolidate the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts into One Medium
Density Zoning District
April 19, 2017 631-17
Create a New High Density Multi-Family Residential Zoning District April 19, 2017 631-17
General Fencing Standards April 19, 2017 632-17
Allow Solid Walls Adjacent to Arterial and Collector Streets in All
Zoning Districts R1-43 and Larger
April 19, 2017 632-17
Onsite Landscaping Requirements April 19, 2017 632-17
Street Tree Standards April 19, 2017 632-17
Accessory Dwelling Units April 19, 2017 633-17
Chickens on Residential Lots Smaller Than 35,000 Square Feet April 19, 2017 633-17
Home Based Occupation Performance Standards April 19, 2017 633-17
Drive through Stacking Requirements April 19, 2017 633-17
Removal of Non-Compliant Signage April 19, 2017 634-17
Temporary Open House Directional Signs April 19, 2017 634-17
Political Signage April 19, 2017 634-17
Paint Reflectivity Standards April 19, 2017 635-17
Permanent Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes April 19, 2017 635-17
Public Notice and Neighborhood Meetings for Preliminary Plats April 19, 2017 636-17
Permitted Uses Table August 2, 2017 649-17
Dimensional Standards Table May 2, 2018 661-18
Add Definitions November 7, 2018 683-18
Update Downtown Core Zoning District and Permitted Use Table November 7, 2018 684-18
Parking, Landscaping, Lighting, and Fencing Standards November 7, 2018 685-18
Supplemental Use Regulations November 7, 2018 686-18
Downtown Core Sign Standards November 7, 2018 687-18
Site Plan Administrative Review May 1, 2019 697-19
Permitted Use Table May 1, 2019 698-19
General Cleanup May 1, 2019 699-19
Equivalency Table
Through the update process, some topics have been moved. The below table shall serve as a guide
to navigate the modernized Town of Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance.
Topic Zoning Ordinance
Section prior to June
2015
Zoning Ordinance
Section beginning
June 2015
Planning Department and Planning Administrator 2.1 2.2
Board of Adjustment 2.2 2.5
Planning Commission 2.3 2.4
Town Council 2.4 2.1
Violations and Enforcement 2.5 2.6
General Plan Amendment 3.3 Deleted
Site Plan Review 3.6 3.3
Development Agreements 3.8 Deleted
Public Improvements 3.9 Deleted
Planned Area Development (PAD) 4.10 4.11
Floodplain District 4.11 Deleted
Critical Areas 4.12 Deleted
Manufactured Housing Overlay District (MHR) 4.13 4.12
Transfer of Development Rights 4.14 4.13
Williams Gateway Airport Overlay District 4.15 4.14
Outdoor Storage and Display 5.7 4.6
Standards for Noise, Odor, and Other Circumstances 5.8 Town Code Chapter 9
Architectural Design Requirements 5.9 Removed and placed in
Town of Queen Creek
Design Standards
General Site Planning Requirements for all Commercial Uses 5.10
Residential Architectural Design Standards 5.11
Bed and Breakfast 6.3 4.6
Campgrounds 6.4 4.6
Cluster Developments 6.5 Deleted
Farming-Related Business 6.6 4.6
Group Care Homes 6.7 6.3
Home-Based Occupations 6.8 6.4
Heavy Equipment and Industrial Storage Lot 6.9 4.6
In-Vehicle Service Facilities 6.10 6.5
Massage Establishments 6.11 6.6
Mini-Warehouse 6.12 4.6
Outdoor Sales 6.13 4.6
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 6.14 4.6
Sexually Oriented Businesses 6.15 6.7
Sign Regulations 6.16 Article 7
Superstores and Big Box Retail Uses 6.17 6.8
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas 6.18 6.9
Temporary Uses 6.19 3.6
Religious Institutions 6.20 Deleted
Pawn Shops and Check Cashing/Payday Loan Businesses 6.21 6.10
Medical Marijuana 6.22 6.11
Continuation of Non-Conforming Uses 7.1 2.7
Expansion or Enlargement of Non-Conforming Uses 7.2 2.7
Certificate of Non-Conforming Use 7.3 Deleted
Vested Rights Determination 7.4 Deleted
Expiration of Development Approvals 7.5 3.8
Appendix A Definitions A 1.14
Appendix C Specifications for Documents to be Submitted C Removed and placed
on file with the Town’s
Development Services
Department
Table of Contents
Article/Section Content Page
1.0 General Provisions
1.1 Title 1-1
1.2 Purpose 1-1
1.3 Authority 1-1
1.4 Applicability 1-1
1.5 Consistency with General Plan 1-2
1.6 Coordination with Other Plans 1-2
1.7 Transitional Provisions 1-2
1.8 Interpretation 1-4
1.9 Severability 1-4
1.10 Permits and Certificates 1-4
1.11 Fees 1-4
1.12 Effective Date 1-4
1.13 Effect of Ordinance 1-4
1.14 Def initions 1-5
2.0 Administration and Enforcement
2.1 Town Council 2-1
2.2 Planning Dept. and Planning Administrator 2-1
2.3 Administrative Relief 2-3
2.4 Planning Commission 2-3
2.5 Board of Adjustment 2-5
2.6 Violations Enforcement and Penalties 2-5
2.7 Non-Conformities 2-9
3.0 Zoning Procedures
3.1 General Procedural Requirements 3-1
3.2 Permits Required 3-7
3.3 Site Plan Review 3-11
3.4 Amendment and Rezoning 3-14
3.5 Conditional Use Permit 3-16
3.6 Temporary Use Permit 3-17
3.7 Board of Adjustment 3-24
3.8 Expiration of Development Approvals 3-24
4.0 Zoning Districts
4.1 Purpose 4-1
4.2 Establishment of Zoning Districts 4-1
4.3 Relationship to General Plan 4-2
4.4 Zoning Map 4-6
4.5 District Boundaries 4-6
4.6 Use Regulations 4-6
4.7 Dimensional and Density Regulations 4-22
4.8 Density Bonus 4-27
4.9 Performance Criteria 4-28
4.10 Planned Community District 4-33
4.11 Planned Area Development Overlay District 4-38
4.12 Manufactured Housing Overlay District 4-43
4.13 Transfer of Development Rights 4-44
4.14 Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport 4-45
Overlay District
Article/Section Content Page
5.0 Site Improvement Standards
5.1 Adequate Public Facilities 5-1
5.2 Fencing and Walls 5-1
5.3 Landscaping Standards 5-4
5.4 Open Space 5-13
5.5 Lighting 5-16
5.6 Parking and Loading Standards 5-20
6.0 Supplemental Use Regulations
6.1 Accessory Buildings and Uses 6-1
6.2 Animal Regulations 6-2
6.3 Group Residential Facilities 6-4
6.4 Home-Based Occupations 6-5
6.5 In-Vehicle Service Facilities 6-7
6.6 Massage Establishments 6-9
6.7 Sexually Oriented Businesses 6-11
6.8 Large Format Retail 6-13
6.9 Wireless Communications 6-18
6.10 Non-Chartered Financial Institutions 6-27
6.11 Medical Marijuana 6-27
7.0 Sign Regulations
7.1 Purpose and Intent 7-1
7.2 General Regulations 7-1
7.3 Sign Measurement, Area, and Height 7-14
7.4 Permits, Approval, and Registration 7-15
7.5 Temporary Signs 7-16
7.6 A-frame Signs 7-22
7.7 Sign Walkers 7-24
7.8 Sensitive Use Signs 7-24
7.9 Interpretation of this Article 7-25
Zoning Ordinance
Article 1.0
General Provisions
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 1
1.0 General Provisions
Section Content Page
1.1 Title 1
1.2 Purpose 1
1.3 Authority 1
1.4 Applicability 1
1.5 Consistency with General Plan 2
1.6 Coordination with Other Plans 2
1.7 Transitional Provisions 2
1.8 Interpretation 4
1.9 Severability 4
1.10 Permits and Certificates 4
1.11 Fees 4
1.12 Effective Date 4
1.13 Effect of Ordinance 4
1.14 Def initions 5
1.1 Title
A. These regulations shall be known and cited
as the Town of Queen Creek Zoning
Ordinanc e (hereinafter known as “the
Ordinanc e”). It has been adopted pursuant
to Ordinance 142-98.
1.2 Purpose
A. The purpose of this Ordinance is intended
to enable the Town of Queen Creek
(hereinafter known as the “Town”) to
respond uniformly and consistently to
development proposals and to promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the Town; to enhance the
aesthetic quality of the natural and built
environment of the community; to
encourage the desirable use of the land; to
maintain and enhance the desirable
character of the community and to
facilitate quality development in
ac c ordanc e with the Town’s adopted
General Plan.
B. Further, the purpose of these regulations
is:
1. To promote orderly future growth and
development and redevelopment of the
community;
2. To respond uniformly and consistently to
development proposals;
3. To clearly articulate our community
standards to establish standards for
performance, aesthetics and quality
design;
4. To facilitate the adequate provision of
community utilities such as
transportation, water, sewer, schools,
parks and other improvements;
5. To establish land use regulations,
regulate the use of buildings, structures
and encourage the most appropriate use
of the land;
6. To establish and preserve open space and
other lands for the protection and
enjoyment of the natural environment;
7. To protect approach slopes and other
safety areas of licensed airports,
including United States government and
military air facilities;
8. To establish procedures for rezoning, use
permits, variances, site plans and other
permits and required approvals; and,
9. To prescribe penalties of violation of said
Ordinance.
1.3 Authority
A. The Arizona Revised Statutes authorize the
Town of Queen Creek to exercise broad
powers in the regulation of zoning,
planning, subdivision of land, and building.
This Ordinance intends to use all powers
provided by virtue of A.R.S. §9-462. The
Development Services Department
(“hereinafter known as the “Department ”)
of Queen Creek can be contacted for
further information about the use of this
Ordinance.
1.4 Applicability
A. The Ordinance shall apply to all public and
private land(s), and use(s) thereon, over
which the Town has jurisdiction under the
constitution(s) and law(s) of the State of
Arizona and of the United States.
Consistent with the provisions of A.R.S. §9-
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 2
461.05.D.4, §9-461.05.D.5, §9-461.07.B
and §9-461.07C, no public works or public
buildings may be constructed or authorized
within the Town until a report as to
compliance with the General Plan has been
approved in accordance with the provisions
of Section 3.9 of this Ordinance.
1.5 Consistency with General Plan
A. This Ordinance is intended to guide
development into compliance with the
goals, objectives and policies of the Town
of Queen Creek General Plan and is hereby
deemed to be consistent and in accordance
with the adopted General Plan for the
Town. Any amendments to or actions
pursuant to the Ordinance shall be
consistent with the General Plan, as it may
be amended from time to time.
B. An amendment to the text of the Ordinanc e
is consistent with and in accordance with
the General Plan if it complies with the
goals and policies stated in the General
Plan, as it may be amended from time to
time. An amendment to the zoning map is
consistent with the General Plan if the map
amendment is consistent with the future
land use map contained in the General
Plan, as it may be amended from time to
time.
1.6 Coordination with Other
Regulations
A. In addition to this Ordinance, the use of
buildings and land within the Town shall be
subject to all other regulations, including,
but not limited to the Town of Queen Creek
Design Standards, Town Code, Building
Code, Subdivision Ordinance, and
Engineering Design Specifications, whether
or not such other provisions are specifically
referenced in this Ordinance. References
to other regulations or provisions of the
Ordinance are for the convenience of the
reader; lack of a cross-reference should not
be construed as an indication that other
regulations do not apply.
B. Conflicting Regulations. Where provisions
of this Ordinance or any other law or
ordinance recognized and adopted by the
Town Council impose more stringent
requirements or limitations, then the more
stringent requirement, regulation, or
limitation shall govern.
1.7 Transitional Provisions
A. Violations Continue. Any violation of the
previous Ordinance will continue to be a
violation under this Ordinance and be
subject to penalties and enforcement under
Section 2 of this Ordinance, unless the use,
development, construction or other activity
complies with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. Nonconformities under Prior Ordinance.
Any legal nonconformity under the
previous Zoning Ordinance also will be a
legal nonconformity under this Ordinance,
so long as the condition that resulted in the
legal nonconforming status under the
previous Ordinance continues to exist. If a
legal nonconformity under the previous
Ordinance becomes conforming because of
the adoption of this Ordinance, then said
use or structure will no longer be
considered nonconformity.
C. Completion of Development.
1. Application Submitted Before Effective
Date. Complete applications submitted
before the Effective Date of this
Ordinanc e may, at the applic ant’s option,
be approved and permits may be issued
under the terms of the previous Zoning
Ordinance. If construction is not
commenced or completed in accordance
with the applicable approval term(s), the
Town Council may, for good cause
shown, grant an extension of up to
eighteen (18) months for such
construction under the terms of the
previous Ordinance. If the building,
development, or sign is not completed
within the time allowed under the permit
or any extension granted, then the
building or structure may be constructed,
completed or occupied only in complianc e
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
2. Permit Issued Before Effective Date of
This Ordinance. Any building, structure,
or development for which a permit was
issued before the Effective Date of this
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 3
Ordinanc e may, at the applic ant’s option,
be completed in conformance with the
issued permit and other applicable
permits and conditions, even if such
building, structure, or development does
not fully comply with provisions of this
Ordinance. If construction is not
commenced or completed according to
the applicable permit terms, the Town
Council may, for good cause shown,
grant an extension of up to eighteen (18)
months for such construction under the
terms of the previous Ordinance. If the
building or structure is not completed
within the time allowed under the original
permit or any extension granted, then
the building, structure or development
may be constructed, completed or
occupied only in compliance with this
Ordinance.
3. Plats and Site Plans Approved Before
Effective Date of this Ordinance. Any
subdivision for which a preliminary or
final plat was approved before the
Effective Date of this Ordinance may, at
the applic ant’s option, be c ompleted
according to the approved plat and other
applicable permits and conditions, even if
the subdivision does not fully comply with
the provisions of this Ordinance. If the
subdivision is not completed within the
time requirements established by prior
ordinance or within any schedule included
in the approval of the plat, the Town
Council may grant an extension of up to
eighteen (18) months for the completion
of the subdivision under the terms of the
previous Ordinance. If the subdivision is
not completed within the time required
under the original approval or any
extension granted, then the subdivision
may be completed only in complianc e
with this Ordinance.
4. Additional Extensions. The Planning
Commission may grant an additional
extension exceeding twenty four (24)
months where the Planning Commiss ion
finds that such extension or extensions
are warranted in light of all relevant
circumstances, including but not limited
to the size and phasing of development ,
the level of investment, the need for the
development, economic cycles, and
market conditions.
D. Transition Provisions. Private Property
Rights Protection Act. (Prop 207)
1. Except with respect to properties for
which a waiver has been granted in
accordance with this subsection D, this
Ordinance shall govern all property within
the Town.
2. During the Transition Period the owner of
a parcel within the Town may file an
application to request that such parcel be
recognized as a Legal Non-Conforming
parcel as it relates to the regulations of
this Ordinance. The request shall be
submitted to the Planning Administrator
on a form prescribed by the City. As part
of the application, the owner shall
acknowledge that, if the request is
granted, development of the property is
allowed “as of right” under the 'old'
Ordinance, but further development shall
not include any requests for discretionary
land use approval, except in complianc e
with this Ordinance.
3. If the Planning Administrator grants a
request for Legal Non-Conforming status
pursuant to this subsection, any further
development on the parcel must proceed
in accordance with the zoning designation
that applied to the parcel immediately
prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance.
4. Waiver by the Owner of Potential Claim
under A.R.S. §12-1134. During the
Transition Period, an owner must, as a
condition precedent to any request for a
discretionary land use approval, execute
a waiver on a form prescribed by the City.
The property owner will waive all
potential claims under A.R.S. §12-
1134(I) for diminution in value arising
from application of a discretionary land
use approval subject to this Ordinance.
5. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit
the City’s rights and options under
Arizona law.
1.8 Interpretation
A. Interpretation and application of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 4
regarded as the basic and minimum
requirements for the promotion of public
health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the Town. Whenever any
provision of the Ordinance or any provision
of any other applicable law, rule, contract,
resolution, or regulation of the Town,
County, State, or Federal government
contains certain standards covering the
same subject matter, the more restrictive
requirement(s) or higher standards shall
control.
B. While the majority of situations subject to
this Ordinance will fall into easily
identifiable processes and requirement s,
this Ordinance is intended to provide
flexibility in dealing with situations which
may fall outside these typical processes
and requirements. It is the role of the
Planning Administrator to provide any
needed interpretations of this Ordinanc e
where flexibility may be granted, subject to
Section 2.2.E of this Ordinance.
C. The elements that make up the Ordinanc e
are interrelated and cannot be taken in
isolation; they must be taken within the
context and intent of the entire Ordinance.
D. The words and phrases used in this
Ordinance shall have the meanings
assigned in Section 1 hereto, unless a more
specific meaning is provided in a specific
section of this Ordinance.
E. This Ordinance includes illustrations,
photographs, and graphics for the
purposes of illustration and simplification.
However, to the extent that there is any
inconsistency between the text of this
Ordinance and any such illustration,
photograph, and graphic, the text shall
control.
1.9 Severability
A. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Town Council that the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be severable. If any
provision is declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, it is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent that the
effect of such decision shall be limited to
that provision or provisions which are
expressly stated in the decision to be
invalid; and such decisions shall not affect,
impair or nullify this Ordinance as a whole
or any part thereof, but the rest of the
Ordinance shall continue in full force and
effect.
1.10 Permits and Certificates
A. No development activity shall occur on any
property within the jurisdiction of this
Ordinance until all applicable permit s,
approvals and certificates have been issued
and approved by the Town officials with the
authority to approve the same pursuant to
this Ordinance.
1.11 Fees
A. The Town Council may, by ordinance or
resolution, establish administrative fees
considered necessary to enforce this
Ordinance. Such fees shall be limited to
the reasonable costs of administering and
processing applications for development
approval. No permit shall be processed,
and no permit shall be considered to be
submitted, until all applicable
administrative fees have been paid
pursuant to this Section and any ordinance
adopted hereto.
1.12 Effective Date
A. This Ordinance shall become effective after
a public hearing, adoption by the Town
Council and publication or posting as
provided by state law.
1.13 Effect of Ordinance
A. The policies and regulations in this
Ordinance apply to the use and
development of land. No application for
development approval shall be approved by
the Town Council or other designated
agency unless said application conforms to
and complies with the procedures,
standards and criteria of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 5
1.14 Definitions
A. Terms Defined. Words contained in this
section are those having a special meaning
relative to the purposes of this Ordinance.
In the interpretation of this Ordinance, the
provisions and rules of this section shall be
observed and applied, except when the
context clearly requires otherwise.
B. Words used or defined in one (1) tense or
form shall include other tenses and
derivative forms.
C. Words in the singular number shall include
the plural number, and words in the plural
number shall include the singular number.
D. The masculine gender shall include the
feminine, and the feminine gender shall
include the masculine.
E. The word "shall" is mandatory.
F. The words "may" or “should” is permissiv e .
G. The word "person" includes individuals,
firms, corporations, associations, trusts,
and any other similar entities.
H. The word "Town" shall refer collectively to
the Town of Queen Creek.
I. The word "Board" shall mean the Board of
Adjustment.
J. The words "Planning Commission" shall
mean the Town of Queen Creek Planning
Commission.
K. The words "Recorder" and "Recorder of
Deeds" shall mean the County Recorder.
L. In case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this
Ordinance and any caption, illustration, or
table, the text shall control.
M. All provisions of this Ordinance shall be
construed to be in addition to all other
applicable laws, ordinances and rules of the
federal government, the State of Arizona or
a Constituent Jurisdiction; and in case of
any conflict between this Ordinance and
any such other law, ordinance or rule, the
more restrictive shall prevail.
N. The words "include" and "including" mean
include or including by way of illustration
and not by way of limitation.
A
ABUT. Having property or district lines in
common.
ABUTTING PARCELS. Parcels which are
directly touching and have common parcel
boundaries. (Parcels across a public right of way
shall not be considered abutting).
ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A supplementary,
secondary dwelling unit that may be constructed
as an addition to the principal structure or as an
accessory to the principal structure.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A detached
residential dwelling unit which provides
complete independent living facilities for one (1)
or more persons, and which includes provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation on the same parcel as the primary
single-family dwelling is situated. An “ac c essory
dwelling unit” inc ludes a “granny flat” or “guest
house” as defined in this Ordinance.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached
subordinate structure, the use of which is
customarily incidental to, and supportive of, the
principal structure or the principal use of land
and which is located on the same parcel of
ground with the principal structure or use.
ACCESSORY USE. A subordinate use of a
building, other structure, or use of land which is:
? Clearly incidental to the use of the main
building, other structure, or use of land;
? Customarily in connection with the main
building, other structure, or use of land;
and,
? Located on the same lot with the main
building, other structure, or use of land.
ADULT ARCADE. Any business establishment or
concern to which the public is permitted or
invited and where coin or slug operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled amusement devices, still or motion
picture machines, projectors, videos or other
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 6
image-producing devices are maintained to
show images on a regular or substantial basis,
where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depic ting or desc ribing “spec ified sexual
ac tivities” or “spec ified anatomic al areas.”
ADULT BOOKSTORE. Any business
establishment or concern having as a regular
and substantial portion of its stock in trade,
”material” (as defined below) whic h is
distinguished or characterized by its emphasis
on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
“spec ified sexual ac tivities” or “spec ified
anatomic al areas.”
ADULT CABARET OR NIGHTCLUB. A business
establishment or concern (whether or not
serving alcoholic beverages) which features live
performances by topless and / or bottomless
dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, or similar entertainers, and where
such performances are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter
depic ting, desc ribing or relating to “spec ified
sexual ac tivities” or “spec ified anatomical
areas”.
ADULT DANCE STUDIO. Any business
establishment or concern which provides for
members of the public a partner for dance where
the partner, or the dance, is distinguished or
characterized by the emphasis on matter
depicting, or describing or relating to ”spec ified
sexual ac tivities” or “spec ified anatomic a l
areas”.
ADULT FIGURE MODELING STUDIO. Any
business establishment or concern which
provides for members of the public a model
whic h exposes their “spec ified sexual ac tivities”
or “spec ified anatomic al areas”, and whic h does
not provide all members of the audience or all
patrons spaces and utensils for artistic
renderings thereof.
ADULT HOTEL OR ADULT MOTEL. Any hotel
or motel which leases rooms for less than
twenty-four (24) hours and which derives not
less than fifty percent (50%) of its revenues
from the display of movies or materials
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, or describing or relating to
“spec ified sexual ac tivities” or “spec ified
anatomical areas”.
ADULT ORIENTED MERCHANDISE. Sexually
oriented implements, paraphernalia, or novelty
items, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto
sucks, sexually-oriented vibrators, benwa balls,
inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with
orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas,
and similar sexually-oriented devices which are
designed or marketed primarily for the
stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic
activity or distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, desc ribing or relating to “spec ified
sexual ac tivities” or “spec ified anatomic a l
areas”.
ADULT SHOWS. Any commercial establishment
regularly used for the presentation of shows
where persons display specified anatomical
areas, as defined in this Sect ion, or where
persons perform acts of or acts which simulate
specified sexual activities, as defined in this
Section.
ADULT THEATER. A theater or other
commercial establishment with or without a
stage or proscenium which is used for
presenting, on a regular and substantial basis,
“material” whic h is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter
depic ting, or desc ribing, or relating to “spec ified
sexual ac tivities” or “spec ified anatomic a l
areas”.
ADOPTED LEVEL OF SERVICE. See “Level of
Service, Adopted”.
AGRIBUSINESS. A business and / or
commercial use operated primarily for the
support of agricultural needs. It may consist of
products, materials, and equipment servicing
and sales; storage and / or processing of
agricultural products and / or animals.
AGRI-TAINMENT. A land use that supports and
enhances agriculture as an attraction for
entertainment and or education related
purposes. The Agri-tainment District
implements the Agri-tainment Future Land Use
classifications of the Queen Creek South Specific
Area Plan and requires a Planned Area
Development (PAD) Overlay.
AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS. The following
animals (also known as livestock) and fowl are
considered accessory to an agricultural or
residential use, whether used for personal
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 7
enjoyment or for commercial purposes: horses,
mules, burros, sheep, cattle, rabbits, chickens,
ducks, geese, goats, ostrich, emu or rhea,
alpaca, llama or similar animals or fowl
(excluding pea fowl).
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE. Fruit, vegetables,
eggs, and honey prior to processing of any kind
other than washing. Canned fruits or
vegetables, preserves, wine, meat and dairy
products shall not be considered agricultural
produce for the purposes of this Ordinance.
AIRPORT. Any public or private airport, as
defined in A.R.S. §28-8461, including terminal
buildings, towers, runways, and other facilities
directly pertaining to the operation of the
airport.
ALLEY. A public passageway affording a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
Frontage on said alley shall not be construed as
satisfying the requirements of this Code related
to frontage on a dedicated street.
AMATEUR RADIO TOWER. A structure, either
freestanding or building-mounted, that may
consist of more than a single shaft of steel or
concrete used to elevate an antenna intended for
airway communication purposes by a person
holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) license
issued by the Federal Communicat ion
Commission. For the purpose of interpreting this
definition, connecting wires used for
transmission and / or reception between poles,
masts, or ancillary supports, shall be considered
accessory appurtenances to the tower and not
additional towers. Poles, masts, cross-wires for
transmission/ reception and ancillary supports
less than eighteen feet (18’) high, or a maximu m
of ten feet (10’) above the highest part of the
residence, whichever is the greater, shall not be
considered Amateur Towers.
AMENDMENT. An amendment to an existing
Land Development Regulation or a new Land
Development Regulation.
ANIMAL FOOD MANUFACTURER. Any person
engaged in the business of manufacturing or
processing animal food derived wholly or in part
from carcasses or parts or products of the
carcasses of livestock.
ANIMAL UNIT. Represents the unit of
measurement utilized as the basis for
determining the number of agricultural animals
permitted in residential districts on lots 35,000
square feet and larger and shall be subject to the
following provisions:
One (1) animal unit shall consist of the following:
? One (1) large livestock animal (weaned beef
animal over six (6) months of age, horse,
llama, alpaca, mule, burro, ostrich or similar
animals). Swine are only permitted as part
of an educational project as stated in
Section 6.2 of this Ordinance) or;
? Five (5) medium livestock animals (goats,
sheep, or similar animals.) or;
? Ten (10) small livestock animals (rabbits,
ducks, chickens, geese, fowl (excluding pea
fowl) or similar animals.
ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or
receiving device mounted on a tower, building or
structure and used in communications that
radiates or captures electromagnetic waves,
digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless
telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
APPEAL. A request for a review of the
authorized Town employee’s interpretation of
any provisions of this Ordinance or a request for
a determination that there is error in an order,
requirement, or decision made by the authorized
Town employee pursuant to this Ordinance.
APPLICANT. Any person, firm, partnership,
joint venture, association, corporation, group, or
organization applying for any permit, approval,
or decision governed or required by this
Ordinance.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
APPROVAL OR APPLICATION. A written
request for any approval, permit, or action
required by this Ordinance, including any written
request for approval or issuance of a
development order or development permit. This
includes such terms as "proposals" and
"requests".
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. Means a
residential care institution, including adult foster
care or memory care, that provides or contracts
to provide supervisory care services, personal
care services or directed care services on a
continuing basis. This definition shall include
assisted living centers and assisted living homes.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 8
AUDITORIUM. A room, hall, or building that is
part of a church, theater, school, recreation
building, or other building assigned to the
gathering of people as an audience to hear
lectures, plays and other presentations. See
also “Plac es of Public Assembly”.
AUTHORIZED AGENT. Any person with valid
authority provided by the Owner, as evidenced
by a notarized document authorizing the Agent
to represent the Owner, and acting on behalf of
the Owner of land seeking a development order
or development permit approval.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR. Engine rebuilding or
major reconditioning (the removal from any
vehicle or a major portion thereof including, but
not limited to, the differential, transmission,
head, engine block, or oil pan, worn or damaged
motor vehicles or trailer collision service,
including body, frame or fender straightening or
repair, and / or painting of vehicles, or the sale
of automotive fuels or oils, and the incidental
repair and replacement of parts and motor
services to automobiles.
AVAILABLE CAPACITY. The difference
between the required capacity and planning
operating capacity; capacity to accommodate
Existing Capacity and Planned Capacity less
Existing Demand and demand that will be
generated by Committed proposed
development.
AVIGATION EASEMENTS. A document
acknowledging airport proximity, limiting the
height of structures and granting permission for
the conditions arising from the overflight of
aircraft in connection with the operation of an
airport.
AWNING. Roof-like cover entirely supported by
and extending from a building for protecting
openings therein, from the elements.
B
BACKHAUL NETWORK. Means the lines that
c onnec t a provider’s tower/c ell sites to one (1)
or more cellular telephone switching offices, and
/ or long distance providers, or the public
switched telephone network.
BAKERY. A place in which baked products (such
as bread, cakes, or cookies) are made.
BAR. Premises used primarily for the sale or
dispensing of alcoholic beverages by the drink
for on-site consumption and where food may be
available for consumption as an accessory use.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building between
floor and ceiling which is partly below and/or
partly above grade, but so located that the
vertical distance from grade to floor below is less
than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.
BED AND BREAKFAST. A house, or portion
thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and
meals are provided. The operator of the inn shall
live on the premises or in adjacent premises.
BERM. A mound of earth designed so that slope
drainage is directed away from a paved area and
sidewalks which serves as a screen or
landscaping.
BLOOD BANK OR PLASMA CENTER. A facility
at which an individual may donate or sell blood,
but which offers no other medical treatment or
services.
BREWERY. A restaurant and/or facility used for
the production and packaging of malt beverages
of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail, or
wholesale, on or off premise. The development
may include other uses such as a standard
restaurant, bar or live entertainment as
otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
BUFFER. In the built environment, a Buffer is an
area between developments of like or unlike
uses, extending the length of a property. In the
natural environment, a Buffer is a development
setback from the boundary of sensitive, natural
area. A Buffer may include landscaping,
screening and paths as approved by the Town.
BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot which is
within the building envelope formed by the
required yards. See “Yard, Required.”
BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING AREA. The total areas taken on a
horizontal plane at the mean grade level of the
principal buildings and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps,
roof overhangs, and balconies.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 9
BUILDING ENVELOPE. The three dimensional
space occupied by a building, including all eaves,
covered porches, breezeways and other portions
of the building, but excluding attached
decorative walls which are less than or equal to
three feet (3’) in height.
BUILDING FAÇADE. That exterior side of a
building which faces, and is most nearly parallel
to, a public or private street.
BUILDING FRONT. Defined as the side of a
building intended as the main customer
entrance, irrespective of the street frontage,
visibility or any factor other than customer
access.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from
the natural mean ground elevation of the lot to
the struc ture’s point of maximum height, whic h
includes all rooftop appurtenances, antennas,
mechanical and lighting devices, etc.
BUILDING OFFICIAL. An employee of the
Town authorized to issue building permits and
Certificates of Occupancy and to generally assist
in the administration of this Ordinance.
BUILDING PERMIT. An authorization to
construct a structure as issued by the Building
Department.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line, between
which line and street line no building or structure
or portion thereof may be erected, constructed
or established.
BUILDING TEMPORARY. A structure designed,
built, created or occupied for a short and / or
intermittent periods of time, including tents,
lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers and other
roofed structures on wheel or other supports
used for residential business, mercantile,
storage, commercial, industrial, institutional,
assembly, educational or recreational purposes.
For the purpose of this definition, “roof” shall
include an awning or other similar covering
whether or not it is permanent in nature.
BULK. The size and shape of buildings,
structures, and non-building uses; and the
physical relationship of their exterior walls or
construction or their location to lot lines and
other buildings or structures or other walls or
construction of the same building or structure;
and all open spaces required in connection with
a building or structure. Bulk regulations include
regulations dealing with lot area, lot area per
dwelling unit, lot frontage, lot width, building
height, required yards, courts, usable open
space, the ratio of aggregate gross floor area to
the area of the lot, spacing between buildings on
a single lot, and the length of buildings in a row.
BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED.
Sexually Oriented Business means business that
provides the adult servic e like “Adult
bookstores”, “Adult shows” , and “Adult
theaters”, “adult c abernet or night c lub”, “adult
danc e studio”, “adult figure modeling studio”,
“adult hotel and motel”, “adult oriented
merc handise”.
BUSINESSES, INCUBATOR. A facility
dedicated to the start-up and growth of small
businesses, accomplished through management
and facility support systems meant to cultivate
and enhance future businesses.
C
CAMPGROUND. An established and maintained
tract of land designated for the accommodation
of camping units for periods of overnight stay
not to exceed ninety (90) days per calendar
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 10
year. At least one (1) full-time attendant will be
provided and only an owner, manager, or
permanent maintenance personnel may use the
campgrounds as a permanent resident. See
“Overnight Campground” and “Rec reationa l
Campground” for respective details.
CARPORT. A roofed structure which may be
attached or unattached to the principal structure
providing space for the storage of one (1) or
more motor vehicles and enclosed on not more
than three (3) sides by walls.
CAR WASH. An establishment that provides
washing and cleaning of passenger or
recreational vehicles by hand, by use of
automated equipment operated by one (1) or
more attendants, or by self-service facilities.
CARRY-OUT FOOD SERVICE. A business
whose principal purpose is the preparation and
sale of food or beverages for consumption offsite,
such as delicatessens, ice cream stores and
hot dog stands, but shall not include liquor
stores, restaurants, and drive-through
commercial establishments.
CEMETERY. A parcel of land or structure
dedicated to and at least a portion of which is
being used for the interment of human or animal
remains. A cemetery may include crematories,
mausoleums, and columbaria.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. (C of O) As
defined in the current Building Code adopted by
the Town.
CHANGE IN USE. A change from one (1)
principal use of a building or land to another
principal use of the building or land whether or
not there is an increase in the size of the existing
building or extent of the use of the land.
CHANNEL. A natural or artificial low-lying area
with definite bed and banks, which confines and
conducts continuous or periodic flows of water.
CHILD CARE FACILITY. Any facility in which
child care is regularly provided for compensation
for children not related to the proprietor. This
definition inc ludes any “c hild c are fac ility”, as
defined in A.R.S. §36-881 or “c hild c are group
home”, as defined in A.R.S. §36-897, as well as
child care facilities which do not meet the
numeric thresholds of said definitions.
CLEANING OR PROCESSING
ESTABLISHMENT. A business that primarily
involves the on-site cleaning, treatment, or
chemical processing of good or materials, or the
storage of chemicals, used in off-site cleaning,
treatment, or processing. This includes, but is
not limited to carpet cleaners, dry-cleaning
plants, self-service or full-service laundries,
exterminating services, and taxidermists.
CLINIC/MEDICAL CLINIC OR HEALTH CARE
FACILITY. A building containing an association
or group of physicians, dentists, clinical
psychologists, and similar professional health
care practitioners, including allied professional
assistants who are assembled for the purpose of
carrying on their professions. The health care
facility may include apothecary, dental and
medical laboratories, tissue labs, and / or X-ray
facilities, but shall not include inpatient care or
operating rooms for major surgery. A clinic
inc ludes any “health c are institution”, “adult day
health c are fac ility”, “adult day health servic es”,
“nursing c are instit ution”, “nursing servic es”,
“outpatient surgic al c enter”, “residential c are
institution”, “respite c are servic es”, or
“supervisory c are servic es” as defined in A.R.S.
§36-401, any “nursing c are institution” as
defined in A.R.S. §36-446, any “rec overy c are
c enter” as defined in A.R.S. §36-448.51, but
does inc lude “adult foster c are” or an “assisted
living fac ility”, as defined in A.R.S. §36-401.
COLLECTOR STREET. Streets accessing
neighborhoods and routes serving intra city
rather than intra state travel. A minor amount
of through traffic may be carried by a collector
street, but the system primarily carries local
traffic. Average trip lengths and travel speeds
are less than for arterial routes. A collector
street includes any street classified as a Major
Collector; Estate, rural or Suburban Type A
Collector; or an Urban Collector pursuant to
Exhibits 11 through 13 of the Subdivision
Ordinance.
COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT, INDOOR. An
establishment offering sports, game playing or
similar amusements to the public , including, but
not limited to: skating rinks, bowling alleys,
billiards, ping pong, mechanical or electronic
games, but not gambling or card playing, within
a fully enclosed structure. Indoor commerc ial
amusement does not include non-commercial or
charitable events.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 11
COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT, OUTDOOR. An
establishment that offers games, rides, or other
similar activities on a commercial basis in a fixed
location, including but not limited to: miniature
golf, amusement parks, water slides,
amphitheaters, stadiums, tracks, and drive-in
theaters.
COMMERCIAL CENTER / COMPLEX. A
grouping of three (3) or more non-residential
buildings with shared access, parking, common
area, or similar common elements.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign wording,
logo, or other representation that, directly or
indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention
to a business, product, service, or other
commercial activity.
COMMERCIAL RANCH. A ranch where animal
or crop production take place, which may or may
not be owner-occupied but which utilizes two (2)
or more full-time employees who are not owners
or family of the owners, and may include
residential facilities for employees.
COMMERCIAL USES. Retail business and
service establishment, professional and
governmental offices, and developed
recreational uses.
COMMISSION. The Town of Queen Creek
Planning Commission.
COMMITTED DEVELOPMENT. For purposes of
the Concurrency Management Resolution,
Committed Development includes: development
with an approved determination of concurrency;
or developments which are approved, but which
are unbuilt, and unexpired sketch plans,
preliminary subdivision plans, or minor
development final plats; or final plats or building
permits approved without a determination of
concurrency.
COMMON OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the
same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership, or unincorporated association; or
ownership by different corporations, firms,
partnerships, entities, or unincorporated
associations, in which a stockowner, partner, or
associate, or a member of his family owns an
interest in each corporation, firm, partnership,
entity, or unincorporated association.
COMMUNICATION TOWER. Accessory
antennae or dishes, which may be free-standing
or building mounted structures, intended for
airway communication purposes.
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING
OPERATION CONCEPT PLAN. As defined in
A.R.S. §49-201. A generalized plan indicating
the boundaries of a tract or tracts under common
ownership, and identifying proposed land use,
land use intensity and thoroughfare alignment.
CONDITIONAL USE. A use which, because of
its unique or varying characteristics, cannot be
properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district. A use is considered a
conditional use if designated as such by Table
4.6-1 of this Ordinance.
CONDOMINIUM. Any structure which has been
submitted to condominium ownership under the
provisions of the Arizona Condominium
Ownership Act. This includes residential, nonresidential,
and any other space.
CONSENT AGREEMENT. A regulatory
document containing specific conditions of
development approval designed to implement
the policies and criteria contained in the Land
Development Regulations and, where the denial
or deferral of development approval is disputed
by the applicant, to effectuate the public policy
favoring the settlement of disputes, which
document contains an integrated development
scheme for a particular phase or phases of
development approval, and contains maps,
diagrams and other appropriate materials
showing future conditions consistent with the
provisions of Section 6.3 herein.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT. A nonpossessory
interest of a holder in real property
imposing limitations or affirmative obligations
for conservation purposes or to preserve the
historical, architectural, archaeological, or
cultural aspects of real property.
CONSISTENT. An amendment to this
Ordinance, or a development order or
development permit, shall be deemed
"consistent" with the General Plan only if the
land uses, densities or intensities, and other
aspects of development permitted by such order
or regulation are compatible with and further the
objectives, policies, land uses, and densities or
intensities set forth in the General Plan, and if it
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 12
meets all other criteria enumerated in the
General Plan. The term "compatible with"
means that the Code amendment, development
order or development permit is not in conflict
with the General Plan. The term "furthers"
means to take action in the direction of realizing
the goals, objectives, and policies of the General
Plan.
CONTIGUOUS. Bordering or adjoining, meeting
or joining at the border or surface.
CONVALESCENT HOME. A building where
persons reside and are provided with medical
care designed to restore them to health.
CONVENIENCE STORE. A freestanding or
center integrated business enterprise designed
to serve patrons on a short term drop-in-basis,
typically containing, but not limited to, a small
food and sundries store, drug store, carry-out
food service, hairdresser, or barber, or dry
cleaning pick-up store.
CONVEY. To transfer all or a part of a title or
equitable interest in land; to lease or assign an
interest in land; or to transfer any other land
interest.
CORRAL. A pen or enclosure for confining
animals.
COUNSELING CENTER. A facility where
individuals or small groups are provided
professional counseling assistance with
personal, emotional, marital, medical, or similar
problems on an outpatient basis.
COURTYARD. An open area, unobstructed from
the ground to the sky that is bounded on at least
three (3) sides by the exterior walls of one (1)
or more buildings. For residential development ,
courtyards shall be defined as an outdoor space
located in the front or side yard which is
bordered by a low wall or decorative fencing.
COWORKING SPACE. A style of work that
involves a shared workplace, often an office, and
independent activity. It generally costs money in
the form of membership dues, though some
spaces are free of charge.
CRITICAL ZONE. (Airport) A rectangular
shaped zone located directly off the end of a
runway's primary surface, beginning twohundred
feet (200') from the end of the
pavement, which is critical to aircraft operations
in that it is more apt to have accidents within it
because of the takeoff and landing mode of
aircraft in that particular area.
CUL DE SAC. A short dead end street
terminating in a vehicular turn around area.
CURB FACE. The vertical or shaped portion of a
curb, facing the roadway, and designed to direct
storm waters.
CUSTOM MANUFACTURING. An establishment
primarily engaged in the on-site production of
goods by hand manufacturing that involves only
the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical
equipment not exceeding two (2) horsepower or
a single kiln not exceeding eight (8) kilowatts,
and the incidental direct sale to customers of
goods produced on the site. Typical custom
manufacturing uses include ceramic studios and
custom jewelry manufacturing.
CUTOFF. The point at which all light emitted
from a source or fixture is eliminated at a specific
angle above ground level.
CUTOFF ANGLE. The angle formed by a line
drawn from the direction of light rays at the light
source and a line perpendicular to the ground
from the light source, above which no light is
emitted.
CUTOFF FIXTURE. A fixture with elements such
as shields, reflectors, or reflector panels which
direct and cutoff the light at an angle that is less
than ninety degrees (90°). Typically this type of
fixture conceals the light source, thus reducing
glare and spillover of light.
D
DAY CARE. See “c hild c are fac ility”.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 13
DAY CARE, ADULT. See “adult day health c are
fac ility”, as defined in A.R.S. §36-401.
DAY CARE CENTER. Any facility or building in
which day care is provided for more than eight
(8) hours per week for compensation for five (5)
or more children not related to the proprietor or
caretaker. Even though some instruction may
be offered in connection with such care, the use
shall not be considered with such care, the use
shall not be c onsidered a “sc hool” within the
meaning of this Code. Any day care center
existing in the Town of Queen Creek must at all
times be licensed by the state of Arizona,
Department of Health Services.
DENSITY. The total number of dwelling units
per acre on the total parcel, lot or development ,
computed in accordance with Section 4.7 of this
Ordinance.
DENSITY BONUS. Dwelling units permitted in
addition to the number that would result from
the application of the density and minimum lot
size requirements of Section 4.7 of this
Ordinance, and computed in accordance with
Section 4.10 of this Ordinance.
DENSITY, NET. The density or intensity based
upon the clustered area of a tract subject to an
application for development approval, which is
determined by dividing total permissible dwelling
units or square footage of floor area, including
additional density or intensity permitted
pursuant to an open space bonus, transfer of
development rights, or other density bonus; by
the number of net acres.
DESERT LANDSCAPING. The use of
landscaping materials, both vegetative and nonvegetative,
which are native to an arid or semiarid
climate.
DETENTION FACILITY. As defined in A.R.S.
§31-331.
DEVELOPER. A person, firm, partnership, joint
venture, association, corporation, groups or
organization who shall participate as owner,
promoter, developer, or sales agent in the
planning, platting, development, promotion, sale
or lease of a development.
DEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT
ACTIVITY. Any of the following activities:
? Change in use;
? Construction, clearing, filling, excavating,
grading, paving, dredging, mining, drilling,
or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil
of a site;
? Building, installing, enlarging, replacing or
sustainability restoring a structure,
impervious surface, or central water system
and including the long-term storage of
materials;
? Erection of a permanent sign;
? Any activity increasing the need for parking;
and,
? Construction, elimination, or alternation of a
driveway onto a public street.
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED. A person
who has autism, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or
mental retardation as disabled provided for by
A.R.S. §36-581.
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION. Any request
for approval, permission, or other action made
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
DIRECTOR. The Development Services Director
of the Town, or his or her designee.
DISPOSITION. A transfer of all or part of a title
or equitable interest in land; a lease or an
assignment of an interest in land; or any other
transfer or conveyance of an interest in land.
DRIVE-IN. A facility customarily providing
parking spaces for the ordering, delivery, and
consumption of a product or service in a parked
vehicle.
DRIVE-THROUGH COMMERCIAL
ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial retail or
personal service establishment designed or
intended to enable a customer in a motor vehicle
parked on or moving through the premises to
transact business with a person outside the
motor vehicle. Such establishments include, but
are not necessarily limited to financial
institutions, restaurants, and dry cleaning
stores. Such establishments require a
Conditional Use Permit.
DRIVEWAY. A private, vehicular access
connecting a house, carport, parking area,
garage, or other buildings with the street.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 14
DRIVEWAY, PRIMARY. The driveway, which
by virtue of its width and location, carries the
majority of ingress and egress vehicular trips
between a parking lot or structure, and the
frontage street.
DUST-FREE. Property that is paved in one (1)
of the following methods: (1) asphaltic concrete,
(2) cement concrete, (3) penetration treatment
of bituminous material and a seal coat of
bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate, or
(4) the equivalent of the above.
DUPLEX. A building containing two (2) singlefamily
dwelling units totally separated from each
other by an unpierced wall extending from
ground to roof.
DWELLING. A building or portion thereof
designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including single-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, duplexes, townhouses,
triplexes, manufactured homes, mobile homes,
modular homes, and multiple-family dwellings,
but not including hotels, boarding and lodging
houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED. A building containing
two (2) or more residential units, attached along
and sharing one (1) or more common walls
between any two (2) units or stacked one (1)
above the other or attached to a non-residential
use.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building or portion
thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or
more families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building
designed for occupancy by one (1) family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED. A
single family dwelling that is not attached to any
other dwelling by any means and is surrounded
by open space or yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED. A
single family dwelling that attached to one (1)
other dwelling by a common vertical wall, with
each dwelling located on a separate lot.
DWELLING UNIT. Any structure or part thereof
designed to be occupied as the living quarters of
a single housekeeping unit. Examples of
dwelling units include, but are not limited to
single family homes, apartments, dormitory
rooms, or boarding house rooms.
E
EARTH TONE. Earth tone color means any of a
group of colors which are dull and achromatic,
between red and yellow in hue (light brown or
tan) or between white and black in hue (gray),
of low lightness, of moderate to low saturation,
and with a reflectance level not exceeding 0.3.
EASEMENT. An interest in land that is less than
fee title which entitles the holder to a specific
limited use or enjoyment.
EASEMENT, NON-ACCESS. An easement
prohibiting vehicular access from a public street .
ENGINEER. A person licensed as an Engineer by
the Arizona Board of Registration.
EQUESTRIAN TRAIL. A natural surfaced path
for equestrian use designed in accordance with
standards on file with the Development Services
Department.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT OR “ERU” .
For purposes of this Ordinanc e, an “equivalent
dwelling unit” shall be as defined in Section
4.13.D.3.
EXCAVATION. The removal of soil, rock, or
other matter from a land area.
EXISTING CAPACITY. The capacity of the
existing built and operational Public Facilities, as
determined by the service provider.
EXISTING STRUCTURE. For purposes of
Sec tion 6.13 of this Ordinanc e, an “existing
struc ture” means a light pole, power pole,
chimney, billboard, or other similar structure
which is placed within the Town at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance, except existing
buildings.
EXOTIC ANIMALS. Those animals not defined
as household pets or agricultural animals.
EXTRACTIVE USES. Surface and / or
subsurface natural resources which may be
extracted from the land. This includes
exploratory drilling or mining but excludes
individual water well drilling.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 15
F
FAMILY. Any number of related persons living
together within a single dwelling unit; provided,
however, that the term “family” shall not inc lude
a group of more than six (6) persons who are
unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption.
FAMILY FOSTER HOME. A home which
receives one (1) to four (4) children for regular
full time care.
FARM AND RANCH STRUCTURES AND USES.
Those structures and uses devoted to the shelter
and raising of livestock, poultry, feed, flowers,
processing and growing crops, field equipment ,
or other agricultural items, with or without a
dwelling unit, but not including a feedlot or
concentrated animal feeding operation.
FARMER’S MARKET. A structure or place where
agricultural produce is brought for the purposes
of retail sales. (Note: A farmer’s market differs
from a produce stand in that there may be more
than one (1) seller allowed per parcel of land and
the structure from which produce is sold at a
farmer’s market need not be portable or c apable
of being dismantled or removed from the site).
FARMING. The use of land for the primary
purpose of raising, harvesting, processing and
selling crops or the feeding, breeding,
management and sales of, or the product of,
livestock, poultry, dairy. The sale of dairy
products not more than two (2) acres of land and
four-thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area
shall be devoted to such use including areas
used for structures, parking, storage, display,
setbacks, and landscaping.
FEED LOT. An area which is used for custom
feeding of livestock where the owners of said
livestock pay for yardage, feed, and feed
processing.
FENCE. A barrier of manmade construction,
regardless of the material used, including walls
but not retaining walls. ("Material" does not
include vegetation).
FENCE, LIVING. A hedge of vegetation used as
a screening device or a fence with vegetat ion
growing to it or on it which at the time of
maturity would prevent an “open” effec t and
would block the normal line of sight.
FENCE, VIEW. A fence constructed in such a
manner as to achieve at least fifty percent (50%)
openness overall three feet solid, three feet (3’ -
3’) view linear footage overall.
FENCE, PARTIAL VIEW. A fence constructed in
such a manner as to achieve at least thirty-three
percent (33%) openness overall, four feet solid,
two feet (4’ - 2’) view.
FENCE, SOLID. A fence constructed in such a
manner as to achieve total opacity (6’ solid – 0’
view).
FILL. Deposit of soil, rock, or other material
placed in an area which created an obstruction
or increases surface elevation.
FINAL PLAT. A survey map of record which
indicates the boundaries for streets, blocks, lots,
and other property divisions which is prepared
pursuant to Section 4.5 of the Subdivision
Ordinance for the Town of Queen Creek and
recorded after approval by the Town Council and
any accompanying material as described in this
Ordinance.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. As defined in
A.R.S. §28-4301.
FIRE FLOW SURVEY. A testing of fire hydrants
to determine capacity by volume and pressure
for firefighting purposes.
FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES. Fire stations
and major pieces of firefighting apparatus,
including, but not limited to pumpers, quick
response vehicles, hook and ladder trucks, and
similar equipment, owned and operated by
public fire districts.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 16
FLAG. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing
distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as
a symbol of a government, political subdivision,
or other entity.
FLEA MARKETS. A flea market, swap shop, or
similar activity by whatever name, where the
use involves the setting up of two (2) or more
booths, tables, platforms, racks, or similar
display areas for the purpose of selling, buying,
or trading merchandise, goods, materials,
products, or other items offered for sale outside
an enclosed building. Flea markets shall not
include any of the following activities which occur
at the same location four (4) or fewer days in
any calendar year: garage sales, produce
stands, or fund raising activities done by a nonprofit
organization.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. (FIRM) The
official map on which the Federal Emergenc y
Management Agency that includes profiles, the
Flood Boundary-Floodway Map, and the base
flood water surface elevation.
FLOOD PLAIN. An area adjacent to a
watercourse which may be subject to flooding as
a result of an increase in water flow beyond a
normal high water mark.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a wash or other
water course and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot (1’).
FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several stories of the building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of party walls.
Included shall be any basement floor, interior
balconies and mezzanines, elevator shafts, and
stair wells and enclosed porches. The floor area
of accessory uses and of accessory buildings on
the same lot shall be included.
FLOOR AREA RATIO. (FAR) The ratio of the
gross floor area of all structures on a parcel to
the gross area of the parcel on which such
structures are located.
FOOT CANDLE. A unit of illumination lighting a
surface, all points of which are one foot (1') from
a uniform light source equivalent to one (1)
candle in brightness or illumination. (See also
“Lumen”)
FRONT. Any public street frontage, not including
alleys, as determined by the Town. A parcel
shall have only one (1) front .
FRONT PORCH. A covered and floored nonlivable
area of a residence that is open at the
front and usually closed at the sides. Typically
partially enclosed with columns and railings, a
porch should be designed to have a noticeable
street presence and architecturally consistent
with the design of the main architecture of the
house.
FRONTAGE. The frontage of a parcel of land is
that distance where a property line is common
with a road right of way line.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 17
FRONTAGE, DOUBLE. A lot which extends from
one (1) street to another or to a proposed street.
FULLY SHIELDED. Fixtures that are shielded in
such a manner that light rays emitted by the
fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly
from the fixture, are projected below a
horizontal plane running through the lowest
point on the fixture where light is emitted, as
certified by photometric test report. A.R.S. §49-
1101.
FUNERAL HOME. An establishment with
facilities for the preparation of the dead for burial
or cremation, for the viewing of the body, and
for funerals.
FUTURE LAND USE MAP. The current and
adopted Town of Queen Creek General Plan Land
Use Map.
G
GARAGE, FRONT ENTRY. An enclosed
structure for the storage of vehicles oriented
such that the entrance is at a maximum angle of
forty-five degrees (45°) from the front setback
line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or
portion of a principal building designed or used
for the parking or temporary storage of motor
vehicles of occupants in the building to which
such garage is accessory, but not including the
parking or temporary storage of delivery or truck
motor vehicles having a capacity in excess of one
(1) ton.
GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion
thereof, other than a private garage, designed or
used for parking, servicing, repairing, equipping,
hiring, selling or storing motor vehicles.
GARAGE, SIDE ENTRY. An enclosed structure
for the storage of vehicles oriented such that the
entrance is a minimum angle of more than fortyfive
degrees (45°) from the front setback line.
GENERAL PLAN. A comprehensive plan for
development of the Town pursuant to A.R.S. §9-
461.05, and including any part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such
plan, or parts thereof.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREA. An area identified
by a qualified state or federal government
agency as containing or being direct ly affected
by geologic hazard.
GOLF, TENNIS, SWIM, FITNESS, HEALTH
CLUB. A private club, including country clubs,
that provides one (1) or more of the following:
indoor and / or outdoor golf, tennis, or swimming
facilities, indoor exercise or recreational rooms
and equipment; such as running, jogging,
aerobics, weight lifting, court sports and
swimming, as well as locker rooms, showers,
massage rooms, saunas, and related accessory
uses, which may include a clubhouse with dining
and banquet facilities; operated on a private
membership basis and restricted to use by
members and their guests.
GRADE. The average level of the finished
surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior
walls of those buildings or structures more than
five feet (5’) from a street line. For buildings
having walls nearer than five feet (5’) to a street
or streets, the elevation of the sidewalk at the
center of the wall adjoining the street(s), or if
there be no sidewalk, then the elevation of the
roadway at the center of the wall adjoining the
street(s).
GRADE, NATURAL. The undisturbed ground
level which may be determined by on site
evidence (vegetation, ground level on adjacent
land, elevation of adjacent streets and roads,
soil types, and locations, etc.)
GRADE, FINISHED. The grade after completion
of site development.
GRANNY FLAT, ELDER COTTAGE. A
temporary, separate, self-contained, living unit
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 18
placed on the same parcel and adjacent to the
existing primary residence as a dwelling unit for
a relative. This definition also shall include an
accessory apartment that is built onto or into an
existing single-family dwelling unit for the same
purpose. Such units are small, complete living
units which have a living area, kitchen,
bathroom, and separate entrance.
GROSS ACRE. A full acre of land prior to
subdivision and prior to dedication of any
required right of way or easement.
GROSS AREA. The area of a lot or parcel,
including all proposed or dedicated streets,
alleys, private access ways, roadway and / or
alley easements. Such boundaries shall extend
to the center line of a future and/or an existing
abutting street or alley right-of-way.
GROSS FLOOR AREA OR “GFA”. The sum of
the areas of all floor levels of a building or
structure measured within the exterior face of
exterior walls or the centerline of walls
separating two (2) abutting buildings, but
excluding any space where floor-to-ceiling
height is less than six feet, six inches (6'6").
GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (GROUP
HOME). A facility licensed or authorized by the
State of Arizona for 10 or fewer clients/persons
who reside together as a single housekeeping
unit and who receive common support, care,
training, supervision, or counseling from one (1)
or more staff persons on a twenty-four hour per
day basis. The limitation of 10 or fewer persons
does not include the operator of the facility,
members of the operator's family or persons
employed as staff. This definition shall not apply
to a group home for the developmentally
disabled as regulated by Arizona Revised
Statutes.
GROUP RESIDENCE. Dormitory, sorority,
fraternity, boarding house and / or lodging
where three (3) or more individual rooms are
occupied by residents who stay for periods of at
least thirty (30) days.
GUEST HOUSE. Living, eating, and sleeping
quarters within an accessory building for the sole
use of occupants of the premises, guests of such
occupants, or persons employed on the
premises. Such quarters shall not be rented,
and / or otherwise used for income producing
purposes.
GUEST RANCH. A working ranch with an
accessory use for the lodging and / or boarding
of guests which provides recreational activities
on, or adjacent to, the ranch.
GUEST RANCH/RESORT. A building or group
of buildings containing two (2) or more guest
rooms, other than a boarding house, hotel or
motel, and including outdoor recreational
activities such as, but not limited to, horseback
riding, golf course, swimming, tennis courts,
shuffleboard courts, barbecue and picnic
facilities, and dining facilities intended for the
primary use of its guests, but not including bars
and restaurants which cater primarily to other
than guests of the guest ranch/resort.
H
HALFWAY HOUSE. A group home for
supervised, residential living by person not
requiring institutional treatment, which may
include but is not limited to individuals with
common needs for treatment or rehabilitation
with respect to mental or physical challenges,
substances abuse rehabilitation or alternatives
to judicial system incarceration.
HARDSCAPE. Stone, brick, rock, sand, textured
or shaped concrete, decorative walls and / or
pedestrian facilities (e.g. benches, tables, play
equipment, walking, or bike paths).
HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.
As defined in A.R.S. §49-901.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY. See “Clinic ”.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT. Large equipment ,
including but not limited to trucks with greater
than a one (1) and one-half ton rating, cranes,
crawler type tractors, earth movers, dump
trucks, and other equipment of equal or greater
size and weight.
HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the grade to
the highest point of any portion of a structure,
as set forth in this Ordinance.
HELIPAD. A facility without the logistical
support provided by a heliport (see Heliport
definition) where helicopters take off and land.
Helipads do not include facilities for
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 19
maintenance, repair, fueling, or storage of
helicopters.
HELIPORT. An area providing an area for the
takeoff and landing of helicopters and fuel
facilities (whether fixed or mobile) or
appurtenant areas for parking, maintenance,
and repair of helicopters.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT STORAGE. See Industrial
Storage.
HIGHWAY. A general term denoting a public
way for purposes of vehicular travel including the
entire area within the right-of-way.
HILLSIDE DISTURBANCE. Any and all areas of
the building site disturbed during construction by
grading or excavation and temporary or
permanent construction for all buildings, parking
areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and other
areas of concrete, asphalt, or other construction
materials.
HOME-BASED OCCUPATION. A business
activity conducted as an accessory use to a
dwelling unit per Sections 3.2.H and 6.4 of this
Ordinance.
HOME OWNERS ASSOCIATION. An
association or organization, whether or not
incorporated, which operates under and
pursuant to recorded covenants for maintenanc e
and ownership agreements through which each
owner of a portion of a subdivision, be it a lot,
property or any other interest, is automatically a
member as a condition of ownership, and each
such member is subject to charge or assessment
for a pro-rated share of expenses of the
association which may become a lien against the
lot, property or other interest of the member.
HOSPITAL. Any building used for overnight
accommodation and medical care of human
patients including sanitariums, but excluding
clinics, long-term care facilities, and
c onvalesc ent homes. A “hospital” inc ludes any
“health c are fac ility” as defined in A.R.S. §36-
481, excluding clinics, rehabilitation centers,
therapy facilities, outpatient clinics, nursing
homes, blood banks, or ambulance facilities.
HOTEL. A building in which lodging or boarding
and lodging are provided for more than twenty
(20) persons and offered to the public for
compensation and in which ingress and egress
to and from all guest rooms are made through
an inside lobby or office.
HOTEL, RESORT. A building or group of
buildings, other than a motel, boarding house or
lodging house, containing twenty (20) or more
individual guest rooms, suites of guest rooms,
and dwelling units, which furnishes services
customarily provided by hotels, and which
provides outdoor recreation, dining and other
facilities for the primary use of its guests.
HOUSEHOLD PETS. Those animals which are
commonly kept as pets: dogs, cats, fish, small
birds (e.g. parakeets, parrots), rodents (e.g.
mice, rats), and reptiles (non-poisonous snakes,
lizards or similar animals).
HUD CODE. The National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974
(42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq., as amended)
and the regulations promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban
Development thereto (24 C.F.R. part 3282),
c ommonly known as the “HUD Code”.
I
INDUSTRIAL STORAGE. Outdoor storage or
deposit of motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts,
iron, metal, glass, paper, or other waste, or
discarded material not to be placed within any
required yard setback kept within a professional
and workmanlike screened area.
IMPACT FEE. The impact fee, connection fee,
user fee, or other fee or charge imposed by the
Town or other service provision entity, to defray
the pro rata share of capital costs for public
facilities needed to serve a proposed
development.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES. Includes all
buildings or structures measured at their
greatest extent and so as to include areas
overhung by eaves, balconies, decks and other
projecting features of the structure; also all
paved or otherwise hard-surfaced areas such as
roads, curbs and gutters, walks, parking lots and
loading areas, and asphalt or concrete aprons for
solid waste containers, signs or outdoor
mechanical equipment.
IMPROVED OPEN SPACE. Landscaped areas,
turf areas, parks, golf course, and recreation
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 20
areas constructed on the parcel, but shall not
include associated buildings.
IMPROVEMENTS. Right of way pavements,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paths, bikeways,
sedimentation control facilities, revegetation,
water mains, sanitary and storm sewers,
drainways, gas lines, electrical and telephone
lines and appurtenances, street signs, trees and
lights, lot pin monuments, range point boxes,
and any other similar items required for
compliance with the regulations of this
Ordinance or the conditions of approval.
INDUSTRIAL PARK. A special or exclusive type
of planned industrial area designed and
equipped to accommodate a community of
industries, providing them with all necessary
facilities and services in attractive surroundings
among compatible neighbors.
INDUSTRIAL USES. Storage, processing, and
shipping of agricultural or timber products;
minerals extraction and production, storage,
processing, shipping or conversion to energy;
fabrication, assembly, servicing, manufacture,
storage or warehousing of other products.
INSTITUTIONAL USES. Churches, Schools,
hospitals, residential Care Facilities, other public
or quasi-public uses.
INTENSITY. The number of square feet of
development per acre by land use type with
respect to non-residential land uses.
J
JUNK. As defined in A.R.S. §28-7941.
JUNKYARD. Any “automobile graveyard” or
“junkyard” as defined in A.R.S. §28-7941.
K
KENNEL. As defined in A.R.S. §11-1001.
KITCHEN. Any room principally used, intended,
or designed to be used for cooking or the
preparation of food. The presence of a range or
oven or utility connections suitable for servicing
a range or oven shall normally be considered as
establishing a kitchen.
L
LABORATORY, MEDICAL OR SCIENTIFIC. A
building or group of buildings in which facilities
for medical or scientific research, investigation,
testing or experimentation are located, and in
which no more than fifteen percent (15%) of a
building so occupied may be used for ancillary
manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
assembly, storage, repair, or service facilities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS. The
General Plan of the Town of Queen Creek, the
Queen Creek Zoning Ordinance, the Queen
Creek Subdivision Ordinance, and any other
ordinances or regulations governing land
development and / or land use within the Town
of Queen Creek, Arizona.
LANDFILL. See “Sanitary Landfill”.
LANDLOCKED PARCEL. A parcel of land
without access of record with the County Clerk
and Recorder.
LANDSCAPE. An area set aside from structures
and parking which is developed with natural
materials (e.g. lawns, trees, shrubs, vines,
hedges, bedding plants, rock) and decorative
features, including paving materials, walls,
fences and street furniture.
LAND SPLIT. The division of improved or
unimproved land whose area is two and one-half
(2-1/2) acres or less into two (2) or more tracts
or parcels of land for the purpose of sale or lease.
LARGE FORMAT RETAIL. (Big Box) A singleuser
retail structure in excess of fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet or any shopping center in
excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square
which may include fast food restaurants and
other accessory retail uses with an entrance
inside the primary retail establishment.
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE. A building within
which clothes washing and drying machines, and
clothes dry cleaning machines, either coin
operated or attendant operated, are provided on
a rental basis for use by individuals for doing
their own laundry and dry cleaning.
LEGISLATIVE ACTION. A general plan, zoning
ordinance, or any other ordinance establishing or
amending the General Plan or this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 21
LEVEL OF SERVICE. An indicator of the extent
or degree of service provided by, or proposed to
be provided by, a facility based upon and related
to the operational characteristics of the facility.
Level of Service indicates the capacity per unit
of demand for each public facility.
LEVEL OF SERVICE, ADOPTED. The Level of
Service (LOS) standards adopted in the Queen
Creek General Plan and in Section 5.1 herein.
LIBRARY OR MUSEUM. A room or building for
exhibiting, or an institution in charge of a
collection of books; artistic, historical, or
scientific objects.
LIQUOR STORE. A retail establishment at which
the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages
comprises not less than sixty percent (60%) of
the gross revenue for the establishment, but
which does not include consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the premises.
LIVESTOCK, LARGE. Cattle, oxen, horses,
mules, donkeys, alpaca, llama, or similar
animals. One (1) large livestock animal is
equivalent to one (1) animal unit.
LIVESTOCK, MEDIUM. Sheep, goats or other
similar animals (swine are only permitted as an
educational activity as described in Section
6.2F). Five (5) medium livestock animals are
equivalent to one (1) animal unit.
LIVESTOCK/FOWL, SMALL. Rabbits, ducks,
chickens, geese or similar animals or fowl
(excluding pea fowl). Ten (10) small livestock or
fowl is equivalent to one (1) animal unit.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES. A
permanently maintained space on the same lot
as the principal building accessible to a street or
alley and not less than ten feet (10’) in width,
twenty feet (20’) in length, and fourteen feet
(14’) in height.
LOADING SPACE. An off street portion of a
parcel for the temporary parking of commerc ial
vehicles while loading or unloading materials for
use or sale on the parcel. This space shall open
onto a street or alley, and any use of the space
shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic
upon the street or alley.
LOCAL ROAD OR STREET. Provides direct
access to adjacent land and access to higher
street classifications. All streets or roads not
otherwise classified are local.
LODGE. A structure providing lodging or
boarding for guests, located in close proximity to
natural recreational areas and / or opportunities.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY. A facility or part
of a facility that is intended to provide medical
supervision for eight (8) or more residents for
periods exceeding 72 hours.
LOT. A parcel or unit of land described by metes
and bounds and held or intended to be held in
separate lease or ownership, or shown as a lot
or parcel on a recorded subdivision, or shown on
a plat used in the lease or sale or offer of lease
or sale of land resulting from the division of a
larger lot, parcel, or tract into two (2) or more
smaller lots or units. A “lot” inc ludes any piec e
or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the
boundaries of which have been established by
some legal instrument of record that is
recognized and intended as a unit for the
purpose of transfer of ownership.
LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane within
the lot lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER. The intersection of two (2) or
more lot lines, or angle point or change in
direction of a lot line.
LOT COVERAGE. The area of land which is
covered by a building on a particular site. Lot
coverage shall be the percentage of net lot area
which is covered by the gross floor area of the
first floor. For all residential purposes, this
should include covered porches and patios,
detached garages, accessory dwelling units, and
all other accessory buildings or structures that
require a building permit and / or are larger than
120 square feet.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (THROUGH LOT).
An interior lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets.
LOT, FLAG. A lot having no frontage or access
to a street or place except by a narrow strip of
land.
LOT FRONTAGE. The distance for which a lot
abuts on a street.
LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot .
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 22
LOT, KEY. A lot adjacent to a corner lot having
its side lot line in common with the rear lot line
of the corner lot and fronting on the street which
forms the side boundary of the corner lot.
LOT LINE. Any line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of a corner lot,
the more narrow of the two (2) lot lines adjoining
a street right-of-way. Where the two (2) lot lines
of a corner lot are within fifteen feet (15') in
length of each, either one (1) of the lot lines may
be designated the front lot line. All appropriate
setbacks shall be adjusted accordingly.
LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite
and most distant from, the front lot line; except
that in the absence of a rear lot line as is the
case of the triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line
may be considered as a line within the lot,
parallel to and at a maximum distance from the
front lot line, having a length of not less than ten
feet (10’).
LOT LINE, SIDE. The boundary of a lot which is
not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT LINE, ZERO. The location of a building on
a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of
the building’s sides rests direc tly on a lot line.
LOT LENGTH. The length (or depth) of a lot
shall be:
? If the front and rear lines are parallel, the
shortest distance between such lines.
? If the front and rear lines are not parallel, the
shortest distance between the midpoint of
the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear
lot line
? If the lot is triangular, the shortest distance
between the front lot line and the line parallel
to the front lot line, not less than ten feet
(10’) long lying wholly within the lot.
LOT WIDTH. For rectangular lots, lots having
side lot lines not parallel, and lots on the outside
of the curve of a street, the distance between
side lot lines measured at the required minimum
front yard setback line on a line parallel to the
street or street chord; and for lots on the inside
of the curve of a street, the distance between
side lot lines measured 30 feet behind the
required minimum front yard setback line on a
line parallel to the street or street chord.
LUMEN. A unit of luminous flux. One (1) Foot
candle is one (1) lumen per square foot. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, the lumen output
values shall be the initial lumen output ratings of
a lamp.
M
MACHINE SHOP. A structure containing
machinery for the manufacture, modification, or
repair of metal goods and motor vehicle
equipment. This use does not include the
dismantling of motor vehicle parts and
equipment.
MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT SALES,
STORAGE, AND REPAIR. An indoor or outdoor
establishment primarily engaged in the cleaning,
repair, painting, reconstruction, storage or other
uses of heavy machinery, equipment, and
vehicles, including vehicle body work.
MANUFACTURED HOME. See “Manufac tured
Housing”.
MANUFACTURED HOME LAND LEASE
COMMUNITY. Any area, lot, parcel, or tract
held in common ownership, and on which
individual portions of said area, lot, parcel or
tract are leased for the placement of
manufactured homes as a primary residence. A
manufactured home land lease community does
not include manufactured home subdivisions or
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 23
property zoned for manufactured home
subdivisions.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION, A
parcel, or contiguous parcels of land subdivided
into two (2) or more lots configured for
development of manufactured housing.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING. A manufactured
structure designed for residential occupancy that
conforms to the HUD Code. Construction and
safety certification shall be affixed in the original
and permanent condition and shall not be
removed. This definition includes any
“Manufac tured Home” as defined in A.R.S. §41-
2142.
MANUFACTURING. Designing, assembling,
fabricating, producing, constructing, or
preparing a product or part of a product before
sale or use.
MARQUEE. Any permanent roof-like structure
projecting beyond a building or extending along
and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide
protection from the weather.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any
establishment having a fixed place of business
where massages are administered for pay,
including but not limited to massage parlors,
sauna baths, and steam baths. This definition
shall not be construed to include a hospital,
nursing home, or medical clinic or the office of a
physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or
duly licensed physical therapist or barbershops
or beauty salons in which massages are
administered only to the scalp, face, neck or
shoulders. This definition shall also exclude
health clubs which have facilities for physical
exercise, such as tennis courts, racquetball
courts, or exercise rooms, and which do not
receive their primary source of revenue through
the administration of massages.
MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on, friction
against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of external
soft parts of the body with the hands or with the
aid of any mechanical apparatus or appliance,
with our without such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol.
MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE. A “masseur” means
a male person, and a “masseuse” means a
female person, who practices massage.
MASSING. The shape and form of a building
provided by all, or a combination of,
architectural elements such as roof
configuration, spacing between buildings,
setbacks from the street right-of-way,
proportion of fenestration and entryways,
building form, exterior building materials,
building scale, architectural styles, and
landscaping.
MASTER PRELIMINARY PLAN. That portion of
a preliminary plat or preliminary site plan
submitted in connection with a multi-phase or
phased subdivision application which provides
the information and graphics meeting the
requirements of this Ordinance for the purpose
of implementing an integrated development
scheme for all phases of the proposed
subdivision.
MINOR ARTERIAL. A roadway designated as a
“minor arterial” in the major roadway network.
MINOR PERMIT. An application for
development approval proposing the
development of any of the following:
? All new single lot or single unit residential
uses on parcels of not less than forty (40)
acres and not within a platted or recorded
subdivision;
? New home occupations;
? The conversion of an existing building or
structure from its current or previous use to
a new or substantially different type of
activity or use, or a revision or amendment
to an approved development permit, which
? All temporary sales uses and temporary
structures
? All auxiliary uses to utilities requiring a
building permit.
MITIGATION. The concept of mitigation
requires the minimization of impacts to existing
vegetation and wildlife habitat as a result of
development in the resource area, and that lost
vegetation and wildlife habitat are restored or
recreated. If a vegetated area is altered, the site
must be revegetated to the same or greater
density, diversity, and volume of vegetation as
existed prior to the alteration. Furthermore, the
hydrology of the affected area shall be returned
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 24
to a level consistent with its pre-development
condition. At a minimum, mitigation shall
provide for:
? Construction methods that identify and
protect riparian habitat that is to be left
unaltered;
? Selective clearing or other habitat
manipulation;
? Replacement of affected vegetation with
appropriate plant species in ratios which will
result in simulation of the pre-alteration
vegetation within five (5) years;
? Periodic monitoring of mitigation features;
? Maintenance and replacement of damaged
plantings or other defective mitigation
measures.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT MIXED USE
PROJECT. A proposed development that
includes primary non-residential and primary
residential uses on the same development site.
MOBILE HOME. A single-family dwelling,
factory built and factory-assembled residence
which does not comply with the National
Manufactured Homes Construction Safety and
Standards Act (42 U.S.C. sec. 5401, 1978 as
amended) or the building code of the Town. This
definition inc ludes any “mobile home” as defined
in A.R.S. §41-2142.
MODEL HOME COMPLEX. The area used by a
home builder and approved by the Town as the
location of the homes to be used as models for
the home builder’s development within the
subdivision.
MODULAR HOME. A building including a
dwelling unit or habitable room thereof which is
either wholly or in substantial part manufactured
at an offsite location to be assembled on site,
and which complies with the building code
adopted by the Town.
MOTEL. A building or group of buildings
containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some
or all of which have a separate entrance leading
directly from the outside of the building with
garage or parking space located on the lot and
designed, used, or intended wholly or in part for
the accommodation of automobile transients.
Motel includes motor courts, motor lodges and
tourist courts, but not mobile home parks or
travel trailer parks.
MOTOR HOME. As defined in A.R.S. §28-4301.
MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER. As defined in A.R.S.
§28-4301.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP. A shop or
place of business used for the repair and
maintenance of motor vehicles and other motor
vehicle equipment as defined in Title 42, C.R.S.
MULTI FAMILY DWELLING. A structure
arranged, designed, and intended to be the
residence of more than one (1) family, with each
family having independent cooking and bathing
facilities.
MUNICIPALITY. An incorporated city or town.
N
NATURAL HAZARD. A geologic, floodplain, or
wildfire hazard as identified by a state or federal
agency.
NATURAL RESOURCE. Existing natural
elements relating to land, water, air, plant, and
animal life, including, but not limited to soils,
geology, topography, surface and subsurface
waters, wetlands, vegetation and animal
habitats.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK. An open area of five
(5) to ten (10) acres in size and including lawn
area, trees, shrubbery, walks, benches, a focal
point (such as a fountain or statue), sandbox,
and play apparatus.
NET ACRES. The total number of acres subject
to an application for development approval
excluding the following:
? Any areas reserved for arterial or collector
street right-of-way; and
? Any areas reserved for schools and public
sites.
NET AREA OR NET LOT AREA. The area of a
lot or parcel, excluding all dedicated streets or
alleys and roadway or alley easements.
NET DENSITY OR NET INTENSITY. See
“Density, Net”.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 25
NET FLOOR AREA. The square footage of the
primary use area of a building including
restrooms, hallways and stairwells, but not
including normally unoccupied areas such as
garages, storage rooms, furnace areas,
stairways, elevator shafts, elevator lobbies,
mechanical areas, security areas or services
areas.
NIGHT CLUB. A commercial establishment
dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises and in which music, dancing or
live entertainment is conducted.
NON-CHARTERED FINANCIAL
INSTITUTION. (NFI) A business other
than a State or Federally chartered bank, credit
union, mortgage lender or savings and loan
association, that offers check cashing services
and loans for payment of a percentage fee,
specifically included are check cashing
businesses that charge a percentage fee for
cashing a check or negotiable instrument, and
payday loan businesses that make loans upon
assignment of wages received. Excluded are
retail uses in which a minimum of 70 percent of
the floor area of the store is devoted to display
or sale of merchandise. Non-chartered financial
institutions may also be referred to as payday
loan and / or check cashing businesses.
NON-CONFORMING USE. A use of land that:
? Legally existed before its current zoning or
land use category designation; and
? Has been maintained continuously since the
time the applicable regulations governing the
land changed; and
? Because of subsequent changes, does not
confirm to this Ordinance or General Plan
provisions that now govern the land.
NON-PROFIT. Organizations which qualify for
exemption from federal income taxes, pursuant
to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code, and for which an application for exemption
thereto has been approved by the federal
Internal Revenue Service.
NURSERY/GREENHOUSE/ LANDSCAPING
MATERIALS. A place where plants are raised,
acquired, and maintained for transplanting or
sale. It may also include, either exclusively or in
conjunction with the above activities, the sale of
materials commonly used for landscaping
purposes, such as soil, rock, bark, mulch, and
other materials determined by the Director to be
landscaping materials. Sale or rental of small
landscaping tools and supplies may be an
accessory use.
NURSERY, PRESCHOOL, DAYCARE. A school
and / or care facility which is licensed by the
State and is maintained for the whole or part of
the day for more than six (6) children.
NURSING HOME. An establishment licensed by
the State which maintains and operates
continuous day and night facilities providing
room and board, personal services, and medical
care for compensation for two (2) or more
persons not related to the operator of the home.
O
OBSTRUCTION. Any physical alteration in, to,
along, across, or projecting into any watercourse
which may impede, retard or change the
direction of the flow of water, either in itself or
by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water, or that is placed where a flow of water
might carry the same downstream.
OCCUPANCY FRONTAGE. For purposes of
signage, the lineal building frontage occupied by
a tenant.
OFFICE. A building or portion of a building
wherein services are performed involving
predominantly administrative, professional, or
clerical operations.
OFF-PREMISES DISPLAY AND SALES. As
defined in A.R.S. §28-4301.
OFF-PREMISES EXHIBITION. As defined in
A.R.S. §28-4301.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE. The space
required to park one (1) vehicle, exclusive of
access drives, and not on a public right -of-way.
ONE HUNDRED YEAR (100 YEAR)
FLOODPLAIN. The low land near a watercourse
which has been, or may be, covered by water of
a flood of 100 year frequency, as established by
engineering practices of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. It shall also mean that a flood of this
magnitude may have a one percent (1%) chance
of occurring in any given year.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 26
OPEN MINING. The mining of natural mineral
deposits by removing the overburden lying
above such deposits and mining directly from the
deposits exposed. The term includes, but is not
limited to, such practices as open cut mining,
open pit mining, strip mining, quarrying and
dredging.
OPEN SPACE. Means and refers to the
following:
? Active Open Space or any park and
recreational facility that is not dependent
upon a specific environmental or natural
resource, which is developed with recreation
and support facilities that can be provided
anywhere for the convenience of the user.
Activity-based recreation areas include, but
are not limited to, playgrounds, golf courses,
bicycle trails, baseball or softball fields,
football or soccer fields, basketball courts,
tennis courts, picnic areas, playgrounds, and
trails;
? Passive open space or areas in and located
due to the presence of a particular natural or
environmental setting and which may include
conservation lands providing for both active
and passive types of resource-based outdoor
recreation activities that are less formalized
or program-oriented than activity-based
recreation. Resource-based outdoor
recreation means and refers to activities
requiring a natural condition that cannot
easily be duplicated by man and includes, but
is not limited to boating, fishing, camping,
enhancement areas, nature trails and nature
study; and,
? Critical areas, roadway areas including rights
of way, parking lots and lawns, setback
areas, or other undisturbed portions of
building lots shall not constitute open space.
Urban design features, such as landscaped or
hardscaped plazas, paseos and promenades
connecting commercial parking areas to
adjacent commercial uses, and parking area
landscaping that exceeds that required by
this Ordinance, fountains and sitting areas
which provide an open park-like atmosphere
shall be considered open space. Boulevard
strip areas and landscape median areas shall
be considered open space consistent with
Section 6.2 of the Subdivision Ordinance,
which is hereby incorporated by this
reference as if set forth in its entirety herein.
ORDINANCE. Unless otherwise specified refers
to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town, which was
adopted as RZ13-97 on January 6, 1999.
OUTDOOR CULTURAL EVENTS.
Entertainment, educational and cultural events
generally involving the outdoor assembly of fifty
(50) or more people.
OUTDOOR EVENT, TEMPORARY. A temporary
commercial amusement activity such as a
carnival, circus, rodeo, or auction.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES. Outdoor artificial
illuminating devices, lamps and other devices,
permanent or portable, used for illumination or
advertisement. Such devices shall include, but
are not limited to search, spot or flood lights for
buildings and structures, recreational areas,
parking lot lighting, landscape lighting,
billboards and other signage and street lighting.
(See A.R.S. §49-1101).
OUTDOOR RENTAL YARD. An establishment ,
located fully or partially outside of an enclosed
structure that offers goods for rent primarily for
outdoor use.
OUTDOOR RETAIL SALES. An establishment ,
located fully or partially outside of an enclosed
structure that offers goods for sale primarily for
outdoor use, including but not limited to home
improvement and building materials, statuary,
garden equipment and plants, but not including
vehicle and boat sales or machinery and
equipment sales.
OUTDOOR SALES. Any person(s),
congregation, or assembly of vendors that offer
for sale, trade, or barter any merchandise or
goods in open air or indoor booths, stalls or other
display areas for no more than eight (8) hours
per day.
OUTDOOR STORAGE, NON-VEHICULAR. An
establishment that provides for outdoor storage
of machinery and equipment, not including
vehicles.
OUTDOOR STORAGE, VEHICULAR. The
containment of personal property by the owner
or occupant of a premises, not to be located
within the front yard, along street rights-of-way,
or within five-hundred feet (500’) of residential
uses and residential zoning districts. Examples
include vehicles, dumpsters, appliances, trailers,
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 27
recreational vehicles, airplanes, boats, or any of
the foregoing, or building materials.
OUTDOOR VEHICLE DISPLAY. The use of land
at least ten feet (10') wide and spaced no closer
than one (1) per one-hundred feet (100') of road
frontage to show operable motor vehicles,
recreational vehicles, boats, or trailers for sale,
not to be within a required landscaped area or
elevated higher than three feet (3') in the air.
OVERNIGHT CAMPGROUND. Campground
located in urban areas or in close proximity to a
major highway intending to serve the traveling
public in need of overnight accommodation.
P
PARCEL. An area of land defined by a legal
description and recorded with the County
Assessor or Recorder.
PARK. Any public or private land available for
recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic
use.
PARKING GARAGE. An attached or detached
building which is intended for the storage of
motor vehicles and is available for use by the
general public for free or for a fee.
PARKING LOT. An area other than a street or
alley devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE. A permanently surfaced
area, enclosed or unenclosed, together with a
driveway connecting the parking space with a
street or alley and permitting ingress and egress
of an automobile. Parking space dimensions shall
be as defined in Section 5.6 of this Ordinance.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. A paved and
properly drained area, enclosed or unenclosed,
required by this Code to be permanent ly
reserved for parking one (1) motor vehicle. The
size of such space shall be in accordance with
Section 5.6 of this Ordinance.
PARKING STRUCTURE. A facility, partially or
fully above ground, accessory to another facility
or a primary use at which a fee may be charged
for the temporary storage of passenger vehicles.
PARTIALLY SHIELDED. Fixtures that are
shielded in such a manner that the bottom edge
of the shield is below the plane of the center line
of the lamp reducing light above the horizontal,
as certified by photometric test report. (See
A.R.S. §49-1101)
PATH, MULTI-USE. A pathway, which may be
paved or unpaved, and is physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open
space or barrier and is either within the highway
right-of-way or within an independent t ract or
easement. Multi-use path activities may include
walking, hiking, jogging, horseback riding,
bicycling, and roller skating.
PAWN SHOP. An establishment at which money
is lent on the security of property pledged in the
keeping of the pawnbroker and the incidental
sale of such property.
PEDESTRIAN PATH. An improvement located
within a public or private right-of-way which is
designed primarily for the use of pedestrians and
/ or bicyclists.
PEDESTRIAN RIGHT OF WAY. A right of way
or easement dedicated for public pedestrian
access.
PENNANT. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or
other material, whether or not containing a
message of any kind, suspended from a rope,
wire, or string, usually in series, designed to
move in the wind.
PERFORMER. Any person who is an employee
or independent contractor of the adult business,
or any person who, with or without any
compensation or other form of consideration,
performs live entertainment for patrons of an
adult business.
PERMIT. For the purpose of this Code, the term
“Permit” shall mean Use Permit, exc ept in those
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 28
areas referring to building, construction, or
offsite improvement permits.
PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals;
or association, company, corporation, firm,
organization, or partnership, singular or plural,
of any kind; or any corporation, general or
limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated association, or governmental or
quasi-governmental entity.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A
business that provides personal services directly
to customers at the site of the business, or which
received goods from or returns goods to the
customer which have been treated or processed
at another loc ation. “Personal servic e
establishment” inc ludes, but is not limited to
travel agencies, dry-cleaning and laundry dropoff
and pick-up stations, tailors, hair stylists,
cosmeticians, toning or tanning salons, branch
offices of financial institutions, photocopying
services, postal substations, package delivery
drop-off and pick-up stations, shoe repair shops,
interior design studios, domestic pet grooming
and care services, and art, music, dance and
martial arts schools.
PETITIONER. An applicant.
PHARMACY. A building or part of a building,
used for the dispensing of medicines or medical
supplies only.
PHASED SUBDIVISION APPLICATION OR
PHASED SITE. An application for subdivision or
site plan approval in which the applicant
proposes to immediately subdivide or develop
the property but will develop in one (1) or more
individual phase(s) over a period of time. A
phased subdivision application may include an
application for, approval of, or conversion to,
horizontal or vertical condominiums, nonresidential
development projects, planned unit
developments, mixed-use projects, and
residential developments. A phased subdivision
application or phased site plan application must
be filed as part of an application for a specific
plan or Master Preliminary Plan.
PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY, INDOORS.
Buildings or indoor facilities for the purpose of,
but not necessarily limited to banquet halls,
auditoria, private clubs and lodges, conference
centers, and theaters, including kitchen for the
preparation of food to be consumed at the
premises.
PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY, OUTDOOR.
See “Commerc ial Amusement, Outdoor”.
PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT. (PAD) An
area of land zoned and improved as a
development for which the otherwise applicable
bulk use and other requirements may be
modified in order to allow for more flexible
planning in conformance with the development
approval process.
PLANNED CAPACITY. The capacity to be added
by Planned Capital Improvements.
PLANNED CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. A capital
improvement which does not presently exist, but
which is included and designated for
commencement and completion of construction
in a Capital Improvement Program.
PLANNED COMMUNITY (OR MASTER
PLANNED) DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land
planned and developed as an integrated unit
under single ownership or control, the
development of which is unique and of
substantial impact upon the surrounding area.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The Town of Queen
Creek Planning Commission. Also referred to as
the “Commiss io n”.
PLANT NURSERY. The use of land, buildings, or
structures for the growth and production of plant
materials for sale.
PLANT NURSERY, RETAIL SALES. The use of
land, buildings, or structures for the sales of
plant materials, landscape materials, and
fertilizer, excluding production of plant
materials.
PLAT. As defined in the Subdivision Ordinance.
POINT SOURCE. Any discernible confined and
discrete conveyance, including but not limited to
any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete, fissure, contained, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel
or other floating craft from which pollutants are
or may be discharged.
PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS. (We Buy Gold)
Any business engaged in purchasing or making
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 29
appraisals of precious metals and their alloys for
resale to refiners, brokers, or the public .
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING
ANTENNAS. Any tower or antenna for which a
building permit has been properly issued prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance, including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet
been constructed so long as such approval is
current and not expired.
PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary drawing
or drawings described in the Code indicating the
proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to
be submitted to the Planning Commission for
approval.
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL. Streets which provide
a network of continuous routes serving intraand
inter-state travel as well as inter- and intraurban
travel.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building or buildings
in which the dominant use of the lot on which it
is situated is conducted. In any residential
district, any dwelling (excluding an accessory
dwelling or accessory apartment) shall be
deemed to be the main building of the lot on
which it is situated.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The structure in
which the principal use of a property is
conducted. This shall include any buildings
which are attached to the principal structure by
a covered structure.
PRINCIPAL USE. The main or primary use of a
parcel of land.
PRIVATE. Anything not owned or operated by
the federal government, state government, or
any political subdivision.
PRIVATE CLUBS, LODGES. See “Plac es of
Public Assembly, Indoors”.
PRIVATE USE. One (1) which is restricted to the
occupants of a lot or building together with their
guests, where compensation for such use is not
received, and where no business or commerc ial
activity is associated with such use or building.
PRIVATE UTILITIES. Includes power,
telephone, internet, natural gas, cable
television, and private water supply service.
PRODUCE STAND. A temporary open air stand
or place for the seasonal selling of agricultural
produce. A produce stand must be portable and
capable of being dismantled or removed from
the sales site. (See also Farmer’s Market.)
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An office of a
member of a recognized profession maintained
for the conduct of that profession and not
including storage or sale of merchandise as a
primary use.
PUBLIC. Anything owned or operated by the
federal government, state government, or any
political subdivision.
PUBLIC FACILITIES. Capital Improvement s
including Water Facilities, Wastewater Facilit ies,
Fire Protection Facilities, Public Schools,
Regional Parks, and Streets.
PUBLIC HEARING. A public meeting for which
public notice has been given and an opportunity
for public testimony is provided.
PUBLIC LAND FOR DEDICATION AND
OWNERSHIP. Parks, playgrounds, schools,
drainage channels, trails, highways, roads and
streets or other areas of land accepted by the
Town Council and dedicated for the public's use
or benefit.
PUBLIC MEETING. A meeting of a Board,
Planning Commission, Town Council, or their
representatives where the public may attend.
PUBLIC NOTICE. Notice to the public of a public
hearing or meeting as required by state or local
law.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY. Any street, road,
highway, alley, or pedestrian/bicycle way or
other special purpose way or utility installation
owned by, or reserved to, the public for present
or future public use.
PUBLIC SCHOOLS. Elementary schools, middle
schools, high schools, accommodation schools
and charter schools, capital equipment provided
therein and the land needed for Public Schools
which are owned and operated by the applicable
school district, as defined in A.R.S. §15-101.
PUBLIC USE. A use which is owned by, and
operated for, the public by a public entity.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 30
R
RAILROAD SWITCHING YARD. A facility that
provides terminal facilities for rail traffic of
railroad cars between terminal yards and similar
facilities.
RECEIVING AREA. An area designated by this
Ordinance as appropriate for development
beyond the target density through the transfer
of development rights.
RECLAMATION. Rehabilitation of plant cover,
soil stability, water resources, and other
measures which will allow or cause flora to
permanently grow on land.
RECORDED/RECORD. Document(s) being
placed in the indexed or coded files and book(s)
of the County Clerk and Recorder.
RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUND. Campground
located in close proximity to natural recreational
areas and / or opportunities providing an
outdoor living environment.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Means a vehicular
type unit which is:
(a) A portable camping trailer mounted on
wheels and constructed with collapsible partial
sidewalls which fold for towing by another
vehicle and unfold for camping.
(b) A motor home designed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping or travel use and built on or
permanently attached to a self-propelled motor
vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van that is
an integral part of the completed vehicle.
(c) A park trailer built on a single chassis,
mounted on wheels and designed to be
connected to utilities necessary for operation of
installed fixtures and appliances and has a gross
trailer area of not less than three hundred
twenty square feet and not more than four
hundred square feet when it is set up, except
that it does not include fifth wheel trailers.
(d) A travel trailer mounted on wheels, designed
to provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use, of a size or
weight that may or may not require special
highway movement permits when towed by a
motorized vehicle and has a trailer area of less
than three hundred twenty square feet. This
subdivision includes fifth wheel trailers. If a unit
requires a size or weight permit, it shall be
manufactured to the standards for park trailers
in A 119.5 of the American national standards
institute code.
(e) A portable truck camper constructed to
provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, travel or camping use and
consisting of a roof, floor and sides designed to
be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a
pickup truck. As defined in A.R.S. §41-2142.
RECREATION VEHICLE, OVERNIGHT. A
recreation vehicle which is not designed for or to
be used for permanent residential use in a travel
trailer/recreation vehicle park or at other
approved locations.
RECREATION VEHICLE PARK. Any parcel of
land upon which two (2) or more recreation
vehicles for dwelling or sleeping purposes are
located regardless of whether or not a charge is
made for such accommodations.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, DESTINATION. A
recreation vehicle which is designed for and is to
be used for permanent residential use in a travel
trailer/recreation vehicle park or at other
approved loc ations. The term “destination
rec reation” vehic le inc ludes park model travel
trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE RESORT. An
integrated development where recreational
vehicles are used for temporary residential
purposes in conjunction with recreational and
social centers designed to provide a significant
portion of the recreational and social needs of
the occupants of the resort.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE. A parcel of
land which is designed and intended for the
accommodation of one (1) recreational vehicle.
RECYCLING CENTER. See “Sc rap and Salvage
Servic es”.
RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT. An
incidental use that serves as a neighborhood
drop off point for temporary storage of
recoverable resources. No processing of such
items would be allowed.
REGIONAL PARKS. Park land and related
facilities thereon containing at least fifty (50)
acres, which offers natural and scenic quality,
which supports both passive and active
recreational activities for all residents of the
Town of Queen Creek, which is owned by Queen
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 31
Creek and operated by the Town Parks and
Recreation Department.
REGULATION. As used in this Ordinance,
means an applicable provision of this Ordinanc e
or any other requirement promulgated under
this Ordinance or the Code of Ordinances of the
Town.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATIONS. The
elevation which is one foot (1') above the
calculated water-surface elevation of the base
flood.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS. Buildings or
facilities used for public worship and related
educational, cultural, and social activities.
RENTAL, HOME ORIENTED. A business
providing items for rent which are generally
found or used in and around the home, including
but not limited to furniture, appliances and small
equipment, but not including heavy equipment.
REPAIR SERVICES, SMALL APPLIANCE, AND
EQUIPMENT. An establishment located within a
fully enclosed facility that offers repair services
for small appliances and equipment, including,
but not necessarily limited to electronics,
computers, stereos, and home appliances, but
not including vehicles and vehicle parts.
RESIDENTIAL RANCH. A residence that may
include animal or crop production but does not
include residential facilities for employees.
RESIDENTIAL SUB UNIT. A dwelling unit
which is secondary and subordinate to a principal
dwelling unit, and which is located within the
same Building as the principal dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. Any of the
following zoning districts: R1-190; R1-145; R1-
108; R1-54; R1-43; R1-35; R1-18; R1-15; R1-
12; R1-9; R1-8; R1-7; R1-6; R-2; R-3; and R-4.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION. The on-site
extraction of surface or sub-surface mineral
products or other natural resources, including
but not necessarily limited to quarries, burrow
pits, sand and gravel operations, oil and gas
extraction, and mining operations.
RESTAURANT. An establishment serving food
and beverages where all service takes place
within an enclosed building or an accessory
outdoor eating area.
RESUBDIVISION or RE-PLAT, FINAL. The
changing of an existing parcel created by a plat
and recorded with the County Clerk and
Recorder.
RETAIL ACTIVITIES OR RETAIL USES.
Includes sales of merchandise at retail prices,
personal and business services, restaurants,
galleries, and similar uses, but not including
financial institutions.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. A building,
property, or activity the principal purpose of
which is the sales of goods, products, or
materials directly to the consumer. This
includes, but is not limited to buying clubs,
clothing stores, appliance stores, bakeries, food
stores, grocers, caterers, pharmacies, book
stores, florists, furniture stores, hardware
stores, pet stores, toy stores, indoor tool and
equipment rental, and variety stores. It does not
include restaurants, personal service
establishments, commercial amusements, or
cleaning or processing establishments.
RETAINING WALL. A manmade barrier
constructed for the purpose of stabilizing soil,
retarding erosion, or terracing a parcel or site.
RIGHT-OF-WAY.
? A general term denoting land, property, or
interest therein, usually in a strip, acquired
for or devoted to transportation purposes;
and,
? The right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to
proceed in a lawful manner in preference to
another vehicle or pedestrian.
RIPARIAN ECOSYSTEM Living organisms
(plants and animals) and habitat that occur in
association with any spring, cienega, lake,
watercourse, river, stream, creek, wash, arroyo,
or other body of water, either surface or
subsurface.
ROAD LINK. A section of the Major Roadway
Network defined by a node at each end.
ROADSIDE STAND. An accessory structure for
the seasonal retail sale of grown or produced
food products on the lot.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 32
ROADWAY. The improved portion of a street
within a right of way and / or easement.
ROADWAY, SHARED. Any roadway upon which
a bicycle lane is not designated and which may
be legally used by bicycles regardless of whether
such facility is specifically designated as a
bikeway.
ROOF LINE. The highest edge of the roof or the
top of parapet, whichever establishes the top
line of the structure when viewed in a horizontal
plane.
RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE. A trapezoidal
shaped zone located directly off the end of a
runway's primary surface, beginning twohundred
feet (200') from the end of the
pavement, and which is clear of all above ground
obstruction or construction. The width is the
same as for the primary surface. The length is
determined by the use of the runway.
S
SAFETY SERVICES. Offices, stations, or related
facilities for police protection, fire protection,
and related activities designed to promote the
public order and safety.
SALVAGE YARD. See Industrial Storage.
Premise will not be considered a salvage yard if
no more than two (2) vehicles are kept in an
enclosed garage by the owner or occupant of the
premise not to be located within the front or side
yard setback.
SANITARY LANDFILL. A “munic ipal solid waste
landfill”, “solid waste landfill”, or “waste tire
fac ility” as defined in A.R.S. §49-201.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAE. A parabolic
antenna designed to receive electromagnetic
transmissions from a satellite.
SCHOOL. An institution of learning, such as
elementary and secondary schools, colleges and
universities, which offers instruction in several
branches of learning and study, but not including
business colleges, nursery schools, dancing
schools, riding academies, or trade or vocational
schools.
SCHOOL, BUSINESS, TECHNICAL OR
TRADE. A school, other than a college or
university, which may be operated as a
commercial venture, and which provides part -
time or full-time education beyond the high
school level and does not provide lodging or
dwelling units for students or faculty.
SCRAP AND SALVAGE SERVICES. An
establishment primarily engaged in the storage,
sale, dismantling or other processing of used or
waste materials which are not intended for reuse
in their original forms, such as automotive
wrecking yards, metal salvage yards, or paper
salvage yards.
SCREENING. Shielding, concealing and
effectively hiding from view of a person standing
at ground level on an abutting site, or outside
the area of the feature so screened by a wall,
fence, hedge, berm or any combination of these
methods, or any similar architectural or
landscaped feature, such as a landscape
perimeter strip or setback (See Landscape).
SELF-STORAGE. The use of self-storage, or
mini-warehouse individual storage units which
are accessed and secured independently without
any offer for sale, or to sell any item of personal
property or to conduct any type of commercial
activity of any kind whatsoever other than
leasing of the storage units. All rental contracts
shall include clauses prohibiting storage of
explosive, corrosive, noxious materials, such as
dust, fumes or noise that could be dangerous,
injurious, distasteful, pernicious or obnoxious to
man or other organisms or properties.
SEMI-TRUCK STOP. See “Travel Plaza”.
SENDING AREA. An area designated by this
Ordinance as a sending area appropriate for the
conveyance of transferable development rights
from the area.
SENSITIVE AREAS. Critical Areas, slopes
exceeding fifteen percent (15%), critical wildlife
habitat, stream corridors, wetlands, ridge lines,
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 33
and areas defined as visually vulnerable,
pursuant to the Environmental and Open Space
Element of the General Plan.
SERVICE COMMERCIAL. Uses such as office
and research parks and uses normally associated
with residential areas (e.g. recreation center,
beauty shop) that will broaden the Town’s
economic base and provide year-around
employment.
SERVICE LINES. Electric, gas, communication,
water, sewer, irrigation, and drainage lines
providing local distribution or collection service.
SERVICE STATION. A building or use devoted
to the retail sale of fuels, lubricants, and other
supplies for motor vehicles, including minor
repair activities which are subordinate to the sale
of petroleum products.
SERVICE YARD AND / OR ENTRANCE. An
area and / or entrance to a structure which is
used for pickup and delivery, especially in
conjunction with retail and wholesale outlets.
SETBACK. The minimum distance between a
structure and property lines of a parcel of land
or other established reference point.
SETBACK, FRONT. The minimum horizontal
distance between any building and the property
line.
SETBACK, REAR. The minimum horizontal
distance between any building and the rear
property line.
SETBACK, REQUIRED. The area in the rear
yard within the rear setback, the area in the
front yard within the front setback, and the area
in the side yard within the side setback.
SETBACK, SIDE. The minimum horizontal
distance between any building and the side
property line.
SETBACK, YARD. The minimum horizontal
distance between any building and the property
line.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any
business establishment or concern which as a
regular and substantial course of conduct
operates as an adult bookstore, adult theater,
adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult figure
modeling studio, adult motel or hotel; or any
business establishment or concern which as a
regular and substantial course of conduct offers,
sells or distributes adult oriented merchandise or
sexually oriented merchandise, or which offers
to its patrons materials, products, merchandise,
services or entertainment characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing or
relating to “spec ified sexual ac tivities” or
“spec ified anatomic al parts”, but not inc luding
those uses or activities which are preempted by
State law.
SHOPPING CENTER. A group of stores planned
and designed for the site on which it is built,
functioning as a unit with off-street parking,
landscaped areas, and pedestrian malls or plazas
provided on the property as an integral part of
the unit.
SIDEWALK. The portion of a street or cross
walkway, paved or otherwise surfaced, intended
for pedestrian use only.
SIGN. Any object, device display or structure, or
part thereof, visible from a public right -of-way
and situated outdoors or on the inside face of a
window, which is used to advertise, identify,
display, direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illuminat ion or
projected images or to communicate informat ion
of any kind to the public. Excluded from these
definitions are: national or state flags, window
displays, athletic scoreboards, or the official
announcement or signs of government. Any
device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses
any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or
writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or
identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to
communicate information of any kind to the
public.
SIGN AREA. Includes the entire face of the sign,
frame, and art work and shall include any
spacing between letters, figures, and designs but
shall not include the bracing or structure of the
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 34
sign. When the sign only consists of letters,
designs or figures engraved, painted, projected
or fixed on a wall or frame of a freestanding sign,
the total area of the sign shall be the area of the
smallest rectangle within which the fixed
lettering and / or artwork is inscribed. All sides
of a sign are visible from any one (1) vantage
point shall be measured in determining the area
of the sign, except that only one (1) side of a
sign shall be measured if the two (2) sides are
back to back or separated by an angle of fortyfive
degrees (45°) or less. If the two (2) sides
are not of equal size, the larger side shall be
measured. A back-to-back sign shall have
parallel faces, separated by not more than four
feet (4’).
SIGN, A-FRAME. A form of temporary sign
constructed of two (2) panels angled to form a
point and resembling the shape of the letter ”A”.
Also known as a ‘sandwic h board’ sign.
SIGN, ANIMATED. Any sign or part of a sign
which changes physical position by any
movement, rotation, or undulation or which
gives the visual impression of such movement ,
rotation or undulation. This category of signs
includes but is not limited to banners, pennants,
flags and spinners as well as signs with flashing
intermittent or sequential illumination.
SIGN, BANNER. A temporary sign constructed
of fabric or similar material on a pole or building
and intended for the temporary advertisement of
a special event being conducted on the site.
National flag or municipal flags, or the official
flag of any institution or business, shall not be
considered banner.
SIGN, BUILDING. Any sign attached to any
part of a building, as contrasted to a
freestanding sign.
SIGN, CANOPY. Any sign that is a part of or
attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric,
plastic, or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor service are.
A marquee is not a canopy.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign or portion
thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations
that can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face or the surface of the sign. A
sign on which the message changes more than
eight times per day shall be considered an
animated sign and not a changeable copy sign
for purposes of this Ordinance. A sign on which
the only copy that changes is an electronic or
mechanical indication of time or temperature
shall be c onsidered a “time and temperature ”
portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign
for purposes of this Ordinance.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary sign
erected on the premises on which construction is
taking place, during the period of such
construction, indicating the names of the
architects, engineers, landscape architects,
contractors, or similar artisans, and the owners,
financial supporters, sponsors, and similar
individuals or firms having a role or interest with
respect to the structure or project.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. Signs limited to
directional messages, principally to direct and
aid the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
suc h as “one-way”, “entranc e”, and “exit”,
building address, and etc.; as well as providing
directional information relating to points of
interest, institutions, facilities, and districts.
SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED. Any sign having copy
on two (2) faces of equal dimension with an
interior angle between the two (2) faces of fortyfive
degrees (45°) or less.
SIGN, FACE. The area or display surface used
for the message.
SIGN, FLASHING. A sign which contains an
intermittent or flashing light source or a sign
which includes the illusion of intermittent or
flashing light by means of animation or an
externally mounted light source.
SIGN, FLUSH WALL. A sign attached to, or
erected against, the wall of a structure which has
the sign face in a plane parallel to the plane of
the wall and which does not extend more than
twelve inches (12") from the building face.
SIGN, FREE-STANDING. Any sign supported
by structures of supports that are placed on, or
anchored in, the ground and that are
independent from any building or other
structure.
SIGN, GARAGE SALE. A temporary sign
advertising a short-term private sale of personal
property characterized as being a “Yard Sale”,
“Garage Sale”, “Rummage Sale”, or similar
event.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 35
SIGN, GROUND. Any freestanding sign, other
than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by
the ground, independent of any other structure,
except footings.
SIGN, HISTORIC. Any Sign which can be
shown through photographs or other
documentation to have been in existence fifty
(50) years or more.
SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured
from the adjacent street grade or upper surface
of the curb, whichever permits the greatest
height to the highest point of said sign, including
ornamental features.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign which shall
refer only to the principal use or uses of the
parcel upon which the sign is located. Such sign
may include building mounted identification,
identification wall mounted sign, identification
ground-mounted sign.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign lighted by or
exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on
or inside the sign or directed towards the sign.
SIGN, ILLEGAL. A sign which is in violation of
the requirements of this Ordinance, except for
those signs qualifying as non-conforming.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL. A sign, generally
informational, that has a purpose secondary to
the use of the zone lot on which it is located,
suc h as “no parking”, “entranc e”, “loading only”,
“telephone”, and other similar direc tives. No
sign with a commercial message legible from a
position off the zone lot on which the sign is
located shall be considered incidental.
SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL. A sign setting forth
the name of a public, charitable, educational, or
religious institution.
SIGN, INTEGRAL. Names of buildings, dates of
erection, monumental citations, commemorat ive
tablets and the like which are carved into stone,
concrete or similar material or made of bronze,
aluminum, or other permanent type construction
and made an integral part of the structure.
Address sign and name plate sign are examples
of Integral Signs.
SIGN MAINTENANCE. Replacing or repairing of
a part or portion of a sign made unusable by
ordinary wear, tear, or damage beyond the
control of the owner.
SIGN, NEON. A piece of electrical equipment or
an electrical apparatus inside of which are wiring
and transformers that transform the electricity
from low voltage into as high as 12,000 volts or
greater, and the necessary high tension wires to
the neon tubing which illuminates the sign.
SIGN, NON-CONFORMING. Any sign that does
not conform to the requirements of this
Ordinance.
SIGN, OBSOLETE. Any sign, which no longer
correctly directs or exhorts any person,
advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner,
product, activity conducted, or product available
on the premises where such sign is displayed.
SIGN, OFF-SITE. Any sign which directs
attention to any business, commodity, service,
or entertainment/event conducted, sold, or
offered at a location other than the premises on
which the sign is located.
SIGN, PERMANENT. A sign which is securely
attached to the ground or a structure so that it
cannot readily be moved.
SIGN PLAN (COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN).
A plan required to be submitted with an
application for a sign permit. The plan may show
a single sign or multiple signs for a planned area
development.
SIGN, POLITICAL. A temporary sign erected in
support or opposition to a candidate seeking
public office in a special, primary or general
election, or in support or opposition to a ballot
measure on a special, primary or general
election.
SIGN, POLE. A sign that is mounted on a
freestanding pole or other support so that the
bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more
above grade.
SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not permanent ly
attached to the ground or other permanent
structure or a sign designed to be transported,
including but not limited to signs designed to be
transported by means of wheels; signs
converted to A- or T-frames; menu and
sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs;
umbrellas used for advertising; and signs
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 36
attached to or painted on vehicles parked and
visible from the public right-of-way, unless said
vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business.
SIGN, PROHIBITED. Any sign not specially
authorized by this Ordinance are prohibited
signs.
SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign attached to a
structure wall and extending outward from the
wall more than twelve inches (12").
SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A sign pertaining to the
sale or lease or the premises, or portion of the
premises, on which the sign is located.
SIGN, RESIDENTIAL. Any sign located in a
district zoned for residential uses that contains
no commercial message except advertising for
goods or services legally offered on the premises
where the sign is located, if offering such service
at such location conforms to all requirements of
this Ordinance.
SIGN, RIDER PANEL. A separate accessory
panel affixed to a temporary subdivision sign or
model home complex directional sign which is of
a contrasting color and / or shape and used to
promote a secondary message such as lot size,
closing costs, down payment, etc.
SIGN, SUSPENDED. A sign that is suspended
from the underside of a horizontal plane surface
and is supported by such surface.
SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign, as defined in
Section 8.5 of this Ordinance and that is used
only temporarily and is not permanent ly
mounted.
SIGN, VEHICLE. Signs attached to a vehicle
primarily for the purposes of advertising, with
such vehicle placed adjacent to a roadway and
not used for the typical conduct of the business
so advertised. Magnetic signs, and signs painted
or wrapped on a vehicle which are used for the
daily conduct of business, are not considered as
vehicle signs under this provision.
SIGN WALKER. An individual who carries,
holds, or displays a temporary sign intended to
identify a business.
SIGN, WALL. A sign fastened to or painted on
the wall of a building or structure in such a
manner that the wall becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of
the sign. Any sign attached parallel to, but within
six inc hes (6”) of, a wall, painted on the wall
surface of, or erected and confined within the
limits of an outside wall of any building or
structure, which is supported by such wall or
building, and which displays only one (1) sign
surface.
SIGN, WALL (FRONT). A wall sign fastened to
or painted on the building front intended as the
main customer entrance.
SIGN, WALL (REAR). A wall sign fastened to or
painted on the wall directly opposite of the
building front.
SIGN, WALL (SIDE). A wall sign fastened to or
painted on any wall not defined as the front or
rear.
SIGN, WIND-DRIVEN. Consists of one (1) or
more banners, flags, pennants, ribbons,
spinners, streamers, captive balloons or other
objects or materials designed or intended to
move when subjected to pressure by wind or
breeze and by that movement attract attention
and function as a sign.
SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign, pictures, symbol, or
combination thereof, designed to communicate
information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed
inside a window or upon the window panes, or
glass and is visible from the exterior of the
window.
SIGN WITHOUT BACKING. Any word, letter,
emblem, insignia, figure or similar character or
group thereof that is neither backed by,
incorporated in, nor otherwise made a part of
any larger display.
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING. A structure
containing cooking and bathing facilities that is
arranged, designed, and intended to be the
residence of one (1) family. (See “Family”.)
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX. A
group of single-family dwellings designed for
individual separate ownership with unified
management that provides common services
and outdoor recreational facilities, but not
including public bars, public restaurants or any
commercial activity in connection therewith.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 37
SITE, WIRELESS. Site means the physical
location upon which wireless
telecommunications facilities are located.
Unless otherwise stated in this Artic le, “site”
shall be limited to the area occupied by a single
tower and its accompanying ground- or roofmounted
equipment.
SITE PLAN, CERTIFIED. The map of a
proposed development to be filed after approval
by the Town Council and any accompanying
material as described in this Ordinance, as
signed and dated by the Planning Administrator.
SKETCH PLAN. A sketch preparatory to the
preliminary plat or site plan (or final plat or site
plan in the case of minor subdivisions or
conditional use permits) to enable the subdivider
to save time and expense in reaching general
agreement with the Town as to the form of the
plat and the objectives of this Ordinance.
SLOPE. A vertical rise in feet measured over a
horizontal distance expressed as a percentage,
measured generally at right angles to contour
lines.
SPECIFIC AREA PLAN. A document
encompassing a specific geographic area of the
Town which is prepared in accordance with
A.R.S. 9-461 and for the purpose of specifically
implementing the General Plan by (1) refining
the policies of the General Plan to a specific
geographic area; and (2) containing specific
recommendation as to the detailed policies and
regulations applicable to a focused development
scheme. The specific plan shall consist of goals,
objectives and policies; requirements for capital
improvements; the level of service required for
public facilities; physical and environmental
conditions; housing and land use characteristics
of the area; and maps, diagrams and other
appropriate materials showing existing and
future conditions.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. “Spec ified
Anatomic al Areas” shall mean:
? Less than completely and opaquely covered:
human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or
female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola;
? Any device or covering, when exposed to
view, which simulates the female breast
below a point immediately above the top of
the areola, human genitals, public region or
buttock; or,
? Human or simulated male genitals in a
discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Specified
Sexual Ac tivities” shall mean:
? Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal;
? Acts of human masturbation, sexual
stimulation or arousal;
? Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy,
oral copulation, coitus or masturbation;
? Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented
torture, beating, or the infliction of pain;
? Human excretion, urination, menstruation,
vaginal or anal irrigation; and / or,
? Fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female
breast.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL. A stable of horses,
mules, or ponies which are let, hired, used, or
boarded on a commercial basis and for
compensation. This facility may offer equestrian
lessons and may include a show arena and
viewing stands.
STABLE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory
building for the keeping of horses, mules, or
ponies owned by the occupants of the premises
and not kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.
STAFF. The employees of the Town of Queen
Creek Planning Division.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes
substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other
improvements was within one-hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start
means the first placement of a permanent ly
constructed structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
pilings, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and / or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 38
temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.
STORY. That portion of a building other than a
cellar, included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if
there be no floor above it, then the space
between the surface of such floor and the ceiling
or roof above it.
STREAM. A watercourse or body of running
water flowing continually or intermittently in a
channel on the surface of the ground or in a
cavern below the surface.
STREET. A collector street, local street or
arterial street.
STREET, ARTERIAL. An arterial street which is
identified as a Major Arterial Street or Minor
Arterial Street on the Major Roadway Network.
STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which is
designed to collect and distribute traffic between
local roads and arterial roads and to serve as a
linkage between land access and mobility needs,
and which is identified as a collector street on
Major Roadway Network.
STREET FRONTAGE. The distance for which a
lot line of a zone lot adjoins a public street, from
one (1) lot line intersecting said street to the
furthest distance lot line intersecting the same
street.
STREET LINE. The boundary which separates
the right-of-way of a street from the abutting
property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in
the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders or any complete rebuilding of the roof or
exterior walls.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected
which requires location on or in the ground or is
attached to something having a location on the
ground. Structures do not include ditches and
their appurtenances, poles, lines, cables, or
transmission or distribution facilities of public
utilities, freestanding mailboxes, on grade slabs,
walks, driveways, landscaping materials and
fences.
STRUCTURE, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL. See
“Principal Building, Principal Structure”.
SUBDIVIDE. The act or process of creating a
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE. The Subdivision
Ordinance for the Town of Queen Creek which is
incorporated by reference as if set forth in its
entirety herein.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin
sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
? Any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or,
? Any alteration of a "historic struc ture”,
provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure."
SURFACE, IMPERVIOUS. That land area
covered by building roofs (including patios,
balconies, and entryways) and asphalt or other
surface devoted to parking spaces and
driveways.
SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered by the
State of Arizona.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. A pool
established or maintained on any premises by an
individual for his or her or his or her family’s use
or for guests of his or her household.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 39
T
TEEN CLUB. An enclosed or unenclosed
structure which is open to persons from fifteen
(15) through twenty (20) years of age
unaccompanied by adults at which music is
furnished for the purpose of social dancing, and
at which a person fifteen (15) through twenty
(20) years of age pays an admission,
membership dues, or a minimum fee or cover
charge, whether or not admission is limited to
members only. “Teen danc e c enter” shall
include the enclosed or unenclosed structure and
the surrounding premises used for parking and
any activity related to the dancing operation.
TELEVISION, RADIO, AND FILM STUDIO. A
facility for the production of films and / or the
production and broadcast of television and radio
programs including but not necessarily limited
to: offices, dressing rooms, studios, sound
stages, file rooms, and set stage, but not
including transmitting facilities.
TEMPORARY. Not to exceed a period of one (1)
year unless otherwise specified in this
Ordinance.
TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use that
is established for a fixed period with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of
such time and that does not involve the
construction of alteration of any permanent
structure.
TOTAL PERMISSIBLE DWELLING UNITS OR
TOTAL PERMISSIBLE SQUARE FOOTAGE.
The total density or intensity of a project
computed, pursuant to Section 4.7 of this
Ordinance.
TOWER. Means any structure that is designed
and constructed primarily for supporting one (1)
or more antennas for telephone, radio, and
similar communication purposes, including
monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures,
and the like. The term also includes the
structure and any support thereto.
TOWN. The Town of Queen Creek, Arizona.
TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town
of Queen Creek.
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling in a row
of at least three (3) such units in which each unit
has its own front and rear access to the outside,
no unit is located over another unit, and each
unit is separated from any other unit by one (1)
or more vertical common walls.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS. The
conveyance of development rights by deed,
easement, or other legal instrument authorized
by this Ordinance to another parcel of land and
the recordation of that conveyance among the
County land records.
TRANSFER FACILITY. As defined in A.R.S.
§49-201.
TRANSIENT. Housing or accommodations
which are typically occupied by residents for
periods of two (2) weeks or less, including but
not limited to hotels, motels and travel lodges.
TRANSIT TERMINAL. A commercial or public
facility for the loading and unloading of
passengers, luggage, and packages, including
sales of fares, and which may include accessory
restaurants, indoor commercial amusement s,
and retail sales, but not including airports.
TRANSITIONAL PERIOD. The three (3) year
period following the effective date of this
Ordinance.
TRANSMISSION LINES. Electric lines (115 KV
and over) and appurtenant facilities; or
pipelines/conveyors (ten inches (10”) diameter
or larger) and appurtenant facilities for
transporting natural resources, chemicals,
petroleum derivatives, or waste substances.
TRANSMITTING FACILITIES. Buildings,
structures, or land used for the above-ground
transmission or reception of airborne radio or
television signals including all transmitting or
receiving towers, dishes, and antennae, but not
including accessory antennae or dishes.
TRAVEL PLAZA. Any building, premises, or land
in which or upon which a business, service, or
industry involving the maintenance, servicing,
storage, or repair of commercial vehicles is
conducted or rendered, including the dispensing
of motor fuel or other petroleum products
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 40
directly into motor vehicles and the sale of
accessories or equipment for trucks and similar
commercial vehicles. A travel plaza may also
include overnight accommodations and
restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck
crews.
TREATMENT FACILITY. Any “adult
developmental home”, “c hild development a l
foster home”, “intermediate c are fac ility for the
mentally retarded”, or “sec ure fac ility” as
defined in A.R.S. §36-551, and any “supportiv e
residential living c enter” as defined in A.R.S.
§36-1301.
TRIPLEX. A building containing three dwelling
units, each of which has direct access to the
outside or to a common hall.
TRUCK PARKING AREA. An area for the
parking of trucks which are often left with either
their motors running and / or their refrigerator
unit motors operating.
U
UNDERGROUND PRESSURIZED
IRRIGATION SYSTEM. A watering system for
landscaped areas, consisting of underground
pressurized pipes connected to sprinkler heads,
bubbler heads, or drip systems such that onehundred
percent (100%) irrigation water
coverage is provided.
UNDERLYING DISTRICT. A standard zoning
district classification which is combined with the
Planned Area Development (PAD) or other
overlay district for purposes of development
regulation specificity. The base (underlying)
district regulations shall apply unless expressly
superseded by overlay district provisions.
USE. The purpose or purposes, for which land or
a building is occupied, maintained, arranged,
designed, or intended.
USE, APPROVED. Any use that is or may be
lawfully established in a particular district or
districts, if it conforms to all requirements of
these regulations for the district in which such
use is located.
USE PERMITS. Approval, with appropriate
stipulations, by the Town Council after public
hearing of a use, structure, condition or manner
of operation in conjunction with an otherwise
permitted use which, by ordinance, requires the
property owner or applicant to obtain such a
permit.
USE, QUASI-PUBLIC. Uses which are
considered to be dedicated to public service or
to culture. Their uses include, for the purposes
of this Code, public schools, hospitals,
universities, and churches.
UTILITIES. Services and facilities provided by
public agencies and public monopolies such as
electrical and gas service, water (domestic and
irrigation), sewage disposal, drainage systems,
and solid waste disposal.
UTILITY FACILITIES. Buildings, structures, or
land used by a utility, railroad, or governmental
agency for uses such as, but not necessarily
limited to, water or sewage treatment plants or
pumping stations, substations, telephone
exchanges, and resource recovery facilities, but
not including land, buildings, or structures used
solely for storage and maintenance of equipment
and materials.
V
VARIANCE. In accordance with A.R.S. 9-462, a
grant of relief from the requirements of this
Ordinance which permits construction in a
manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this Ordinance.
VARIETY OF MASSING. See “Massing”.
VEGETATIVE GROUND COVER. Wood bark,
shredded or chipped wood, (installed over an
adequate matte of fabric weed barrier), sod, or
live plants.
VEHICLE, ABANDONED OR JUNK. A vehicle or
any major portion thereof which is incapable of
movement under its own power and will remain
without major repair or reconstruction.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. A semi-trailer or
semi-tractor or other commercial vehicle having
a gross vehicle weight (GVW) exceeding fifteenthousand
(15,000) pounds as established by the
manufacturer.
VEHICLE, LARGE. Any motor vehicle with a
manufac turer’s c hassis rating greater than one
(1) ton.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 41
VEHICLE, MOTOR. A device, in, upon, or by
which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a road of highway,
except devices moved by human power, devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
and snowmobiles. For the purpose of these
regulations “motor vehic les” are divided into two
(2) divisions:
? First Division: Those motor vehicles which
are designed for the carrying of not more
than ten (10) persons.
? Second Division: Those motor vehicles which
are designed for carrying more than ten (10)
persons, those designed or used for living
quarters, and those vehicles which are
designed for pulling or carrying property,
freight or cargo; those motor vehicles of the
first division remodeled for use and used as
motor vehicles of the second; and those
motor vehicles of the first division used and
registered as school buses.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL. As defined in A.R.S.
§11-1001.
W
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION,
GENERAL. An establishment offering indoor or
open-air storage, distribution, handling of
materials and equipment, such as vehicle
storage, monument or stone yards, grain
elevators, or open storage yards.
WASTE TIRE COLLECTION SITE. As defined in
A.R.S. §44-1301.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES. Structures or
systems designed for the collection,
transmission, treatment, or disposal of sewage
and includes trunk mains, interceptors, and
treatment plants, including package treatment
plant and disposal systems, and on-site septic
systems.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY. As
defined in A.R.S. §49-1201.
WATERCOURSE. Any lake, river, stream, creek,
wash, arroyo, or other body of water or channel
having banks and bed through which waters flow
at least periodically.
WATER FACILITIES. Systems or structures
designed to collect, treat, or distribute potable
water, and includes water wells, treatment
plants, storage facilities, and transmission and
distribution mains.
WELL. As defined in A.R.S. §49-201.
WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated or
saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and
similar areas. Wetlands shall be designated in
accordance with the Corps of Engineers
Wetlands Delineation Manual (United States
Department of Commerce, National Technical
Information Service, January 1987). Copies of
the Wetland Delineation Manual may be obtained
by contacting the National Technical Informat ion
Service. Wetlands shall be classified as "high
value," "moderate value" or "low value" as
designated in the document prepared for the
Environmental Protection Agency, Region VIII
and the United States Army Corps of Engineers
entitled Wetlands of the Snyderville Basin:
Snyderville Basin Advance Identification Study
and Wetland Functional Assessment
Interpretative Report (May 1991), which is
incorporated by reference as if set forth in its
entirety herein.
WHOLESALE, REHOUSING, AND
DISTRIBUTION, LIMITED. An establishment
offering wholesaling, storage, and warehousing
services within a completely enclosed building,
such as wholesale distributors, storage
warehouses, and moving and storage
companies.
X
XERISCAPE. Landscape methods which
conserve water using drought-tolerant plants,
planting and irrigation techniques.
Y
YARD. The open space at grade level between a
building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied
and unobstructed by any portion of a structure
from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided in this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 1 - Page 42
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the
front width of a lot and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the street line and
the principal building or any projection thereof
other than steps, unenclosed balconies and
unenclosed porches. The front yard of a corner
lot is the yard adjacent to the designated front
lot line. Where a lot has sufficient land area, the
front yard may exceed the minimum front
setback as specified in Table 5.3-2 of this
Ordinance.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending between the
side yards of a lot or between the side lot lines
in the absence of side yards, and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the rear
lot line and the rear of the principal building or
any projection thereof, other than steps,
unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On
corner lots and interior lots the rear yard is in all
cases at the opposite end of the lot from the
front yard. Where a lot has sufficient land area,
the rear yard may exceed the minimum rear
setback as specified in Section 5.2 of this
Ordinance.
YARD, REQUIRED. The minimum open space
as specified by the regulations of this Ordinanc e
for front, rear and side yards, as distinguished
from any yard area in excess of the minimum
required. See "Buildable Area."
YARD, SIDE. A yard between the building and
the side lot line of a lot and extending from the
front yard to the rear lot line as defined or along
the full depth in absence of front and rear yards
and being the minimum horizontal distance
between a side lot line and the side of the
principal building or any projection thereof, other
than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed
porches. An interior side yard is defined as the
side yard adjacent to a common lot line. This
side yard definition may apply for three (3) sides
of a flag lot if the flag pole portion of the lot
exceeds the front yard setback. Where a lot has
sufficient land area, the side yard may exceed
the minimum side setback as specified in Section
4.8 of this Ordinance.
Z
ZONING CLEARANCE. The issuance of a permit
or authorization by the Zoning Inspector
indicating that a proposed building, structure, or
use of land meets all of the standards, criteria,
procedures, and requirements contained in this
Ordinance.
ZONING DISTRICT. Any portion of the area of
the Town of Queen Creek in which the same
Zoning regulations apply.
ZONING INSPECTOR. The Director of the Town
of Queen Creek Development Services
Department or his or her duly authorized
representative.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A.R.S.: Arizona Revised Statutes.
F.A.A. Federal Aviation Administration.
F.C.C. Federal Communications Commission.
F.I.A.: Flood Insurance Administration.
GFA: Gross floor area.
GLA: Gross leasable area.
N/A: Not applicable.
SF: Square feet or square footage.
Zoning Ordinance
Article 2.0
Administration and Enforcement
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 1
2.0 Administration and Enforcement
Section Content Page
2.1 Town Council 1
2.2 Planning Dept. and Planning Administrator 1
2.3 Administrative Relief 3
2.4 Planning Commission 3
2.5 Board of Adjustment 5
2.6 Violations Enforcement and Penalties 6
2.7 Non-Conformities 9
2.1 Town Council
A. The Town Council shall have the following
powers and duties:
1. To initiate, adopt and amend the General
Plan, the General Plan Future Land Use
Map, and all Elements of the General
Plan;
2. To initiate amendments to the text and
map of this Ordinance and the General
Plan;
3. To hear, review and adopt amendment s
to the text of this Ordinance after a
recommendation of the Planning
Commission or a Hearing Officer has
been submitted pursuant to A.R.S. §9-
462.04.C;
4. To approve, deny or to amend and to
grant applications for development
approval as defined in this Ordinance;
5. To approve, deny, or to amend and to
grant applications for conditional use
permits or development agreements;
action on those items heard will be based
on consideration of evidence presented
including, but not limited to, the
following:
a. Planning Commiss ion
recommendations;
b. Conformance with this Ordinance and
adopted plans, standards and policies;
c. Staff recommendations;
d. Review agency input;
e. Public input and testimony received at
the hearing; and,
f. Effects of the proposal on the
neighborhood, area and community-atlarge.
6. To approve, deny, or to amend any
appeal of a decision or interpretation of
the Planning Commission.
7. To render determinations regarding the
existence, expansion, or modification of
nonconforming uses; and,
8. To take such other action not expressly
delegated exclusively to the Planning
Department, Planning Administrator, the
Planning Commission, or the Board of
Adjustment as the Town Council may
deem desirable and necessary to
implement the provisions of this
Ordinance and the General Plan.
2.2 Planning Division and Planning
Administrator
A. Establishment of Planning Division.
Pursuant to A.R.S. §9-461.03, the Town
Council hereby establishes the Planning
Division of the Town of Queen Creek,
Arizona, here and after referred to as the
Development Services Department. The
Development Services Department shall
perform the planning functions for the
Town and shall provide technical support
and guidance for action on all plan and
ordinance amendments and on applications
for development approval and shall
perform such other functions as may be
requested by the Town Council or the
Commission as authorized by this
Ordinance.
B. Establishment of Office of Planning
Administrator. Pursuant to A.R.S. §9-
462.05.C, the Town Council hereby
establishes the Office of the Planning
Administrator. The Planning Administrator
charged with enforcement of this
Ordinance shall be the Development
Services director or his or her designee.
The Planning Administrator is authorized to
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 2
establish Department standards of
operation and procedures consistent with
the intent of this Ordinance, and is further
empowered to delegate the duties and
powers granted to, and imposed upon, the
Planning Administrator by this Ordinance.
As used in this Ordinanc e, “Planning
Administrator” shall inc lude his or her
designee by the Planning Administrator.
C. Inspection. The Planning Administrator is
hereby empowered to enter or inspect any
building, structure, premises, or real
property in the Town upon which, or in
connection with which, a development or
land use is located or proposed for the
purpose of inspection to ensure complianc e
with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such
inspections shall be carried out during
business hours unless the Planning
Administrator determines that an
emergency exists. Entry onto private
property for the purpose of inspection shall
be made only after contact with the owner
of the premises, whose permission to
inspect a property. If permission is not
granted, no inspection shall be undertaken
without an order from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
D. Enforcement. The Planning Administrator is
hereby authorized and delegated the
authority to commence an action to enforce
the provisions of this Ordinance, pursuant
to A.R.S. §9-462.05.A, §9-462.05.B, and
Section 2.6 of this Ordinance.
E. Interpretation. The Planning Administrator,
or designee thereof, shall interpret the
provisions of this Ordinance. In the case of
a dispute pertaining to the boundary of a
land use category or zoning district, the
Planning Administrator shall have
jurisdiction and authority to render
interpretations of the General Plan Future
Land Use Map or Official Zoning Map, or
disputes pertaining to lot lines, district
boundary lines, or questions arising from
the administration of the Zoning Ordinanc e
use and bulk provisions. In the event that
the terrain problems prevent an accurate
determination of height, the Planning
Administrator shall rule as to height.
Requests for interpretation shall be made
in writing and shall include any necessary
application form, fees, and supporting
materials. The Planning Administrator
shall render a decision, in writing, on any
interpretation request within ten (10)
business days of receipt of a request for
interpretation.
F. Zoning Verification.
1. The Planning Administrator or his or her
designee shall be responsible for the
verification of the boundaries and
requirements of Zoning Districts and
Zoning Regulations.
2. An application clearly stating the location
and property identification number(s) for
the property or properties in question
may be submitted on a form prescribed
by the Development Services
Department with the required fee before
a Zoning Verification will be made.
3. Zoning Verification letters may contain
the following information:
a. Current zoning on the property or
properties.
b. Development standards required by
the property’s zoning distric t inc luding,
but not limited to, building setbacks,
maximum building height, lot
coverage.
c. Copies of Certificates of Occupancy.
d. Verification of known building or
Zoning Ordinance violations or failure
to comply with development standards
or development regulations.
4. Zoning Verification letters shall not
certify legal non-conforming uses or act
as legal authority with respect to legal
interpretations such as vested rights.
5. The Planning Administrator or his or her
designee shall issue written verification
within ten (10) business days of the
submission of a completed application
requesting Zoning Verification. All Zoning
Verifications shall be maintained in the
Development Services Department
records.
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 3
G. Appeal. Interpretations may be appealed to
the Board of Adjustment.
2.3 Administrative Relief
A. The purpose of this Section is to provide
flexibility in the application of and
interpretation of the requirements of this
Ordinance. Where and when flexible
standards are permitted such flexible
standards shall continue to meet the intent
of the applicable regulations. In special
circumstances, the Development Services
Director may grant a waiver of any
applicable fees, upon written request.
1. An application by the property owner or
on behalf of the owner was submitted on
a form prescribed by the Planning
Administrator or authorized
representative, and any applicable fees
were paid;
2. The proposed improvement requiring
relief will not be detrimental to the
property requesting relief, any adjacent
property, or the Town as a whole;
3. The relief requested is needed due
unusual circumstances, including, but not
limited to small size or irregular shape of
the parcel, unique design and additional
solution that is not prescribed in the
Ordinance but still satisfies the intent;
4. The relief granted is the minimum
required to meet the needs of the
proposed improvement; and,
5. The relief shall not be contrary to the
purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
B. The Planning Administrator or his or her
designee may approve a request to modify
the requirements of this Ordinance and the
Town of Queen Creek Design Standards in
accordance with the Administrative Relief
process outlined in this Section.
C. The Planning Administrator, or authorized
designee, may authorize relief of up to ten
percent (10%) of any development
standard. For projects located within a
Downtown Core (DC) or Agritainment (AT)
zoning districts the Planning Administrator
or authorized designee may authorize relief
up to fifteen percent (15%) of any
development standard and may also waive
specific non-quantitative development
requirements for single family homes. Any
relief authorized will be documented with
findings consistent with all of the
requirements below and filed with the
building permit records, subdivision case
file or other Development Services
Department records. If determined by the
Planning Administrator, application for
relief may require notice, by first-class
mail, postmarked at least fourteen (14)
calendar days prior to the determination,
and was given to adjacent property owners
determined by the Planning Administrator
or authorized designee as potentially
affected by the request.
2.4 Planning Commission
A. Establishment. Pursuant to A.R.S. §9-
461.01.A, there is hereby established a
planning agency known as the Planning
Commission of the Town of Queen Creek,
Arizona (“Commission”).
B. Powers and Duties. The Commission shall
provide an advisory function to assist the
Town Council in making decisions
pertaining to amendments to the General
Plan and this Ordinance, and applications
for development approval. In no event is
the Commission authorized to render a
final decision approving, denying, or
conditionally approving a change in the
Zoning Ordinance or General Plan. The
Commission shall have the following
powers and duties:
1. Pursuant to A.R.S. §9-461.01B.1, to
develop and maintain a General Plan or
element thereof and to submit the
proposed General Plan or element to the
Town Council;
2. To prepare or cause to be prepared
amendments to such plan and element s
thereof and to submit the amendments to
the Town Council;
3. To review and make recommendations to
the Town Council with regard to
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 4
amendments to the General Plan Land
Use Map;
4. To initiate, hear, review and make
recommendations to the Town Council on
applications for amendments to the text
or map of this Ordinance;
5. To hear, review and approve or
disapprove all applications for Preliminary
Plats, Major Site Plans greater than five
acres (5), Residential Design Review and
Comprehensive Sign Plans, as provided
by this ordinance; and,
6. To hear, review and recommend approval
or disapproval of all applications for Major
General Plan Amendments, Minor
General Plan Amendments, Specific Area
Plans, Rezones, Planned Area
Developments, and Conditional Use
Permit applications, as provided by this
ordinance or the subdivision ordinance;
and,
7. To adopt bylaws, policies, procedures,
and regulations for the conduct of its
meetings, the consideration of
applications for development approval,
and for any other purposes deemed
necessary for the functioning of the
Commission provided, however, that
bylaws, policies, procedures, and
regulations shall be consistent with this
Ordinance and shall be approved by the
Town Council before taking effect.
C. Organization, Membership, Terms,
Appointment, and Removal. The
Commission shall be organized as follows:
1. Composition. The Commission shall be
composed of the number of members to
be appointed by the Town Council as
established by the minimum
requirements of A.R.S. §9-461.02;
2. Removal of Member. The Town Council
may remove any member of the
Commission if written charges are filed
against the member. The Town Council
shall provide the member with a public
hearing if requested;
3. Compensation. Members may be
compensated per diem, based upon
meetings actually attended and
reasonable and necessary expenses, as
determined by the Town Council;
4. Terms. All members shall serve a term of
three (3) years. Members may be
reappointed as necessary by the Town
Council; however members shall not
serve more than three (3) consecutive
terms;
5. Officers. At an annual organizational
meeting, the members of the
Commission shall elect one (1) of their
members as chair and one (1) as vicechair.
In the absence of the chair, the
vice-chair shall act as chair and shall
have all powers of the chair;
6. Duties of Chair. The chair, or in the
c hair’s absence the vice-chair, shall
administer oaths, shall be in charge of all
proceedings before the Commission, and
shall take such action as shall be
necessary to preserve order and the
integrity of all proceedings before the
Commission;
7. Nonattendance. If any member of the
Commission shall fail to attend three (3)
regular meetings of the Commiss ion
within any consecutive three (3) month
period, or a total of six (6) regular
meeting within any twelve (12) month
period, the chair or the vice-chair, as the
case may be, shall immediately file a
notification of such nonattendance with
the Town Council for placement on the
agenda of the Town Council. The Town
Council may, by appropriate action,
terminate the appointment of such
person and fill the vacancy thereby
created as soon as practicable;
8. Recording Secretary or Designee. The
Planning Administrator or designee, shall
serve as the recording secretary to serve
the Commission. The secretary shall keep
minutes of all proceedings of the
Commission, which minutes shall be a
summary of all proceedings before the
Commission, attested to by a majority of
the members of the commission voting.
In addition, the secretary shall maintain
all records of commission meetings,
hearings, proceedings, and the
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 5
correspondence of the Planning
Commission;
9. Staff. The Planning Administrator, or his
or her designee, shall serve as the
professional staff of the Commission;
10. Quorum and Necessary Vote. No meeting
of the Commission may be called to
order, nor may any business be
transacted by the Commission, without a
quorum consistent with A.R.S. §1-216.B,
the chair shall be considered for purposes
of establishing a quorum and shall act as
a voting member. All actions shall
require the concurring vote of a majority
of the members of the Commission. If a
general plan or land use regulation,
requiring final approval of the Town
Council, or amendment thereto or other
development approval has been duly
submitted to the Commission, and the
Commission has failed to convene a
quorum or to make a recommendat ion
approving or denying such action at two
(2) consecutive meetings, such action
shall be deemed to be a negative
recommendation and the Director shall
submit the proposed land use regulation
or amendment thereto or other
development approval to the Town
Council for its consideration pursuant to
A.R.S. §9-461.06.C, §9-461.09.B, and /
or §9-462.04.B; and,
11. Meetings, Hearings and Procedure.
a. The Commission shall establish a
regular meeting schedule by rule.
Special meetings may be requested by
the Town Council, the chair of the
Commission, a majority of the
members of the Commission, Mayor, or
the Planning Administrator.
b. If a matter is postponed due to lack of
a quorum, the chair of the Commiss ion
shall continue the meeting to the next
commission meeting. The recording
secretary shall notify all members of
the date of the continued meeting and
also shall notify all parties.
c. The Planning Commission shall hold
regularly scheduled public hearings to
receive and review public input on
those items required by this Ordinance.
On those items where is has review
authority, the Commission shall
recommend that the Town Council
approve, approve with conditions, or
deny applications. Planning
Commission decisions and
recommendations shall be based on
consideration of the following evidence
and analysis:
1) Conformance with this Ordinance;
2) Conformance with the Queen Creek
General Plan and other adopted
plans;
3) Staff Recommendations;
4) Review agency input;
5) Public input and testimony received at
the hearing; and,
6) Effects of the proposal on the
neighborhood, area and the
community-at-large.
2.5 Board of Adjustment
A. Establishment. There is hereby established
the Board of Adjustment of the Town of
Queen Creek, Arizona.
B. Appointment. The Town Council shall
appoint a Board of Adjustment as provided
in A.R.S. §9-462.06.A.
C. Powers and Duties. The Board of
Adjustment shall decide appeals of
administrative interpretations and
decisions and have the powers and duties
as set forth in A.R.S. §9-462.06.
D. Appeals
1. Any appeal of a decision or interpretation
of the Planning Administrator and any
appeal for a variance shall be reviewed by
the Board of Adjustment. A notice of
appeal of an administrative decision from
a final decision relating to an application
for development approval shall be
submitted to the Planning Administrator
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 6
within thirty (30) days from receipt of
decision.
2. The Board of Adjustment shall conduct a
hearing on the appeal, pursuant to the
procedures established in A.R.S. §9-
462.06.
C. Approval Criteria.
1. Appeal of Decisions. In an appeal to the
Board regarding an administrat ive
decision or interpretation, the Board's
scope of review shall be limited to
determining whether the decision or
interpretation by the Planning
Administrator was in accordance with the
intent and requirements of this
Ordinance, and accordingly, the Board
will affirm or reverse the decision.
2.6 Violations, Enforcement and
Penalties
A. Authority. The Planning Commission, Board
of Adjustments, Town Council, Town
Attorney, Building Official, Planning
Administrator, are authorized to enforce
the provisions and regulations of the
Zoning Ordinance and are hereby referred
to as “enforc ement offic ials”.
B. Violations. The remedies provided in this
section for violations of any provision of
this Ordinance, or regulation adopted
pursuant to this Ordinance, whether civil or
criminal, shall be cumulative and shall be
in addition to any other remedy provided
by law. Except as otherwise provided in
this Ordinance, any development or use
initiated after adoption of this Ordinance,
or maintained in violation of this
Ordinance, which is not in compliance with
the provisions of this Ordinance is
prohibited and shall be referred to herein
as an “unlawful” development or use.
C. Inspection of Property.
1. Standard Inspections. The Planning
Administrator may conduct inspection of
property either from a right-of-way,
property suspected of a violation, or
adjacent property. The Planning
Administrator or his or her designee shall
attempt to present sufficient evidence of
their authorization and described the
purpose of the inspection to the owner,
tenant, or occupant at the time of
inspection.
2. Emergency Remedy. When, in the
opinion of the Planning Administrator and
/ or building official, the condition of the
site causes serious danger to the health,
safety, or welfare of the community, the
Town may enter upon the site to remedy
the dangerous condition without notice to
the landowner.
3. Denial of Access to Property. In the event
that the Planning Administrator or his or
her designee and / or building official is
denied entry, and providing there is
evidence of violation of this Ordinance, a
Town official may apply to the court of
jurisdiction to invoke legal, equitable, or
special remedy for the enforcement of
the Zoning Ordinance or any applicable
ordinances.
D. Responsibility of Violations and Liability.
The property owner shall be responsible for
any violation on the property. The property
owner is liable for any structures that are
raised or converted, or any land uses in
violation of this Ordinance.
E. Types of Violations. Any of the following
shall be a violation of this Ordinance and
shall be subject to the remedies and
penalties provided for in this Ordinance:
1. Use, Structure, or Sign without Permit or
Approval. To place any use, structure or
sign upon land that is subject to this
Ordinance without all of the approvals
required by this Ordinance;
2. Activities Inconsistent with This
Ordinance. To erect, construct,
reconstruct, remodel, alter, maintain,
move, or use any building, structure or
sign, or to engage in development or
subdivision of any land in contravention
of any zoning, subdivision, sign, or other
regulation of this Ordinance;
3. Activities without Permit or Approval. To
engage in any subdividing, development ,
construction, remodeling, or other
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 7
activity of any nature upon land that is
subject to this Ordinance without all of
the approvals required by this Ordinance;
4. Activities Inconsistent with Permit. To
engage in any development, use,
construction, remodeling, or other
activity of any nature in any way
inconsistent with the terms and
conditions of any permit, approval,
certificate, or other form of authorization
required in order to engage in such
activity;
5. Activities Inconsistent with Conditions.
To violate, by act or omission, any term,
condition, or qualification placed by a
decision-making body upon any permit or
other form of authorization;
6. Making Lots or Setbacks Nonconforming.
To reduce or diminish any lot area so that
the setbacks or open spaces shall be
smaller than prescribed by this
Ordinance;
7. Increasing Intensity of Use. To increase
the intensity of use of any land or
structure, except in accordance with the
procedural requirements and substant ive
standards of this Ordinance;
8. Removing or Defacing Required Notice.
To remove, deface, obscure, or otherwise
interfere with any notice required by this
Ordinance; and,
9. Failure to Remove Signs or Other
Improvements. To fail to remove any sign
or other improvement installed, created,
erected, or maintained in violation of this
Ordinance, or for which the permit ,
approval, permission or other
authorization has lapsed.
F. Continuing Violations. Each day that a
violation remains uncorrected after
receiving notice of the violation from the
Town shall constitute a separate violation
of this Ordinance.
G. Procedures for Violations. Failure to comply
with any provision of this Ordinance is
hereby declared unlawful. The following
remedies and enforcement powers may be
used to administer and enforce this
Ordinance:
1. Withhold Permit. The Town may deny or
withhold all permits, certificates or other
forms of authorization on any land or
structure or improvements thereon upon
which there is an uncorrected violation of
a provision of this Ordinance or of a
condition or qualification of a permit ,
certificate, approval, or other
authorization previously granted by the
Town. This enforcement provision shall
apply regardless of whether the current
owner or applicant is responsible for the
violation in question. The Town may
deny or withhold all permits, certificates
or other forms of authorization on any
land or structure or improvements owned
or being developed by a person who
owns, developed, or otherwise caused an
uncorrected violation of this Ordinance.
This provision shall apply regardless of
whether the property for which the
permit or other approval is sought is the
property in violation;
2. Permits Approved with Conditions.
Instead of withholding or denying a
permit or authorization (as desc ribed in
subsection C.1 of this Section, above) the
Town may grant such authorization
subject to the condition that the violation
be corrected;
3. Revoke Permits. If the Planning
Administrator determines that there are
reasonable grounds for revocation of a
development permit or approval, the
Planning Administrator shall set a hearing
before the final decision-maker. If the
decision was made by the Planning
Administrator, the hearing shall be
conducted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. If the Town Council was the
original decision-maker, it may refer the
proposed revocation to the Planning
Commission for a recommendation prior
to the hearing. Any development permit
or other form of authorization required
under this Ordinance may be revoked by
the Town when the Planning
Administrator determines:
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 8
a. That there is departure from the plans,
specifications, or conditions as required
under terms of the permit;
b. That the development permit was
procured by false representation or was
issued by mistake; or,
c. That any of the provisions of this
Ordinance are being violated. Written
notice of such revocation shall be
served upon the owner, the owner’s
agent, or contractor, or upon any
person employed on the building or
structure for which such permit was
issued, or shall be posted in a
prominent location; and, thereafter, no
such construction shall proceed.
4. Notice and Public Hearing. Notice of a
revocation hearing shall be given in the
same manner as provided in A.R.S. §9-
462.04 A public hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the
procedures established in Section 3.1.C.3
of this Ordinance.
5. Decision and Notice. The decision-maker
shall render a decision to revoke the
permit to allow the applicant to retain the
development permit, or to reconsider the
permit, and shall notify the holder of the
permit, and any other person who has
filed a written request for such notice in
the manner provided in A.R.S. §9-
462.04.A.6
6. Effect and Appeals. A decision to revoke
a development permit shall become final
thirty (30) days after the date the
decision is rendered, unless appealed.
After such effective date of revocation,
any activities continuing pursuant to such
permit shall be deemed to be in violation
of this Ordinance.
7. Right Cumulative. The Town’s right to
revoke a development permit, as
provided in this section, shall be
cumulative to any other remedy allowed
by law.
8. Stop Work. With or without revoking
permits, the Town may stop work on any
building or structure on any land on which
there is uncorrected violation of a
provision of this Ordinance or of a permit
or other form of authorization issued
hereunder, in accordance with its power
to stop work under its building codes;
9. Revoke Plan or Other Approval. Where a
violation of this Ordinance involves a
failure to comply with approved plans or
conditions to which the approval of such
plans was made subject, the Town
Council may, upon notice to the applicant
and other known parties in interest
(including any holders of building permit s
affected) and after a public hearing,
revoke the plan or other approval or
condition its continuance on strict
compliance with this Ordinance, the
provision of security to ensure that
construction is completed in complianc e
with approved plans, or such other
conditions as the Town Council may
reasonably impose;
10. Injunction and Abatement. The Town
Council, through its authorized agents,
including the Planning Administrator,
may initiate injunction or abatement
proceedings or other appropriate action
by a Civil Hearing Officer in accordance
with the Town Code, Chapter 5, Article 5-
6 Civil Hearing Officer or in a court of
competent jurisdiction against any
person who fails to comply with any
provision of this Ordinance, or any
requirement or condition imposed
pursuant to this Code, to prevent, enjoin,
abate, or terminate violations pursuant to
A.R.S. §9-462.05.B. The Town may seek
penalties through a Civil Hearing Officer
or a court order in the nature of
mandamus, abatement, injunction or
other action for proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore
the premises in question to the condition
in which they existed prior to the
violation; and,
11. Other Remedies. The Town shall have
such other remedies as are and as may
be from time to time provided by Arizona
law for the violation of zoning,
subdivision, sign, or related Ordinanc e
provisions.
H. Fines and Penalties.
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 9
1. Penalty. It is unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, maintain, or use any land in
any zoning district in violation of any
regulation or any provisions of this
Ordinance. Any person, firm, or
corporation violating this Ordinance or
any part thereof, is subject to a civil
penalty in the amount of $250.00 for the
first offense; $500.00 for a second
offense in a 12-month period, and
$2,000.00 for a third offense in said 12-
month period. For purposes of calculating
the 12-month period, such period shall
begin on the date of the first offense.
Each and every day, from the date the
citation is issued, during which the
violation continues is a separate offense.
I. Other Provisions.
1. Other Powers. In addition to the
enforcement powers specified in this
Article, the Town may exercise any and
all enforcement powers granted by
Arizona law.
2. Continuation. Nothing in this Ordinanc e
shall prohibit the continuation of previous
enforcement actions, underneath by the
Town pursuant to previous and valid
ordinances and laws.
3. Remedies Cumulative. The remedies and
enforcement powers established in this
Article shall be cumulative, and the Town
may exercise them in any order.
4. Enforcement Procedures.
a. Non-Emergency Matters. In the case of
violations of this Ordinance that do not
constitute an emergency or require
immediate attention, the Planning
Administrator shall give notice of the
nature of the violation to the property
owner or to any other person who is
party to the agreement or to any
applicant for any relevant permit in the
matter hereafter stated, after which the
persons receiving notice shall have
fourteen (14) days to correct the
violation before further enforcement
action shall be taken. Notice shall be
given in person, by United States Mail,
or by posting notice on the premises.
Notices of violation shall state the
nature of the violation and the time
period for compliance and may state
the corrective steps necessary and the
nature of subsequent penalties and
enforcement actions should the
situation not be corrected.
b. Further Enforcement Action. Violations
that are not corrected within the time
allotted in the notice shall be subject to
further enforcement action through
penalties issued by the Civil Hearing
Officer or the court, in accordance with
Section 2.6, and the Town Code,
Chapter 5, Article 5-6 and 5-7.
c. Emergency Matters. In the case of
violations of this Ordinance that
constitute an emergency situation as a
result of safety or public concerns or
violations that will create increased
problems or costs if not remedied
immediately, the Town may use the
enforcement powers available under
this Article without prior notice, but the
Planning Administrator shall attempt to
give notice simultaneously with
beginning enforcement action. Notice
may be provided to the property owner,
to any other person who is party to the
agreement and to applicants for any
relevant permit.
2.7 Non-Conformities
A. Continuation of Non-Conformance.
1. Any non-conforming uses, structures, or
signs in existence at the time of the
adoption of this Ordinance shall not be
subject to this Ordinance to the extent
that the regulations, restrictions, and
requirements of this Ordinance would
prohibit that use. Any non-conforming
use which, at any time, is not in use for a
continuous twelve (12) month period
following the adoption of these
regulations shall be considered to be
abandoned and, therefore, extinguished.
The initial decision as to whether a prior
existing, non-conforming use has been
abandoned shall be made by the Planning
Administrator, subject to said decision
being appealed to the Board of
Adjustment be they affected property
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 2 - Page 10
owner within three (3) months of the
ruling by the Planning Administrator.
B. Expansion or Enlargement .
1. A non-conforming use, structure, or sign
shall not be changed to another nonconforming
use.
2. A non-conforming use, structure, or sign
shall not be repaired and / or remodeled,
except to the extent necessary to
maintain the non-conforming use as is or
convert it into a conforming use.
3. A non-conforming use or structure may
be expanded or enlarged to an extent not
exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of
the land area or building floor area
devoted to the use at the time it became
non-conforming. Such expansion shall
require a conditional use permit.
C. Non-Conforming Uses.
1. A change of use permit may be granted
for non-conformity only if the change in
use is to principal use permitted in the
district. Once the change from nonconformity
to a principal permitted use is
completed, no conversion to the previous
non-conforming use shall be permitted.
D. Non-Conforming Structures.
1. If a non-conforming structure has been
damaged so that the cost of repair or
rebuilding in compliance with current
construction codes is less than fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the
structure prior to the damage, the
structure may be repaired or rebuilt. The
extent of non-conformity shall not be
increased by the repair or rebuilding.
2. If a non-conforming structure has been
damaged so that the cost of repair or
rebuilding in compliance with current
construction codes equals or exceeds 50
percent of the value of the structure prior
to the damage, the structure may be
repaired or rebuilt, but only in
conformance with this Ordinance.
E. Non-Conforming Signs.
1. A legal nonconforming sign may not be
altered in any manner not in conformance
with this Ordinance; however, such
sign(s) shall be maintained as required
by this Section and may be reasonably
repaired as determined by the
Administrator.
a. Notwithstanding any provisions to the
contrary contained herein, a legal
nonconforming sign may be utilized in
perpetuity as noted herein.
b. Whenever the use of given building or
premises changes to another use
allowed in the respective zoning
district, all nonconforming signs on the
building and/or premises shall be
modified to bring them into
conformance with these regulations.
c. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, any
signs not enjoying legal
nonconforming status shall be
removed from display within six (6)
months.
Zoning Ordinance
Article 3.0
Zoning Procedures
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 1
3.0 Zoning Procedures
Section Content Page
3.1 General Procedural Requirements 1
3.2 Permits Required 7
3.3 Site Plan and Final Subdivision Review 11
3.4 Amendment and Rezoning 14
3.5 Conditional Use Permit 16
3.6 Temporary Use Permit 17
3.7 Board of Adjustment/Variance 24
3.8 Expiration of Development Approvals 24
3.1 General Procedural
Requirements
A. Application Process and Official Filing Date.
The specific procedures followed in
reviewing various Applications for
Development Approval differ. Reference
shall be made to the appropriate section in
this Ordinance which addresses the
procedures and requirements of a
particular application. Generally, the
procedures for all applications have three
(3) common elements: submittal of a
complete application, including required
fee payment along with appropriate
information; review of the submittal by
appropriate Town staff, agencies and
boards and required public notifications;
and, action to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application.
1. Pre-Application Conference. The
applicant shall meet with the Planning
Administrator or his or her designee to
discuss the nature of the proposed
application, application submittal
requirements, the procedure for action,
and the standards for evaluation of the
application. All applications require preapplication
prior to formal application.
This requirement may be waived by the
Planning Administrator due to special
circumstances.
2. Application Materials. Current application
materials are available in the
Development Services Department .
Applications may be made available by
other electronic means also. Materials
may be picked up during normal business
hours. The Development Services
Department may publish an application
schedule which prescribes the deadline
for submitting an application to the
Planning Commission or the Town
Council. Completed applications shall be
filed according to the published schedule
of the Development Services
Department. Such applications shall be
filed and reviewed by staff in advance of
any public hearing or public meeting
required pursuant to this Ordinance or
the A.R.S.
B. Fees. Where referenced in this Ordinance,
applicable fees shall refer to the
established fee schedule adopted by Town
Council as modified from time to time. A
current copy of the fee schedule is on file
with the Development Services
Department.
C. Public Outreach Procedures. The purpose of
the public outreach process is to bring
together interested and affected
individuals, organizations, agencies and
other governmental entities; to inform
them about the projects and goals; to
include them in the decision making
process; to consult, or seek input or
exchange information on plans and
projects and involve them in an ongoing
dialogue about the future of the Town. It
shall be the applic ant’s responsibility to
provide a signed and notarized affidavit
confirming that all notice requirement s
have been met.
1. Neighborhood Meeting. The purpose of
the neighborhood meeting is to provide a
means for the applicant, surrounding
neighbors and homeowners associations
to review preliminary development
proposals and solicit input and exchange
information about the proposed
development with the intent to resolve
potential conflicts prior to the required
formal hearings. A neighborhood meeting
shall conform to the following standards:
a. One (1) or more neighborhood
meetings shall be required for all
Rezoning’s, Conditional Use Permits,
Variances and other cases as
determined by the Planning
Administrator or his or her designee.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 2
b. At least one (1) neighborhood meeting
shall be held at least fifteen (15)
calendar days prior to the scheduled
Planning Commission Meeting.
c. Mail Notification. Mailing a notice by
First Class Mail shall be provided by the
applicant not less than fifteen (15)
calendar days prior to the date of the
Neighborhood Meeting to all property
owners of record, and property
management associations,
homeowners associations, and any
neighborhood associations on record
with the Town at a distance determined
in Table 3.1-1.
d. Site Posting.
1) The development site shall be posted
by the applicant with at least one (1)
sign having a minimum sign area of
sixteen (16) square feet with black
copy/lettering on a white background,
not less than fifteen (15) calendar
days prior to the public meeting. Such
signs shall be clearly legible and
wherever possible, placed adjacent to
the right of way of a public street .
2) Sites that exceed five (5) acres in size
and / or have frontage on more than
one (1) street shall post a sign having
a minimum sign area of sixteen (16)
square feet with black copy/lettering
on a white background, not less than
fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the
public meeting. Additional signs at
the rate of one (1) additional sign per
every ten (10) additional acres, or
one (1) sign for each street with a
maximum of four (4) signs per
project. Such signs shall be clearly
legible and wherever possible, placed
adjacent to the right of way of a public
street.
3) The site posting shall contain the
date, time, and location of the
neighborhood meeting, a summary of
the request, and shall also have
contac t information for the applic ant’s
representative.
4) It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to use reasonable efforts to
maintain the sign once it has been
placed on the property and remove
the sign after the neighborhood
meeting has been completed.
e. The applicant shall arrange for the
facilities and bear all costs associated
with the meetings, including all
required notifications and sign
postings.
f. The Planning Administrator or
appropriate planning staff shall be
required to attend the neighborhood
meeting.
g. Neighborhood Meetings may be held at
the Town hall or a location near or on
the development site and shall be in a
publicly accessible place within the
corporate limits of the Town of Queen
Creek. The meeting shall be held on a
weekday evening or weekend day at a
reasonable time to ensure the majority
of residents can attend the meeting;
and.
h. A meeting summary shall be submitted
to the Development Services
Department not less than fifteen (15)
calendar days prior to the Planning
Commission Meeting with a copy of the
mailing labels showing who was notified
and written summary of the issues and
discussion from the meeting and a list
of attendees.
2. Public Notification. The purpose of public
notification is to encourage and enhance
citizen participation in the development
process and provide an opportunity to
give public inputs. Requirements for the
notice of the public meetings for
Rezoning’s, Conditional Use Permits,
Variances and other Board of Adjustment
cases as determined by the Planning
Administrator are as follow:
a. Mail Notification. Staff shall mail a
notice by First Class Mail not less than
fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the
scheduled Commission Meeting to all
the necessary and required parties such
as:
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 3
1) All property owners of record
obtained from Maricopa County or
Pinal County Assessor’s Offic e, as
appropriate, chairpersons and
management association of
homeowners associations, and any
neighborhood associations on record
with the Town at a distance and type
of notifications requirement s
mentioned in Table 3.1-1.
b. Site Posting.
1) The development site shall be posted
by staff with at least one (1) sign
having a minimum sign area of
sixteen (16) square feet with a black
copy on a white background, not less
than fifteen (15) calendar days prior
to the public meeting. Such signs
shall be clearly legible and wherever
possible, placed adjacent to the right
of way of a public street.
2) Sites that exceed five (5) acres in
size and / or have frontage on more
than one (1) street shall post a sign
having a minimum sign area of
sixteen (16) square feet with a black
copy on a white background, not less
than fifteen (15) calendar days prior
to the public meeting. Additional
signs at the rate of one (1) additional
sign per every ten (10) additional
acres, or one (1) sign for each street
with a maximum of four (4) signs per
project. Such signs shall be clearly
legible and wherever possible,
placed adjacent to the right of way of
a public street.
3) The site posting shall contain the
date, time, and location of all
applicable meetings, a summary of
the request, and shall also have
contact information for the
applic ant’s representative.
4) It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to use reasonable efforts to
maintain the sign once it has been
placed on the property and remove
the sign once the application is
completed or approved or after the
council hearing.
c. Newspaper Advertisement .
1) Staff shall publish a public notice in a
display ad covering not less than oneeighth
(1/8) of the full page in an
official local newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Queen
Creek (as determined by the Planning
Administrator or his or her designee),
no less than fifteen (15) days prior to
the date of each meeting.
2) The public notice shall include a
description of the request, the
general location of the request and
the date, time, and place of the
hearing. The Planning Administrator
or his or her designee shall provide
the wording for the required
newspaper advertisement to the
applicant.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 4
Table 3.1-1: Notification Requirements
Notes:
* Applicant is responsible for mailing notices and
sign postings for neighborhood meetings. Refer
to Section 3.1 for more information.
** Notice shall be sent by mail in accordance
with Section 3.1 and in conformance with
Arizona Revised State Statutes.
# Applicant shall notify property owners
and all HOA and Neighborhood
Associations within the required
distance
Type of Case
Neighborhood
Meeting
Required
Notice and
Site Posting
for
Neighborhood
Meeting*
Notice
and Site
Posting
of Public
Hearing
**
Newspaper
Ad for
Public
Hearing
Notice of Neighborhood
Meeting and Public
Hearing Distance
#(Radius in Feet)
Conditional Use
Permit, Indoor, Up
to 2,500 square
feet of building/
leased area or
Outdoor, five (5)
acres and less
Yes
Yes Yes Yes 900
Conditional Use
Permit, Indoor,
Above 2,500
square feet of
building/ leased
area or Outdoor,
above five (5)
acres
Yes
Yes Yes Yes 1200
Preliminary Plat No
No No No N/A
Rezoning, Five
(5) acres and
less
Yes
Yes Yes Yes 900
Rezoning, More
than five (5)
acres
Yes
Yes Yes Yes 1200
Site Plan, Five
(5) acres and
less
No
No No No N/A
Site Plan, More
than five (5)
acres
No
No No No N/A
Site Plan
Amendment,
Major
No
No No No N/A
Site Plan
Amendment,
Minor
No
No No No N/A
Temporary Use
Permits
No
No No No N/A
Variance Yes
Yes Yes Yes 900
Zoning Ordinance
Text
Amendments
No
No No Yes N/A
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 5
3. Public Hearing Procedures.
a. Setting of the Hearing. When the
Planning Administrator determines that
a development permit application is
complete the Planning Administrator or
his or her designee shall cause notice of
such hearing to be made at the expense
of the Applicant.
b. Purpose of Hearing. The purpose of a
public hearing is to allow the applicant
and all other interested parties a
meaningful and fair opportunity to be
heard, to present evidence relevant to
the application and to rebut evidence
presented by others. Public hearing
may be held by the Planning
Commission and / or Town Council.
c. Conduct of Hearing.
1) Any person or persons may appear at
a public hearing and submit evidence,
either individually or as a
representative. Each person who
appears at a public hearing shall
state, for the record, his or her name,
address, and if appearing on behalf of
an organization or group, the name
and mailing address of the
organization or group.
2) The Chair of meeting shall exclude
testimony or evidence that is
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitions. At any point, members of
the body conducting the hearing may
ask unduly questions of the applicant,
staff or public. The order of
proceedings shall be as follows:
a) The Planning Administrator or
appropriate staff members shall
present a description of the
proposed development and a
written or oral recommendation, if
required. The recommendat ion
shall address each factor required
by this Ordinance to be considered
prior to action or approval on the
development permit;
b) The applicant shall present any
information that the applicant
deems appropriate;
c) The Planning Administrator or other
staff member may respond to any
statement made by the applicant or
any public comment;
d) The applicant may respond to any
testimony or evidence presented by
the staff or public; and,
e) The body conducting the hearing
shall close the public portion of the
hearing and conduct deliberations.
3) Record of Proceedings.
a) The body conducting the hearing
shall record the proceedings by any
appropriate means and according to
such procedures as the Town
Council may, from time to time,
prescribe by rule. Such record shall
be provided at the request of any
person upon application to the Town
Council to cover the cost of
duplication of the record.
b) The record of all proceedings,
including testimony and statements
of personal opinions, the minutes of
the secretary, all applications,
exhibits, and papers submitted, all
staff and Advisory Board or
Commission or Council reports and
recommendations, and the decision
and report(s) of the body before
which the hearing is heard shall
constitute the record.
c) All such records shall be public
records, open for inspection at
reasonable times and upon
reasonable notice. Recordings may
be available in electronic format,
upon request.
4) Continuance.
a) Any applicant or authorized agent of
an applicant may be granted a
continuance before the Planning
Commission, Board of Adjustment ,
or Town Council upon written
request by the applicant. A
continuance may also be imposed
by the body or agency conducting
the hearing, but no such
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 6
administrative fee may be charged
unless the continuance is requested
by the applicant.
b) All motions to grant a continuanc e
shall state the date on which the
matter is to be heard. A majority
vote of those members in
attendance shall be required to
grant a continuance and any
stipulations or conditions placed
upon the continuance.
5) Additional Rules. Where appropriate,
additional rules governing the public
hearing may apply including, but not
limited to, other provisions of the
ordinance applicable to the body
conducting the hearing and any of the
body’s adopted rules or proc edures as
long as the same does not in conflict
with this Article. The body conducting
the hearing may adopt rules of
procedure to limit the number of
applications for Development
Approval which may be considered
per meeting and to limit the time for
each presentation, or each speaker.
D. Records. The Planning Administrator or his
or her designee shall provide for minutes
to be written and retained, shall record
the evidence submitted within the hearing
time allotted for the item being
considered, and shall include a summary
of the considerations and the action of the
Planning Commission.
E. Notice Provisions. The notice requirement s
for each type of application for
development approval are prescribed in the
individual subsections of this Ordinanc e
applicable thereto and / or the A.R.S.
F. Scope of Action. The reviewing body may
take any action on the application that is
consistent with the notice given, including
approval of the application with conditions
(if applicable); approval of the application
or denial of the application. The reviewing
body may allow amendments to the
application if the effect of the amendments
is to allow a lesser change than that
requested on the original application, or to
reduce the impact of the development , or
to reduce the amount of land involved from
that indicated in the notices of the hearing.
The reviewing body shall not, in any case,
permit a greater amount of development ,
or a use falling in a different general use
category, or a larger land area than
indicated in the original application, or a
greater variance than was indicated in the
notice.
G. Appeals.
1. Any person, including any officer or
agency of Queen Creek, aggrieved by a
final administrative determination on a
development permit or administrat ive
development approval by the Planning
Administrator or final decision-maker
may appeal such final determination to
the appellate body designated by this
Article, if any, in the manner provided in
this Section.
2. A written appeal shall be filed with the
Town Clerk within thirty (30) business
days after the date of the final decision.
The applicant shall submit the required
materials as defined in the Town’s
application(s) and / or process guide(s),
on file with the Town’s Developme nt
Services Department. Only complete
applications shall be accepted. The
appeal shall contain a written statement
of the reasons for which the appellant
claims the final decision is erroneous.
The appeal shall be accompanied by the
fee established by the Town Council. If
the appeal is from a Board of Adjustment
decision, it shall be filed by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department ,
board, or bureau of the municipality
within thirty (30) days of the decision.
3. The appellate body of the Town shall hear
the appeal within a reasonable time after
the filing of the appeal. The hearing
before the appellate body shall be
conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Section 3.1.G hereto.
4. An aggrieved party shall include the
applicant of the subject decision being
appealed or a property owner within
three hundred feet (300’) of a applic ation
where an administrative decision has
been rendered.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 7
3.2 Permits Required
A. General. No development or development
activity may be undertaken within the
Town unless all development permit s
applicable to the proposed development
are issued in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. At a
minimum, no development or development
activity may occur until a corresponding
application has been obtained from the
Development Services Department or a
building permit is obtained from the
Building Department. Permits are required
for all development, unless otherwise
accepted, to ensure compliance with the
various adopted codes, standards, and
laws and to ensure consistency with the
General Plan and policies of the Town.
B. The procedures for approval of a Major and
Minor Site Plan Review, Rezoning,
Conditional Use Permit, Temporary Use
Permit, or a Board of Adjustment matter
are prescribed in Section 3 of this
Ordinance. The procedures for approval of
permits which follow the above referenced
procedures, or permits for special
situations, are set forth in this Section.
Unless otherwise provided in any particular
section of this Ordinance, the following
procedure shall apply to the issuance of
any permit required of this Ordinance:
1. The applicant shall submit the required
materials as defined in the Town’s
application(s) and / or process guide(s),
on file with the Town’s Developme nt
Services Department. Only complete
applications shall be accepted;
2. After the application is filed, the Planning
Administrator or his or her designee shall
send a summary of review comments to
the applicant. The applicant shall respond
to any review comments within five (5)
days of receipt of the comments. The
application shall be approved, approved
with conditions, or denied within ten (10)
working days after submittal of the
applic ant’s response to the review
comments;
3. The filing of an appeal to the Board of
Adjustment shall conform to the time
established herein for the approval or
issuance of a permit required by this
Section; and,
4. Upon approval of any permit required by
3.2.C to 3.2.J of this Section (excluding
subsection B hereto, below), a Zoning
Clearance and Building Permit application
may be submitted by the applicant.
C. Zoning Clearance and Building Permit.
1. Application. On and after the effective
date of adoption of this Ordinance,
structures shall be erected only on
parcels of land that have been created in
conformance with this Ordinance. No
person shall construct any structure, use
any land, or change the use of any
structure or land until a zoning clearance
has been obtained from the Development
Services Department and a building
permit had been obtained from the
Building Department.
2. Exceptions. The provisions of the
preceding paragraph shall not apply to
any legal nonconforming use established
in accordance with the provisions of
Section 2.7 of this Ordinance.
3. Application Procedures.
a. Site Plan Review is required in
accordance with Section 3.3 of this
Ordinance. Current application
materials are available in the
Development Services Department .
Applications may be made available by
other electronic means. If the proposed
development or development activity is
exempt from site plan review pursuant
to Section 3.3 hereto, a plot plan
consistent with the sketch plan
requirements as defined in the Town’s
application(s) and / or process
guide(s), on file with the Town’s
Development Services Department
shall be provided. The Planning
Administrator or his or her designee
shall assist the applicant in determining
which materials are required for a
submittal. Building permit applications
are required and available from the
Building Department.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 8
b. When the required materials are
submitted to each respective
department, the Building Department
shall review its applicable building
codes. The Development Services
Department shall review its application
for conformance with the Ordinance.
c. Following review, applications shall be
approved, approved with conditions, or
denied. Applications which are denied
shall have the reasons for denial, in
writing, attached to the application.
4. Approval Criteria.
a. The building plans and related diagrams
and written information shall be
provided in conformance with the
adopted building code, fire code,
electrical code, mechanical code and
any other applicable codes and policies
adopted by the Town.
b. The proposed building plan shall be in
conformance with the land uses
permitted in the zoning district in which
the development project will be
constructed.
c. The building plans shall be in
conformance with all applicable
regulations of this Ordinance.
5. Validity. The building permit shall be valid
for the use for which the zoning clearance
was granted, as long as the use complies
with applicable codes, providing that
within six (6) months of issuance of the
clearance a certificate of occupancy has
been obtained by the applicant. A new
zoning clearance and any applicable fee
shall be required for any approved
project that did not commenc e
construction within that six (6) month
period.
F. Fence Permit.
1. Application. Unless a building permit is
required for a lot in the interior of a
subdivision or for the interior of a lot, no
fence shall be erected or constructed
unless and until a fence permit has been
issued by the Planning Administrator.
2. Processing Procedures. The procedure for
processing a fence permit shall be as set
forth in Section 3.2 of this Ordinance,
except that the time period for the
approval, conditional approval, or denial
of a fence permit shall be thirty (30)
days.
3. Approval Criteria. No fence permit shall
be issued or approved, and no fence shall
be constructed, unless evidence is
presented which demonstrates that the
proposed fences shall be designed,
constructed, and erected in conformance
with Section 5.2 of this Ordinance.
G. Home-Based Occupation Permit.
1. Application. No home occupation shall be
commenced or established unless and
until a home occupation permit has been
issued by the Planning Administrator or
his or her designee.
2. Processing Procedures. The procedure for
processing a home occupation permit
shall be set forth in Section 3.2.B of this
Ordinance, except that the time period
for the approval, conditional approval, or
denial of a home occupation permit shall
be thirty (30) days.
3. Approval Criteria. No home occupation
permit shall be issue or approved, and no
home occupation shall be established,
except in conformance with Section 6.4
of this Ordinance.
H. Sexually Oriented Business (SOB) Permit .
1. Application. No sexually oriented
business shall be commenced or
established unless and until a sexually
oriented business (SOB) permit has been
issued by the Planning Administrator or
his or her designee.
2. Processing Procedures. The procedure for
processing an SOB permit shall be as set
forth in Section 3 of this Ordinance,
except as follows.
3. Approval Criteria. No SOB permit shall be
issued or approved and no sexually
oriented business shall be established,
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 9
except in conformance with Section 6.7
of this Ordinance.
H. Schools.
1. Application. Pursuant to A.R.S. §15-
189.01, charter schools shall be classified
as public schools for the purposes of the
assessment of zoning fees, site plan fees
and development fees. The procedures
herein are adopted in order to ensure
that hearings and administrative reviews
involving charter schools are scheduled
and conducted on an expedited basis and
that charter schools receive a final
determination from the Town within
thirty (30) days of the beginning of
processes, requiring only an
administrative review, and within ninety
(90) days of the beginning of processes
requiring a public hearing, and allowing
an appeal to the board of adjustment or
the Town Council, as required by A.R.S.
§15-189.01. This section further
provides benefits relating to zoning for
schools, as authorized by A.R.S. §15-
342.16(a).
2. Processing Procedures.
a. Charter schools are designated as uses
permitted as of right in all zoning
districts where they are designated as
a permitted use.
b. For schools other than charter schools
and which are subject to A.R.S. §15-
342, the procedure for processing shall
be the same as the procedure set forth
in subsection 2.a above of this
subsection F. Where such schools are
designated as a conditional use, the
Planning Commission shall submit its
recommendation within thirty (30) days
after receipt of a complete application
for site plan approval. The failure of the
Planning Commission to submit a
recommendation within this time period
shall be deemed a recommendation of
approval, and the application shall be
forwarded to the Town Council. The
Town Council shall render its
determination within sixty (60) days
after receipt of the recommendation of
the Planning Commission.
3. Approval Criteria. No school shall be
established, except in conformance with
any applicable provisions of Articles 4, 5,
and 6 of this Ordinance.
I. Religious Institutions.
1. Application. No new religious institution
building shall be constructed unless and
until a building permit has been issued by
the Development Services Department.
2. Processing Procedures. The procedure for
processing a permit shall be set forth as
follows:
a. The applicant shall submit the required
materials as defined in the Town’s
application(s) and / or process
guide(s), on file with the Town’s
Development Services Department.
b. The Planning Administrator shall review
the application in accordance with the
criteria established in Section 6.10
Religious Institutions of this Ordinance.
The Planning Administrator shall solicit
review comments in accordance with
general review procedures. The
applicant shall hold a neighborhood
meeting in accordance with the
requirements set forth in section
3.1.C.1 Neighborhood Meetings of this
Ordinance.
1) Religious Institutions (with seating
capacity up to 1,500 persons) which
meet the criteria established in
applicable sections of this Ordinanc e
will be required to proceed through
Town Council approval. After a
complete application has been
reviewed, the Planning Administrator
shall submit to Town Council for final
site plan approval as an
administrative item only. The
applicant may apply for building
permits consistent with the proposed
plans. No building permit application
may be issued by the Planning
Administrator until he has certified
such application conforms to the
approved final site plan.
2) Religious Institutions (with seating
capacity up to 1,500 persons) which
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 10
do not meet the criteria established in
applicable sections of this Ordinanc e
will be required to proceed through
the public hearing process as
established in Section 3.4
Amendment and Rezoning of this
Ordinance.
3) Large Religious Institutions (with
seating capacity greater than 1,500
seats) will require Conditional Use
Permit approval as indicated in Table
4.6-1 and will be required to proceed
through the public hearing process as
set forth in Section 3.5 Conditional
Use Permit of this Ordinance. Large
Religious Institutions which do not
meet the criteria established in
applicable sections of this Ordinanc e
will be required to proceed through
the public hearing process as
established in Section 3.4
Amendment and Rezoning of this
Ordinance. Both requirements may
be processed concurrently.
c. Approval Criteria. No religious
institution building shall be established,
except in conformance with any
applicable provisions of Article 4 and 5
of this Ordinance.
J. Sign Permit.
1. Application. Permits are required for all
new signs except as provided in Article 7
of this Ordinance. The alteration of sign
faces by painting or overlay shall be
considered as construction of a new sign
and require a permit. Touching up or
repainting existing letters or symbols
shall be considered maintenance and
repair and shall not require a permit. An
application form and a site plan
completed by a licensed sign contractor
(the applicant), shall be submitted to the
Development Services Department .
2. Processing Procedures.
a. The Planning Administrator shall review
the application in accordance with the
criteria established in this Article 7 of
this Ordinance. The Planning
Administrator shall solicit review
comments in accordance with general
review procedures.
b. Permanent signs for planned area
developments, subdivisions, and
conditional uses shall be reviewed as
part of the site plan.
3. Approval Criteria.
a. All signs shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with Article 7
of this Ordinance. Sign types shall be
those allowed for specific purposes in
the zoning district in which the sign
shall be erected. All signs shall be
located on the premises to which they
refer unless permitted as off-premise
signs under this regulation.
b. The Administrator or his or her
designee shall find that all
requirements of the sign permit issued
for the development project has been
satisfactorily completed.
K. Telecommunications Permit .
1. Application. No antenna or tower shall be
erected, constructed, or established
unless and until a telecommunications
permit has been issued by the Planning
Administrator or his or her designee.
2. Processing Procedures. The procedure for
processing a telecommunications permit
shall be as set forth in Section 3.2 of this
Ordinance, except as follows:
a. Where an antenna or tower is
considered a permitted use, the
Planning Administrator shall review the
application for development approval
and submit his review comments to the
applicant. The applicant shall respond
to any review comments.
b. Where an antenna or tower is
considered a conditional use, the
Planning Administrator shall refer the
application to the Planning
Commission. The Planning
Administrator shall review the
application then submit a staff report to
the Planning Commission. The matter
shall be scheduled at the first available
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 11
meeting of the Planning Commiss ion
but not less than the statutory
requirements. The Planning
Commission shall submit its
recommendation within thirty (30) days
after its initial public hearing on the
application. If no recommendation is
timely submitted by the Planning
Commission, the application shall be
referred to the Town Council without a
Planning Commission recommendat ion,
and shall be placed on the agenda of
the Town Council at the first available
opportunity. The Town Council shall
render its decision approving,
approving with conditions, or denying
the application for a conditional use
permit within sixty (60) days after the
first public hearing relating to the
application.
3. Approval Criteria. No telecommunicat ion
permit shall be issued or approved, and
no antenna or tower shall be constructed
or erected, except in conformance with
Section 6.9 of this Ordinance.
L. Certificate of Occupancy.
1. Application. No vacant land or building
shall be occupied or used (including
change of use) or hereafter erected or
structurally altered until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the
Building Official.
2. Processing Procedures.
a. The applicant shall submit the required
materials with a request for final
inspection, to the Planning
Administrator.
b. The Planning Administrator shall review
the permit application and application
submittal and require that the
departments involved in the initial
review make a final inspection to
ensure that the work activities have
been completed in accordance with the
criteria established in this Ordinanc e
and the adopted building and fire
codes.
3. Approval Criteria.
a. The Administrator or designee shall find
that all requirements of all permit s
issued for the development project
have been satisfactorily completed.
b. The Administrator shall obtain from the
Building Official a document/record that
the final development conforms with
the final development conforms to the
Building Permit issued for the
development project.
3.3 Site Plan and Final Subdivision
Review
A. Purpose. The site plan and final subdivision
review provisions and regulations of this
Section are intended to promote the safe,
functional and aesthetic development of
property and to ensure that new
structures, utilities, streets, parking,
circulation systems, yards and open spaces
are developed in conformance with the
standards of this Ordinance, the Queen
Creek Design Standards, the General Plan,
and consistent with any adopted specific
plans. The site plan and final subdivision
review shall consider site, landscape, and
architectural design of all structures, and
related on-site or off-site improvements to
promote harmonious relationships with
adjacent development, herein after
referred to as “site plan”.
B. Application.
1. No application for development approval
in the following categories shall be
approved unless a plan set has been
submitted consistent with the
requirements as defined in the Town’s
application(s) and / or process guide(s),
on file with the Town’s Developme nt
Services Department, and has been
approved in accordance with the
procedures prescribed in this Section:
a. An application for development
approval requesting a non-residential
use or any multi-family dwelling unit;
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 12
b. An application for approval of a
conditional use; and,
c. An application for change in the Official
Zoning District classification (a
"rezoning"), including any application
for approval of a Planned Area
Development (PAD).
2. Site plans shall be reviewed and
approved concurrently with the
requirements of the Town of Queen Creek
Design Standards. Design review
submittal requirements shall conform to
subsection 3.3.C below.
3. Site plan review shall occur prior to
issuance of a building or grading permit.
4. Final Subdivision plats and residential
architectural design shall be reviewed
and approved concurrently. Submittal
requirements shall conform to the Town
of Queen Creek Subdivision Code and
Design Standards.
C. Submittal Requirements. The applicant
shall submit to the Development Services
Department a completed application as
defined in the Town’s applic ation(s) and /
or proc ess guide(s), on file with the Town’s
Development Services Department .
During the pre-application conference, the
Planning Administrator or his or her
designee shall inform the applicant of the
appropriate minimum submittal standards
required for the specific project. As a result
of the agency and staff reviews, more
information may be required. Therefore, it
is incumbent upon the applicant to discuss
the project with the applicable review
agencies prior to submittal in order to avoid
delays. Only complete submittals shall be
accepted.
D. Approval Procedures.
1. Minor Site Plan. Any proposed site less
than or equal to ten (10) net acres shall
be considered a minor site plan and shall
conform to the procedures below:
a. An application for approval of a site plan
shall be submitted to the Development
Services Department. The Department
shall determine whether the application
for site plan approval is complete, and
shall submit a report as to complianc e
with this Ordinance and the application
for site plan approval to the Planning
Administrator;
b. If the site plan application is
incomplete, the Department shall
return it to the applicant with a
statement of the reasons why the
proposed site plan does not conform to
the provisions as defined in the Town’s
application(s) and / or process
guide(s), on file with the Town’s
Development Services Department;
c. If a use permitted by right is proposed,
the Development Services Department
shall submit a recommendation to the
Planning Administrator. The Planning
Administrator shall approve the site
plan, approve the site plan with
conditions, or deny the site plan; and,
d. If a conditional use, rezoning, or PAD is
proposed and accompanies the minor
site plan application for review, the
application shall follow the procedures
as set forth by the conditional use,
rezoning, and / or PAD procedures, as
applicable.
e. Within ten (10) calendar days of final
approval, minor site plan approvals
may be appealed to a full hearing of the
Town Council by two or more members
of the Town Council or by the Town
Mayor.
2. Major Site Plan. Any proposed site
greater than 10 net acres shall be
considered a major site plan and shall
conform to the procedures below:
a. An application for approval of a site plan
shall be submitted to the Planning
Administrator. The Planning
Administrator shall determine whether
the application for site plan approval is
complete, and shall submit a report as
to compliance with this Ordinance and
the application for site plan approval to
the Planning Commission;
b. If the site plan application is
incomplete, the Planning Administrator
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 13
shall return it to the applicant with a
statement of the reasons why the
proposed site plan does not conform to
the provisions as defined in the Town’s
application(s) and / or process
guide(s), on file with the Town’s
Development Services Department;
c. If a use permitted by right is proposed,
the Planning Administrator shall submit
a recommendation to the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commiss ion
shall approve the site plan, approve the
site plan with conditions, or deny the
site plan; and,
d. If a conditional use, rezoning, or PAD is
proposed and accompanies the major
site plan application for review, the
application shall follow the procedures
as set forth by the conditional use,
rezoning, and / or PAD procedures, as
applicable.
E. Appeals. Any site plan approval,
conditional approval and / or denial may be
appealed to the Town Council by an
aggrieved party, subject to the procedures
set forth in Section 3.1.G of this Ordinance.
F. Deviations from Approved Site Plan.
Development activities subject to the
requirements of this section may be carried
out only in substantial conformance with
the approved site plan and any conditions
or restrictions attached thereto.
Development activities may seek
Administrative Relief per Section 3.2 of this
Ordinance. Any substantial deviation from
the approved site plan, unless approved in
advance and in writing by the Planning
Administrator, or Town Council as stated
below or through Administrative Relief ,
shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance. The Planning Administrator
may direct that a new application to revise
the approved site plan be filed.
Furthermore, no certificate of occupancy
shall be issued if said development
activities do not conform to the approved
site plan.
G. Revision of Approved Site Plan. Any change
or modifications to an approved Site Plan
shall be considered an amendment to the
Site Plan. For all Site Plan amendment s,
revised Site Plans incorporating the
changes shall be submitted to the
Development Services Department. Site
Plan amendments shall be classified as
Major or Minor as below:
1. Minor Revisions. Any modification which,
as determined by the Development
Services Department, does not
substantially change the approved site
plan and the change/reduction is ten
percent (10%) or less, shall be
considered a Minor Site Plan Amendment .
The Department shall consider changes
such as minor dimensional building
configuration and landscape changes,
open space or outdoor living area as well
as the addition of shade structure, to be
Minor Site Plan Amendments. Minor
Revisions may seek Administrative Relief
per Section 3.2 of this Ordinance.; and,
2. Major Revisions. Any modification which,
as determined by the Development
Services Department, changes the
original approval such as: a change in
intent, phasing or revisions that do not
conform to Town standards, or a change
that is ten percent (10%) or more, shall
be considered a Major Site Plan
Amendment and shall be required to file
a new application form together with the
revised Site Plan and associated
materials, along with the application fees,
and shall be subject to the Site Plan
Review and recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
H. Effect of Site Plan Approval.
1. Effective Period. The approval of a site
plan shall be effective for a period of
eighteen (18) months from the date of
Town Council, Planning Commission or
administrative approval, at the end of
which time the applicant must have
submitted an application for building
permit. If a building permit is not
submitted for within the eighteen (18)
month period, the approval shall be null
and void, and the applicant shall be
required to submit a new site plan for
review.
2. Building Permit. After a site plan has been
approved the applicant may apply for
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 14
building permits consistent with the site
plan as approved. If a valid building
permit has been filed within eighteen
(18) months of site plan approval, and
said building permit remains act ive, the
site plan may remain valid, as
determined by the Planning
Administrator. No building permit
application may be issued until the site
plan has been certified as conforming to
the site plan as approved by the Town
Council, Planning Commission or Town
Staff.
3. Commencement of Development .
Development shall commence within
eighteen (18) months of site plan
approval, unless approved otherwise, or
the approval becomes null and void. In
such cases where certain development
requirements cannot be met immediately
due to weather conditions, a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued,
provided that adequate surety for such
development requirement will be
provided. Said completion shall not
exceed a period of eighteen (18) months
from date of issuance of the temporary
certificate of occupancy.
I. Final Inspection. The Planning
Administrator shall inspect the site for
compliance with the approved site plan
before a certificate of occupancy is issued
for the project. Any deficiencies shall be
recorded in a letter to the applicant. The
applicant shall have ten (10) days in which
to eliminate the deficiencies. If the
applicant is unable to comply within the ten
(10) day period, the applicant shall
request, in writing, an extension of time for
the completion which shall not exceed six
(6) months. The written request shall state
the extenuating circumstances causing the
delay. Upon review and approval by the
Planning Administrator, a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued
indicating the date by which the
deficiencies shall be eliminated.
J. Validity.
1. Site plan approval shall bear the
signature of the Planning Administrator
or his/her designee and date signed on
the site plan. Approval shall become
effective immediately.
2. Site plan approval shall lapse and become
void eighteen (18) months following the
date on which such approval became
effective unless application for a building
permit has been made, if an extension
request has been filled, or a valid building
permit is issued and construction is
commenced and diligently pursued
toward completion. After issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, the approved
site plan will govern site development.
3. Upon violation of any applicable provision
of this section or, if granted subject to
conditions, upon failure to comply with
conditions, site plan approval shall be
suspended upon notification to the owner
of a use or property subject to the site
plan.
4. A site plan shall continue to be valid upon
a change of ownership of the site or
structure which was the subject of the
application approval pursuant to these
provisions.
3.4 Amendment and Rezoning
A. Application.
1. When the owner of the affected property
initiates an amendment to the district
boundaries, an application for such
amendment shall be submitted to the
Planning Administrator. Before any
application is accepted by the
Development Services Department, the
applicant shall submit an application for a
pre-application meeting. The purpose of
the pre-application meeting is to discuss,
in general, the procedures and
requirements for a zoning amendment
request pursuant to these Regulations.
B. Initiation of a Rezoning. An owner of real
property within the Town, or that owner’s
authorized representative, may, upon
proof of ownership, apply for a change in
zoning district boundaries (rezoning) for
that landowner’s property.
C. Initiation of a Text Amendment. Any
person may request an amendment of the
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 15
text of the Ordinance, after a preapplication
meeting is held, by filing a
written request and application with the
Planning Administrator.
D. Procedures.
1. A pre-application conference shall be
scheduled by the applicant with the
Planning Administrator to discuss the
proposal. During the conference, the
Planning Administrator will identify the
submittal request.
2. Application for Rezoning or Text
Amendment shall follow the Public
Outreach procedures outlined in Section
3.1 of this Ordinance.
3. When the owner of the affected property
initiates an amendment to the district
boundaries, an application for such
amendment shall be submitted to the
Planning Administrator. An application
for amendment or rezoning needs to
follow the requirements as defined in the
Town’s applic ation(s) and / or process
guide(s), on file with the Town’s
Development Services Department .
Before any application is accepted by the
Development Services Department, the
applicant shall submit an application for a
pre-application meeting. The purpose of
the pre-application meeting is to discuss,
in general, the procedures and
requirements for a zoning amendment
request pursuant to these Regulations.
4. A rezoning shall be an amendment to the
Official Zoning Map as established and
maintained according to Section 4.4 of
this Ordinance.
5. The Planning Commission shall
recommend approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of a petitioned zone
or text change.
6. Upon a recommendation for approval of a
rezoning request or text amendment ,
with or without conditions, the Planning
Administrator shall schedule the
application for hearing before the Town
Council. The Town Council shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the
rezoning or text amendment.
7. When a rezoning application is
accompanied by an application for a
conditional use permit or subdivision
approval such dual applications may be
processed and reviewed concurrently. If
the proposed rezoning is inconsistent
with the General Plan Future Land Use
Map, an application for an amendment to
the Future Land Use Map shall be
submitted by the applicant in accordance
with the requirements of the Town of
Queen Creek General Plan. Amendment s
to both the Official Zoning Map and the
General Plan Future Land Use Map may
be considered concurrently.
E. Approval Criteria. The Planning
Commission and Town Council shall
consider the following questions, at a
minimum, in reviewing an application for a
rezone:
1. Whether the existing zoning was in error
at the time of adoption;
2. Any change of character in the area due
to installation of public facilities, other
zone changes, new growth trends,
deterioration, and development;
3. The degree to which the proposed zoning
will benefit the community. Whether
there will be benefits derived by the
community, or area, by granting the
proposed rezone;
4. Whether the proposed rezone is
compatible with the surrounding area or
whether there will be adverse impacts on
the capacity or safety of the portion of
street network influenced by the rezone,
parking problems, or environmental
impacts that the new use will generate
such an excessive storm runoff, water,
air or noise pollution, excessive nighttime
lighting, or other nuisances;
5. Whether the proposal conforms with and
is in furtherance of the implementation of
the goals and policies of the General Plan,
other adopted plans, and the goals,
objectives and policies of this Ordinance,
and other Town regulations and
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 16
guidelines, including goals and policies
relating to economic development;
6. Compliance with the Adequate Public
Facilities criteria as set forth in Section
5.1 of this Ordinance;
7. The zoning districts and existing land
uses of the surrounding properties;
8. Whether the subject property is suitable
for the uses to which it has been
restricted under the existing zoning
classification;
9. Whether the rezoning is compatible with
the adjacent neighborhood, especially
residential neighborhood stability and
character;
10. The length of time the subject property
has remained vacant as zoned; and,
11. Whether there is an adequate supply of
land available in the subject area and the
surrounding community to accommodate
the zoning and community needs.
F. Protest. The majority of votes prescribed
by A.R.S. §9-462.04.G, shall be required if
a protest petition is filed in accordance with
said statute and the subsection F. The
protest petition shall be filed in writing with
the Town Clerk at or before noon (12:00)
on the date of the Town Council hearing.
G. Subsequent Applications. In the event that
an application for amendment is denied by
the Town Council or that the application is
withdrawn after the town Planning
Commission hearing, the Planning
Commission shall have the authority to
refuse to accept another application for the
same amendment within one (1) year of
the original hearing.
3.5 Conditional Use Permit
A. Applicability.
1. Conditional uses are those uses which are
generally compatible with the land uses
permitted by right in a zoning district, but
which require individual review of their
location, design, and configuration and
the imposition of conditions in order to
ensure the appropriateness of the use at
a particular location within a given zoning
district.
2. Only those uses that are enumerated as
conditional uses in a zoning district, as
set forth in Section 4.6 of this Ordinance,
or as authorized pursuant to subsection
D.2 of this Section, shall be authorized by
the Town Council. A conditional use
permit shall not be required for a use
allowed as a permitted use in a given
zoning district. No conditional use shall
be established until a site plan has been
approved in accordance with section 3.3
of this Ordinance. Applications for a
conditional use and site plan review shall
be submitted and reviewed concurrently.
B. Approval Criteria. As may be specified
within each zoning district, uses permitted
subject to conditional use review criteria
shall be permitted only after review and
approval by the Planning Commission and
the Town Council only if the applicant
demonstrates that:
1. The proposed conditional use shall be in
compliance with all regulations of the
applicable zoning district, the provisions
of Article 4 and Article 5 of this
Ordinance, and any applicable
performance standards as set forth in
Article 6 of this Ordinance;
2. The proposed conditional use shall
conform to the character of the
neighborhood, within the same zoning
district, in which it is located. In making
such a determination, consideration shall
be given to the location, type, and height
of the buildings or structures and the type
and extent of landscaping and screening
on the site;
3. Adequate utilities, access roads,
drainage, fire protection, and other
necessary facilities shall be provided;
4. Adequate measures shall be taken to
provide ingress and egress so designed
as to minimize traffic hazards and to
minimize traffic congestion on the public
roads;
5. The proposed use shall not be noxious or
offensive by reason of vibration, noise,
odor, dust, smoke, or gas;
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 17
6. The proposed use shall not be injurious to
the use and enjoyment of the property in
the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially
diminish or impair the property values
within the neighborhood;
7. The establishment of the proposed use
shall not impede the orderly development
and improvement of surrounding
property for uses permitted within the
zoning district.
8. The establishment, maintenance, or
operation of the proposed use shall not
be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, or
general welfare; and,
9. The public interest and welfare
supporting the proposed conditional use
shall be sufficient to outweigh the
individual interests which are adversely
affected by the establishment of the
proposed use.
C. Approval Procedures.
1. The approval of a conditional use permit
shall follow the procedures set forth in
the Major Site Plan Approval Procedures
in Section 3.3.D.2. When a complete
conditional use permit application has
been submitted, the conditional use
permit shall be submitted with a
recommendation to the Planning
Commission and the Town Council for
approval, approval with conditions, or
denial. The procedure for processing a
conditional use shall be as set forth in
A.R.S. §9-462.04.
2. When a conditional use is approved, the
Town Council must concurrently approve,
approve with condition(s) or deny a site
plan. Any conditions of approval of the
site plan shall be made condition(s) of
approval of the conditional use by
reference.
D. Town Council Authority.
1. Any use that the Town Council may
permit as a Conditional Use, existing at
the time this Ordinance or amendment s
thereto become effective, shall be
considered a nonconforming use unless
such use has been established as a
Conditional Use as herein provided.
2. The Town Council may permit any use
within a zoning district upon a finding
that said use is materially similar to other
permitted or conditional uses within the
same zoning district, in accordance with
the procedures and standards set forth in
this Section. No use shall be authorized
by the Town Council, pursuant to this
subsection, except by the favorable vote
of three-fourths (3/4th) of all members of
the Town Council.
3.6 Temporary Use Permit
A. Purpose. The temporary use permit is a
mechanism by which the town may allow a
use to locate within the town on a short -
term basis and by which it may allow
seasonal or transient uses not otherwise
allowed.
B. Application and Uses Permitted. Prior to
conducting or establishing a temporary use
or structure, applicants shall submit a
completed application form and a site plan
for the approval of a temporary use permit
to the Development Services Department .
Applications requirements shall be
established by the Planning Administrator.
1. The uses listed under Section 3.6.D of
this Ordinance are authorized temporary
uses subject to the regulations and times
specified therein and only in the zoning
districts specified in Section 4.6 of this
Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified
herein, Temporary Use Permit renewals
or extensions shall not be permitted. All
other uses shall be considered permanent
and subject to all regulations within this
and other applicable Ordinances.
C. Applications Procedures.
1. An application for approval of a
temporary use permit shall be submitted
to the Development Services Department
as set forth and determined by the
Planning Administrator which shall
include a general project report and a site
plan, except that the site plan format
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 18
may be eleven by seventeen inc h (11” x
17”). The Development Servic es
Department shall determine whether the
application for temporary use permit
approval is complete, and shall submit a
recommendation of approval, approval
with conditions, or denial to the Planning
Administrator.
2. If the temporary use permit application is
incomplete, the Development Services
Department shall return it to the
applicant with a statement of the reasons
why the temporary use permit does not
conform to the provisions of temporary
use permit application and / or provisions
mentioned in Section 3.6.D of this
Ordinance.
3. If a temporary use permitted by right is
proposed, the Development Services
Department shall submit a
recommendation to the Planning
Administrator. The Planning
Administrator shall approve the
temporary use permit, approve the
temporary use permit with conditions, or
deny the temporary use permit.
D. Approval Criteria for Uses. All temporary
uses listed in this section require a
Temporary Use Permit. The Planning
Administrator shall not approve or modify
an application for a Temporary Use Permit
unless the following criteria, specific
regulations and time limitations are met in
addition to criteria for any particular
temporary use as specified in subsections
of this Section:
1. General.
a. Compatibility with/effect on
Surrounding Area. Except as provided
herein, no Temporary Use shall be
proposed and or approved on
residential zoned land. The allowance
of such use shall not be detrimental to
the public health, safety and general
welfare, and the use shall be consistent
with the purpose and intent of this
Ordinance and the specific zoning
district in which it will be located; and
the use is compatible in intensity,
characteristics and appearance with
existing land uses in the immediate
vicinity of the temporary use, and the
use, value and qualities of the
neighborhood surrounding the
temporary use will not be adversely
affected by the use or activities
associated with it. In addition to those
listed herein, factors such as location,
noise, odor, light, dust control and
hours of operation shall be considered.
b. Location on Public Property. The use
shall not be on publicly owned property
unless the applicant first obtains
approval of a revocable or other
applicable permit through the Town or
the owner, if not the Town.
c. Traffic. The location of the temporary
use or structure shall be such that
adverse effects on surrounding
properties will be minimal, particularly
regarding any type of traffic generated
or impacted by the temporary use or
structure and impact upon traffic
circulation in the area.
d. Parking and Access. Adequate offstreet
parking, in accordance with
Section 5.6 of this Ordinance, shall be
provided to serve the use. The use
does not displace the required offstreet
parking spaces or loading areas
of the principal permitted uses on the
site. The entrance and exit drives shall
be designed to prevent traffic hazards
and nuisances.
e. Property Line Setbacks. Structures and
/ or display of merchandise shall
comply with the yard and property line
setback requirements of the zone
district within which it is located. The
items shall be displayed so as not to
interfere with the sight visibility triangle
of the intersection of the curb line of
any two (2) streets or a driveway and a
street. In no case shall items be
displayed within the public right-ofway.
f. Signs. Temporary Use Permit for signs
shall be permitted only for the time
frame established in Section 7.5 of this
Ordinance. No sign for a temporary use
shall exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet, not including permanent signage
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 19
that may be on a vehicle. All signs for
temporary uses shall be attached to a
structure, vehicle, or existing sign post.
Off premise signage for a temporary
use shall not be allowed.
g. Number per Business. Only one (1)
Temporary Use Permit shall be
permitted for a single business at any
given time.
h. Period of Time between Permits. The
period of time between any temporary
use permit on a parcel and application
for another temporary use permit on
that parcel shall be at least three (3)
times the amount of time of the first
(previous) permit.
2. Enterprise Sales. “Enterprise Sales” ma y
be conducted, unless otherwise
prohibited, without reference to other
regulations of this Ordinance, upon
issuance of a Permit by the Planning
Administrator, when it is found that the
following criteria will be met:
a. That the Permit shall be obtained prior
to commencing any enterprise sale;
b. That the Permit shall not authorize a
sale for more than four (4) days in
length, no more than six (6) times per
calendar year for each of the following:
1) A bona fide non-profit, charitable or
religious organization and fraternal or
service club;
2) An individual bona fide Queen Creek
merchant who shall possess a valid
Business License for a specific
identifiable location in a commerc ial
zoning district in the Town of Queen
Creek. All merchandise offerings
shall consist of items normally
stocked by the holder of the Business
License;
3) That the site or location of such sales
shall be kept in a clean and orderly
fashion, free of refuse and other
debris;
4) That no element of the sale will
obstruct or interfere with the safe and
normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic;
5) That no element of the sale will
constitute a condition which, in the
opinion of the Planning Administrator,
Building Inspector, or Fire Chief
presents a danger to the health,
safety, or welfare of the general
public; and,
6) That upon the conclusion of the sale,
the site, or location shall be cleaned
and restored to its previous condition.
3. Temporary Seasonal and Community
Events. Temporary Events may be
allowed, without reference to other
regulations of this Ordinance, upon
issuance of a permit by the Planning
Administrator for events lasting not more
than thirty (30) days and customarily
associated with recognized local or
national holidays, and activities, such as:
a. Christmas Tree sales at Christmas
time;
b. Pumpkin sales at Halloween;
c. Music festivals;
d. Promotional events;
e. Horse shows, Rodeos, and Charity
Events;
f. Fireworks Sales; and,
g. Events utilizing or encroaching on
public right-of-way.
4. Temporary Retail Sales Uses.
a. Seasonal Sale of Agricultural Products.
Temporary Use Permits are required for
all seasonal sales of agricultural
products in non-residential zone
distric ts suc h as farmers’ market. Suc h
sales are limited to a period of time not
to exceed four (4) consecutive months
per calendar year. A maximum of one
(1) building/display booth shall be
allowed and may cover a maximum of
four-hundred (400) square feet. The
structure must be portable and
completely removed at the end of the
period.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 20
b. Seasonal Greenhouses (Accessory to
Established Business). Limited to only
non-residential zone districts for a
period of time not to exceed six (6)
months per calendar year. A maximum
of one (1) building shall be allowed and
may cover a maximum of two-thousand
(2,000) square feet. The structure
must be portable and completely
removed at the end of the permit
period.
c. Sidewalk Vendors. The sale of food,
beverages, or merchandise from a
stand or motor vehicle, or from a
person may be allowed in nonresidential
zoning districts consistent
with the requirements of subsection C
of this Section (Enterprise Sales), and
shall be limited to a period not to
exceed ninety (90) continuous days per
calendar year in a given location. Even
if at any time the vendor does not
occupy the permitted site, the 90-day
limit shall not be extended.
d. Fireworks Sales. The display and sale of
consumer fireworks as defined by the
American Pyrotechnics Association
Standard 87-1 and pursuant to State
Law.
1) Permissible Consumer Fireworks
include: ground and hand-held
sparkling devices, cylindrical and
cone fountains, illuminating torches
wheels, ground and flitter sparklers,
toy smoke devices, wire sparklers or
dipped sticks, multiple tube fireworks
devices and pyrotechnic articles.
2) Does not include anything that is
designed or intended to rise into the
air and explode or detonate in the air
or to fly above the ground, including,
for example, firework items
commonly known as Bottle Rockets,
Sky Rockets, Missile-Type Rockets,
Helicopters, Torpedoes, Roman
Candles, and Jumping Jacks.
3) A person shall not sell or permit or
authorize the sale of permissible
consumer fireworks to a person who
is under sixteen (16) years of age.
4) Use of consumer fireworks pursuant
to the Queen Creek Town Code,
Chapter 9.
5) Applicant, Entity, and / or person
responsible for fireworks sales shall
provide a written informational flyer,
to all customers and visitors,
describing the use of consumer
fireworks in the Town of Queen Creek
pursuant to the Town Code. Flyer
shall include exact language from the
Town Code, including section number,
of provisions regulating use of
fireworks. Cost of informational
brochure shall be the responsibility of
the Applicant.
5. Real Estate Development and
Construction-Related Temporary Uses.
The following uses are allowed in all
zoning districts.
a. Permits Required. Temporary Use
Permits are required for real estate
development and construction-related
temporary uses and are subject to the
following criteria:
1) The property owner or authorized
representative shall obtain zoning
clearance and building permit
authorization for construction prior to
issuance of the Temporary Use
Permit. Unless otherwise specified
below.
2) The temporary building, travel trailer,
or mobile home shall be located on
the lot or parcel on which construction
is occurring and shall be occupied and
/ or used only by the property owner
or authorized representative.
3) Any temporary use permit for such
temporary building, travel trailer or
mobile home issued by the Planning
Administrator shall be limited to a
period of time not to exceed one (1)
year from the date of such approval
unless otherwise specified within this
Ordinance, but said permit may be
renewed thereafter upon the property
owner submitting a request to the
Planning Administrator for the
renewal of said permit and the
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 21
submittal of satisfactory evidence to
the Planning Administrator indicating
that the need for such temporary
building, travel trailer or mobile home
continues to exist.
4) Unless such Temporary Use Permit is
renewed, the temporary building,
travel trailer or mobile home shall be
removed from the property upon
expiration of the previously issued
Temporary Use Permit or within ten
(10) days after completion of the
construction work, or within ten (10)
days after the expiration of the
authorized building permit for the
construction work, whichever comes
first. If an accessory building has
been used for temporary residential
use during construction, the building
shall be returned to its accessory use
state and any kitchen facilities placed
in the building shall be removed
within the above time frame.
b. Contractors Office and Equipment /
Storage Sheds. Accessory to a
Construction Project (Residential or
Non-Residential). Multiple temporary
structures may be allowed under one
(1) temporary use permit. Placement
of such a temporary use is limited to a
period of time determined by an
estimated project completion date with
the option of an extension of up to one
(1) year as and if approved by the
Planning Administrator. A trailer may
be used for a contractor's office or for
the contractor's storage of equipment
or materials. All temporary buildings
and trailers shall be completely
removed from the site within thirty (30)
days of issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy or completion of the
construction project, whichever occurs
first.
c. Real Estate Office in a Trailer/Mobile
Homes. One (1) temporary structure
such as trailer or mobile home may be
used as a real estate sales office in any
new construction project for the sale of
units within that project only. Such a
temporary use may be allowed in all
zone districts subject to the following:
1) The property owner or authorized
representative shall obtain zoning
clearance and make application for
construction of a model prior to
issuance of the temporary use
permit;
2) The permit shall be valid for a period
of six (6) months or until all units for
the project are sold, whichever comes
first. At the conclusion of the 6-
month period or lot sales, then the
temporary structure shall be removed
from the site within ten (10) days
after the expiration of the temporary
use permit. Said permit may be
renewed thereafter upon the property
owner submitting a request to the
Planning Administrator for renewal of
said permit and the submittal of
satisfactory evidence to the Planning
Administrator indicating that the need
for such temporary building, travel
trailer or mobile home continues to
exist;
3) An all-weather emergency access
road approved by the fire department
and the Town engineer shall be
provided to the site. All weather
access shall mean a minimum twenty
foot (20’) wide roadway c onsisting of
a minimum six inc hes (6”) of
aggregate base;
4) An off-street parking area shall
provide one (1) stall for each person
stationed at the mobile home, plus
two (2) customer spaces and one (1)
ADA accessible space;
5) Prior to opening the sales office there
shall be operable fire hydrants within
five-hundred feet (500’) of the sales
office;
6) An affidavit from the builder stating
that no general public access to home
sites shall be permitted until street
improvements are completed;
7) All ADA requirements shall be
complied with; and,
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 22
8) Evidence of compliance with all other
state/county agencies shall be
provided.
d. Real Estate Office in Model Homes.
Accessory to Construction of a New
Residential Development. Limited to a
period of time not to exceed one (1)
year with the option of an extension of
up to one (1) year as and if approved
by the Planning Administrator. The
number of employees utilizing the office
at any one (1) time may not exceed five
(5). A real estate office may not
contain sleeping or cooking
accommodations unless located in a
model dwelling.
e. Model Home Complex. A Temporary
Use Permit application is required for a
Model Home Complex within a
residential subdivision. A model home
complex may include only:
1) The lots occupied by the model
homes;
2) Any immediately adjacent lots to be
used for parking for the model home
complex (limited to not more than
one (1) lot for parking per model
home);
3) One (1) lot for temporary
construction office;
4) Immediately adjacent common
areas within the subdivision which is
landscaped and improved in
conjunction with the model home
complex; and
5) The immediately adjacent roadways
which provide entry to the model
home complex.
6) Signage as listed in Article 7, Section
7.5, Subsections 3 through 5, may
be included in, or excluded from a
model home complex as approved by
the Town.
7) A subdivision may have more than
one (1) model home complex if
different housing product lines are
being offered by a home builder at
different locations within the
subdivision, or if more than one (1)
home builder is offering housing
products within the subdivision.
f. Single Family Dwelling in Temporary
Structure. During the active
construction period (after a building or
grading permit has been issued) of a
construction project involving a nonresidential
use or a residential
development, one (1) mobile home or
trailer may be allowed on the same
property to be used as a temporary
residence or for a night watchman for a
period not to exceed twelve (12)
months or the active construction
period, whichever is less. The
temporary home shall be removed from
the site within fourteen (14) days of
issuance of the final Certificate of
Occupancy for a non-residential
structure or the first residential unit if
within a residential development.
6. Amusement Enterprises. Carnival, circus,
or menagerie and amusement rides may
be allowed in any non-residential zone
district for a period not to exceed fifteen
(15) days within any calendar quarter.
This classification excludes events
conducted in a permanent entertainment
facility.
7. Special Events and Activities. Except
when utilizing public right-of-way, special
events and activities conducted on public
property such as school sites and Town
parks shall be exempt from the provisions
of this section of the Ordinance but must
comply with any guidelines, regulations
and permitting process required by the
authorizing agency (e.g. School District
or Town Parks and Recreation
Department). Events utilizing public
right-of-way shall comply with the
provisions of this Section.
8. Location of Manufactured, Mobile Homes,
Travel Trailers, Aircraft, Boats, Camping
Trailers, Truck Campers, and Motor
Homes. Unless otherwise permitted by
the use regulations for a specific zoning
district, the location or storage of
manufactured homes, mobile homes,
travel trailers, aircraft, boats, camping
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 23
trailers, truck campers and motor homes
outside of approved mobile home parks,
travel trailer parks and
manufactured/mobile home subdivisions,
and the location or storage of aircraft,
boats, camping trailers, truck campers
and motor homes in all zones shall be
subject to the following:
a. At no time shall the manufactured
home, mobile home, travel trailer,
aircraft, boat, camping trailer, truck
camper, or motor home be occupied or
used for living, sleeping, or household
purposes.
b. Manufactured homes, mobile homes ,
travel trailers and motor homes
intended for non-residential uses shall
be subject to securing a temporary use
permit; provided the mobile homes
used for quarters for on duty personnel
in connection with publicly or privately
owned or operated fire stations shall be
considered to be a non-residential use
in any zoning district and subject to the
zoning permit requirements.
c. If a manufactured home, mobile home,
travel trailer, aircraft, boat, camping
trailer, truck camper and / or motor
home is located outside a garage or
carport, it shall be placed in the rear
yard of the lot and screened from view
by an opaque fence (e.g. wood picket,
or block), except that placement in
other than the rear yard for loading and
unloading purposes may be permitted
for a period of time not to exceed
seventy-two (72) hours.
9. Similar and Compatible Uses Not
Specified. Those uses which are similar
and compatible to those allowed as
temporary uses in this Section.
a. Determination of what constitutes
similar and compatible shall be made by
the Planning Administrator.
b. In such instances, the applicant shall
provide the following information by
which the proposal can be reviewed:
1) Type of use;
2) Number of employees;
3) Parking/circulation needs;
4) Hours of operation; and,
5) Duration of operation.
E. Appeal. Upon receiving notification of the
Department’s dec ision to approve or deny
the application for a Temporary use Permit ,
the applicant or any party in interest,
aggrieved by the decision may file an
appeal to the Board of Adjustment. Such
appeal shall be filed in writing, within seven
(7) calendar days of the decision. Any
appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall
follow the procedures outlined in Article 2.5
of this Ordinance.
F. Validity. The temporary use permit shall be
valid for the use for which the permit was
granted for the length of time indicated in
the permit as long as the use is in
compliance with applicable ordinances.
3.7 Board of Adjustment
A. Application. The Board of Adjustment
(BOA) shall decide appeals of
administrative interpretations and
decisions.
B. Processing Procedures. Appeals from
administrative decisions.
1. Any appeal of a decision or interpretation
of the Planning Administrator and any
appeal for a variance shall be reviewed by
the Board of Adjustment. A notice of
appeal of an administrative decision from
a final decision relating to an application
for development approval shall be
submitted to the Planning Administrator
within thirty (30) days from receipt of
decision.
2. The Board of Adjustment shall conduct a
hearing on the appeal, pursuant to the
procedures established in A.R.S. §9-
462.06.
G. Approval Criteria.
1. Appeal of Decisions. In an appeal to the
Board regarding an administrat ive
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 24
decision or interpretation, the Board's
scope of review shall be limited to
determining whether the decision or
interpretation by the Planning
Administrator was in accordance with the
intent and requirements of this
Ordinance, and accordingly, the Board
will affirm or reverse the decision.
2. Appeals for Variance. Variance is not a
right. It may be granted to an applicant
only if the applicant establishes
compliance with the hardship criteria
established in, A.R.S. §9-462.06.
Pursuant to, A.R.S. §9-462.06, no use
variance or variance based upon selfimposed
hardship shall be granted.
3. Validity. Rights and privileges established
by the granting of a variance shall be
exercised within one (1) year following
the date of approval unless a different
time limit is specified by the Board at the
time the variance is granted. Failure to
exercise a variance within the time limit s
specified shall cause the variance to
become null and void.
4. Required Findings. The Board of
Adjustment may grant a variance only
after all of the findings set forth below
have been met:
a. Special circumstances or conditions
exist on the subject property including
its size, shape, topography, location,
or surroundings that does not exist on
other property in that zoning district.
b. The literal interpretation of the
provisions of this Ordinance would
deprive the appellant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other properties
in the same zoning district.
c. Granting the variance will not confer
upon the applicant any special
privilege that is denied by this
Ordinance to other land, parcels,
structures, or buildings in the same
zoning district.
3.8 Expiration of Development
Approvals
A. Time of Expiration. Unless otherwise
specifically provided for in this Ordinance,
development applications shall
automatically expire and become null and
void, and all activities taken pursuant to
such development application shall cease
and become null and void, and all activities
pursuant to such approval thereafter shall
be deemed in violation of this Ordinance,
when: 1) the applicant fails to satisfy any
condition that was imposed as part of the
original or revised approval of the
application for the development approval,
or that was made pursuant to the terms of
any development agreement, including the
failure to abide by specified time limit s
established therein; or 2) the applicant fails
to present a subsequent development
application as required by Table 3.8-1 or
3.8-2 of this Ordinance or the A.R.S.
Except for Rezoning or Map change, if no
time limit for satisfaction of conditions is
specified in the original or revised approval
of the development application, the time
shall be presumed to be two (2) years from
the date of approval.
1. Extension Procedures. Unless otherwise
prohibited by Arizona law this approval is
for a period not to exceed two (2) years
from the date of the original decision
granting approval, if the application for
extension is made in writing within the
original period of validity. Subsequent
extensions may be made by the final
approval body upon finding that
conditions at the same time of approval
have not changed.
2. Date from Which Time Limit is measured.
a. Each time period referenced on Table
3.8-1 and Table 3.8-2 shall run from
the final action of the appropriate Town
official, officer, board, commission or
the governing body with valid and legal
jurisdiction to take such action or to
approve such plans or to issue such
permits. Except as may be otherwise
indicated herein, the date of final action
shall be the date such action was taken
or such approval was granted or such
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 25
permit was issued, as set forth on such
action, approval or permit.
b. In order to assure that all applicants for
actions, approvals or permits are
informed of the applicable time limit ,
the date of final action and the
expiration date shall be shown on each
such action, permit or approval; but
provided, however, that the Town's
failure to include either the date of final
action or the expiration date shall not
be deemed to be a waiver of such dates
nor shall it be the basis of any action by
the applicant to challenge the
applicable expiration date. The burden
is on the applicant to know the date of
issuance and the expiration date. If
either or both of such dates are not
shown, the applicant may request, and
the Town shall promptly supply such
date or dates.
c. All actions, approvals, or permits shall
expire on the expiration date unless a
valid extension has been granted on or
before the expiration date pursuant to
Subsection D herein.
3. Extensions of Time Limits.
a. There shall be no extension of any time
limits for actions, approvals or permit s
set forth herein, as of right. Any
extensions must be expressly
requested by the applicant, in writing,
and approved by the appropriate
official, officer, board, commission or
the governing body which originally
took the action, approved the plan, or
issued the permit.
b. A request for extension, with applicable
fees, of an expiration date shall be
made on an application form provided
by the Town and shall include, but shall
not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
1) The current date of expiration;
2) The extension period requested,
which shall be no longer than the
original period of time granted; and,
3) The reason(s) that the applicant has
been unable to proceed within the
period of the original expiration date.
c. Before granting an extension, the Town
official, officer, board, commission or
the governing body shall determine
whether any applicable changes in land
use regulations have occurred which
would impose new requirements with
respect to such action, approval or
permit, if an extension were denied and
the applicant were compelled to re-file
for an original action, approval, or
permit. If changes have occurred, the
Town official, officer, board,
commission or the governing body shall
balance the burden imposed on the
applicant if required to re-file for an
original action, approval or permit
against the benefit accruing to the
Town and the public by requiring the
applicant to comply with the new
regulation.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING PROCEDURES
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 3 - Page 26
Table 3.8-1 Time Limits for Use of Zoning Approvals and Permits
Table 3.8-2 Time Limits for Use of Subdivision Approvals
Type Time Limit
Rezoning
Zoning Map
Time limits for Rezoning or Zoning Map change shall be at the discretion of the Town
Council.
Conditional Use
Permit
Eighteen (18) months to obtain a building permit and commence construction of the
primary use authorized by the permit, or in the case of home occupations, to complete
any necessary alterations, adjustments, modifications, or other activities authorized by
the permit.
Variance or
Special Exception
Six (6) months to obtain a building permit and to commence construction of the primary
use authorized by the variance.
Building Permit Six (6) months.
Site Plan
Eighteen (18) months to commence construction after receiving site plan approval, two
(2) years from commencement of construction to complete construction.
Development
Agreement
The above-referenced time limits may be extended up to a maximum of five (5) years,
pursuant to an approved development agreement.
Type Revised Time Limit
Preliminary Plat Twenty-four (24) months to submit final plat or preliminary plat void.
Final Plat
Twenty-four (24) months to initiate construction of improvements; Thirty-six (36) months
to complete construction of improvements.
Zoning Ordinance
Article 4.0
Zoning Districts
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 1
4.0 Zoning Districts
Section Content Page
4.1 Purpose 1
4.2 Establishment of Zoning Districts 1
4.3 Relationship to General Plan 2
4.4 Zoning Map 6
4.5 District Boundaries 6
4.6 Use Regulations 6
4.7 Dimensional and Density Regulations 22
4.8 Density Bonus 27
4.9 Performance Criteria 28
4.10 Planned Community District 34
4.11 Planned Area Development Overlay District 39
4.12 Manufactured Housing Overlay District 44
4.13 Transfer of Development Rights 45
4.14 Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport 46
Overlay District
4.1 Purpose
A. The Town is hereby zoned and divided into
districts. The purpose of establishing these
districts is:
1. To implement the Queen Creek General
Plan;
2. To conserve and promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare;
3. Encourage the most appropriate use of
land throughout the Town and to ensure
logical and orderly growth and
development of the physical elements of
the Town;
4. Prevent scattered and haphazard growth
and guide orderly transition of urban
areas;
5. Conserve and enhance economic, social
and aesthetic values;
6. Protect and maintain the integrity and
character of established neighborhoods;
7. Facilitate adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewage, schools,
parks, and other public and commercial
facilities and services;
8. Promote the development of convenient
and beneficial clusters of uses, including
business and shopping facilities where
satisfactory proof is made that the same
are reasonably necessary and desirable
for the public convenience and welfare;
9. Provide for adequate light and clean air;
10. Aid in preventing traffic congestion in the
streets and public ways of the Town;
11. Prevent unduly noisome and / or injurious
substances, conditions and operations;
and,
12. Secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers.
4.2 Establishment of Zoning
Districts
A. In accordance with the requirement of
A.R.S. §9-462.01.B, that zoning
regulations be districts, the Town of Queen
Creek, as shown on the Official Zoning Map
accompanying this Ordinance and
incorporated herein by this reference, is
hereby divided into the following zoning
districts which shall be governed by all of
the uniform use and area requirements of
this Ordinance, the respective symbol for
each type of district being set forth opposite
its title.
B. Additional zoning districts may be added
from time to time upon the
recommendation of the Planning
Commission to the Town Council pursuant
to A.R.S. §9-462.03. Proposed changes to
the zoning district regulations or the Official
Zoning Map, including the addition of new
zoning districts, may be submitted by the
Planning Commission or any other
interested party.
C. Uses not listed as a permitted use or
conditional use within the applicable zoning
district regulations herein shall be
prohibited, unless determined by the
Planning Administrator as described in
subsection 4.6.B.1.
D. If a use does not conform to the uses
designated as permitted uses within the
zoning district, the applicant may submit an
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 2
application for an amendment to the Official
Zoning Map and / or the text of the Zoning
Ordinance, or an interpretation of zoning
district boundaries or permitted uses
pursuant to Section 2.2 of this Ordinance.
Table 4.2-1 Zoning Districts
4.3 Relationship to General Plan
A. The purpose of this Ordinance is to
implement the land use policies of the
General Plan Land Use Element, including
the Land Use Plan. Pursuant to A.R.S. §9-
462.F, all zoning ordinances or regulations
adopted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be
consistent with the General Plan and any
specific plans of the Town, if any, as
adopted under A.R.S. §9-6 This section
describes the relationship between the
various zoning districts and the General
Plan and a summary of each development
district in tabular form. The provisions of
Article 4 to Article 7 shall prevail, if there is
any inconsistency with the tabular
summary below.
1. Purpose Statements for All Districts. The
purpose and intent of each distric t is
listed in Table 4.3-1 on the next page.
Zoning District Area Requirements
Residential Districts
A-1 Agricultural District – Rural Development Ten (10) acres/du
R1-190 Rural Development District Five (5) acres/du
R1-145 Rural Development District Three and one-third (3 1/3) acres/du
R1-108 Rural Development District Two and a half (2 1/2) acres/du
R1-54 General Rural Development District One and one-fourth (1 1/4) acres/du
R1-43 Rural Estate District One (1) acre/ du
R1-35 Suburban Residential Type A District Thirty five thousand (35,000) sq. ft. /du
R1-18 Suburban Residential Type B District Eighteen thousand (18,000) sq. ft. /du
R1-15 Suburban Development Type B District Fifteen thousand (15,000) sq. ft. /du
R1-12 Suburban Development Type B District Twelve thousand (12,000) sq. ft. /du
R1-9 Urban Development Type A District Nine thousand (9,000) sq. ft. /du
R1-8 Urban Development Type A District Not Permitted after August 1, 1998
R1-7 Urban Development Type A District Seven thousand (7,000) sq. ft. /du
R1-6 Urban Development Type A District Not Permitted after August 1, 1998
R1-5 Urban Development District Up to 5 du/acre
R1-4 Urban Development District Up to 8 du/acre
MDR Medium Density Residential District Up to 14 du/acre
HDR High Density Residential District Up to 25 du/acre
Non-Residential Districts
C-1 Light Commercial District N/A
C-2 General Commercial District N/A
C-3 Regional Commercial Center District N/A
EMP-A Office/Industrial Park N/A
EMP-B General Industrial District N/A
PRC Parks, Recreation and Conservation Zone District N/A
P/QP Public/Quasi Public District N/A
NC Neighborhood Commercial/Office Mixed Use District N/A
DC Downtown Core District N/A
MU Mixed Use District N/A
AT Agri-tainment District N/A
PCD Planned Community District Two-hundred (200) acres
Overlay
Districts
PAD Planned Area Development Overlay District N/A
MHR Manufactured Housing Overlay District N/A
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 3
Table 4.3-1 Relationship of Residential Districts to General Plan
Agriculture District
A-1
Ten (10)
Acres Per
Dwelling Unit
To provide areas for low intensity agricultural operations, supportive agricultural
industries, and very low density single family. This district is appropriate where
low density single family uses development is desired or where terrain and / or
lack of public facilities and services require low density development. A-1 zoning
implements the Very Low Density Residential future land use classification of the
Queen Creek General Plan.
Rural Development District
R1- 190
Five (5)
Acres Per
Dwelling Unit
To provide areas for low intensity agricultural operations and to conserve and
protect farms and other open land uses, and prevent urban and agricultural land
use conflicts. Rural 190 zoning implements the Very Low Density Residential future
land use classification of the Queen Creek General Plan.
R1-145
Three and
One-Third (3
1/3) Acres
Per Dwelling
Unit)
To provide areas for low intensity agricultural operations and to conserve and
protect farms and other open land uses, and prevent urban and agricultural
conflicts, Rural 145 zoning implements the Very Low Density Residential future
land use classification of the Queen Creek General Plan.
R1-108 Two and
One-Half (2
1/2) Acres
Per Dwelling
Unit
To provide areas for low intensity agricultural operations and to foster orderly
growth in the Rural Preservation Tier, and to prevent urban and agricultural land
use conflicts. Rural 108 zoning implements the Very Low Density Residential future
land use classification of the Queen Creek General Plan.
General Rural District
R1-54 One and
One-Fourth
(1 1/4) Acres
Per Dwelling
Unit
To provide areas for low intensity agricultural operations and to provide a zoning
classification for property formerly located in the unincorporated areas of Pinal
County upon the annexation into the territorial limits of the Town of Queen Creek.
Generally, such properties are zoned GR (General Rural) pursuant to the Pinal
County Zoning Ordinance. Such properties shall, upon annexation into the Town
of Queen Creek, be zoned R1-54 unless and until a different zoning classification
is applied to said property. R1-54 zoning implements the Very Low Density
Residential future land use classification of the Queen Creek General Plan and is
located in the Rural Preservation Tier of the General Plan.
R1-43 One (1) Acre
Per Dwelling
Unit
To provide areas for low intensity agricultural operations and to provide areas for
very and low density single family uses in the Rural Preservation Tier, Property
zoned R1-43 should include only those tracts which abut or are in close proximity
to existing large-lot single family development, making R1-43 an appropriate
transition district between rural and urban uses, This zoning district implements
the Very Low Density Residential and Low Density Residential future land use
classification of the Queen Creek General Plan.
Suburban Residential
R1-35
Type A
35,000
Square Feet
Per Dwelling
Unit
To provide areas for medium low-density, single-family residential uses where
adequate public facilities and services exist with capacity to serve development.
R1-35 zoning implements the Very Low Density Residential (VLDR), Low Density
Residential (LDR), and Medium Density Residential (MDR) future land use
classifications of the Queen Creek General Plan.
R1-18,
R1-15,
R1-12
Type B
18,000,
15,000,
12,000 Sq.
Feet Per
Dwelling Unit
To provide areas for medium low-density, single family residential uses where
adequate public facilities and services exist with capacity to serve development.
R1-18, R1-15 AND R1-12 zoning implants the Low Density Residential (LDR) and
Medium Density Residential (MDR) future land use classifications of the Queen
Creek General Plan.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 4
Table 4.3-1 Relationship of Residential Districts to General Plan (Continued)
Urban Development
R1-9
Type A
9,000
Square Feet
Per Dwelling
Unit
To provide for medium density detached and attached single family homes and
duplexes in areas where large-lot development is discouraged and adequate public
facilities and services are located nearby. R1-9 supports the Queen Creek General
Plan’s principles of concentrating urban growth and reinforcing existing community
centers. A mix of dwelling types is allowed in this district. This district implements
the Medium Density Residential future land use classification of the Queen Creek
General Plan.
R1-8
Type A
8,000
Square Feet
Per Dwelling
Unit
Pursuant to Ordinance 127-98, this district is not in use after August 1, 1998.
R1-7
Type A
7,000
Square Feet
Per Dwelling
Unit
High density district allowing the full spectrum of residential single family detached
unit types within specified densities where adequate public facilities and services
are available in the Urban Corridor tiers. R1-7 may serve as a transitional district
between single family and multi-family and non-residential districts. This district is
intended to allow a mix of residential unit types and densities to provide a balance
of housing opportunities while maintaining neighborhood compatibility. R1-7
implements the Medium Density Residential future land use classification of the
Queen Creek General Plan. However, it may also be appropriate in lower intensity
areas where it is part of a mixed density development.
R1-6
Type A
6,000
Square Feet
Per Dwelling
Unit
Pursuant to Ordinance 127-98, this district is not in use after August 1, 1998.
R1-5
Type B
Up to Five
(5) Dwelling
Units Per
Acre
To provide a transitional district between lower density and higher density
residential uses or non-residential uses. It may also be used to facilitate “infill”
development for properties that may be difficult to develop due to their size, shape,
or location at the same densities as adjacent residential properties. Lower densities
may be developed in this district and it requires approval of a Planned Area
Development (PAD) overlay as part of the development application process. This
district implements the MHDR-A Future Land Use classification of the Queen Creek
General Plan.
R1-4
Type B
Up to Eight
(8) Dwelling
Units Per
Acre
To provide residential uses in conjunction with Office and Commercial uses as part
of a master planned development. The R1-4 district is intended to allow a broader
mix of residential opportunities by allowing single family housing on smaller lots
and lot clustering. Lower density residential may be developed in this district and
it requires approval of a Planned Area Development (PAD) Overlay as part of the
development application process. This district implements the MHDR-B Future
Land Use classification of the Queen Creek General Plan.
MDR Medium
Density
Residential
Medium density district allowing for single family attached or detached residential
uses within specified densities. MDR may serve as a transitional district between
single family and commercial districts. This district is intended to allow a mix of
residential unit types and densities to provide a balance of housing opportunities
while maintaining neighborhood compatibility. MDR implements the Medium
Density Residential, and Mixed Use future land use classifications of the Queen
Creek General Plan.
HDR High Density
Residential
High density district allowing for multiple family unit types and densities to provide
a balance of housing opportunities. The HDR District implements the High Density
and Mixed Use future land use classifications of the Queen Creek General Plan.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 5
Table 4.3-2 Relationship of Non-Residential Districts to General Plan
Non-Residential Districts
MU Mixed Use To provide a mixture of residential, commercial, office and public uses that serve the
neighborhood and / or community. Residential uses are allowed up to eighteen (18)
units per acre. The MU District promotes integration of Office, Commercial, and
Residential uses to support pedestrian and non-motorized alternatives to driving, and to
promote a broader range of employment and housing options. It allows a range of
development intensities and uses including, but not limited to: personal and professional
services, institutional and civic uses, retail, office, and multi-family dwellings. The Mixed-
Use District implements the Mixed Use and future Land Use classifications of the Queen
Creek Town Center and General Plans, and requires a Planned Area Development (PAD)
Overlay.
DC Downtown
Core
To promote a unique Downtown that reinforces the authentic character and quality of
Queen Creek. The DC district emphasizes compact development, connectivity, and a
pedestrian oriented environment. It allows a range of uses such as specialty retail,
commercial office, open space, residential and event uses designed in an organized and
unique manner. All development is encouraged to follow a set of specific design
guidelines to promote unified development. Shops and stores are encouraged to be front
facing on or near the sidewalks with parking conveniently located on-street and behind
building masses. Drive-thru restaurants, suburban shopping centers and large “big-box”
commercial is prohibited. The DC district promotes the long-term vitality of the Town
Center Area as provided by the Queen Creek General Plan.
NC Neighborhood
Commercial/
Office Mixed
Use
To provide small areas for office and professional services combined with limited retail
uses, designed in scale with surrounding residential uses. This district provides a balance
of residential and non-residential land use opportunities reflecting the economic needs
of residents and business owners as promoted by the Queen Creek General Plan. NC
implements Commercial Goal 6, Policies 6.c and 6.f (page 27) of the Queen Creek
General Plan.
AT Agritainment
District
To provide for land uses that support and enhance agriculture use in the Town. Such
uses shall be compatible with agriculture, and may include uses that support open space,
natural resource management, outdoor recreation, enjoyment of scenic beauty,
commercial and residential uses. The Agri-tainment District requires a Planned Area
Development (PAD) Overlay.
PCD Planned
Community
District
To provide an alternative to standard zoning for planned developments. The purpose of
the PCD is to encourage creative approaches in land development which conform and
elevate the policies and goals of the General Plan. The district shall provide a wide mix
of uses, densities, and intensities and shall be implemented through a Development
Agreement. The PCD should strive to utilize the existing topography, surrounding uses,
and open space opportunities through flexible design solutions.
Commercial Districts
C-1 Light
Commercial
Indoor retail, service, and office use requiring arterial street access and business
and commercial development along urban arterials. The purpose of the C-1 district
is to accommodate well-designed development sites that provide excellent
transportation access, make the most efficient use of existing infrastructure, and
provide orderly transitions and buffers between uses. C-1 implements Commercial
Goal 6, of the Queen Creek General Plan.
C-2 General
Commercial
General commercial activities designed to serve the community such as repair shops,
wholesale businesses, warehousing, and limited retail sales, with some outdoor display
of goods, but limited outdoor operations. This district promotes a broad range of
commercial operations and services necessary for large regions of the Town and
County, providing community balance as described in the Queen Creek General Plan.
The C-2 implements the Commercial Goal 6, of the General Plan.
C-3 Regional
Commercial
Center
To provide for a mixture of shopping, housing, recreation and employment
opportunities to serve a regional market greater than the Town. Retail malls and power
centers, auto dealers, major office centers, hospitals, apartments and condominiums
and other similar larger scale and higher intensity uses are anticipated. Residential
uses may also be developed. These projects must be developed as part of a masterplanned
development requiring approval of a Planned Area Development (PAD)
Overlay. This district implements the Regional Commercial Center Future Land Use
classification of the Queen Creek General Plan.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 6
Table 4.3-2 Relationship of Non-Residential Districts to General Plan (Continued)
4.4 Zoning Map
A. The boundaries of zoning districts
established by this Ordinance shall be
designated on a map or maps entitled
Official Zoning Map(s) of the Town of
Queen Creek, which Official Zoning Map is
hereby incorporated by reference.
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be located in
the Office of the Planning Administrator
and a copy of the Official Zoning Map shall
be kept on file with the Town Clerk. Any
changes thereto shall be identified as an
amendment to the Official Zoning Map and
shall be filed in accordance with this
subsection. The Official Zoning Map may,
from time to time, be republished to
delineate any rezoning approved pursuant
to Section 3.4 of this Ordinance or any
other amendments thereto.
4.5 District Boundaries
A. Unless otherwise provided, zoning district
boundaries shall be located on municipal
corporate lines, section lines, parcel lines,
natural boundary lines or on the center
lines of highways, streets, alleys, railroad
rights-of-way or these lines extended. In
cases where these lines are not used, the
zoning district lines shall be determined by
using the scale of the Official Zoning Map.
If a parcel of land is divided by a zoning
district boundary line at the time of
enactment of this Ordinance or by
subsequent amendments thereto, the
appropriate standards and uses for each
zone shall apply on the portion of the parcel
covered by that zone.
B. Any dispute as to the boundary or location
of property within a zoning district shall be
resolved in accordance with Section 2.2 of
this Ordinance.
4.6 Use Regulations
A. Generally. No use shall be permitted
pursuant to this Ordinance, and no
Development Permit authorizing a use may
be authorized, issued, or approved by any
officer, official, or agency of the Town,
unless said use is listed as a permitted,
accessory or conditional use in this Section
4.6 and all applicable permits and
Employment Districts
EMP-A Office/
Industrial
Park
To provide for a mix of light manufacturing uses, office park, and limited retail
service uses that services the industrial uses, in an attractive business park setting
with proper screening and buffering, all compatible with adjoining uses. This
district implements the Employment A future land use classifications of the Queen
Creek General Plan.
EMP-B General
Industrial
Areas of heavy and concentrated fabrication, manufacturing and industrial uses
which are suitable based upon adjacent land uses, access to transportation, and
the availability of public services and facilities. EMP-B must be located in areas
where conflicts with other uses can be minimized to promote orderly transitions
and buffers between uses. This district implements the Employment B future land
use classification of the Queen Creek General Plan.
Others
PRC Recreation
and
Conservation
Zone
The principle purpose of the Recreation and Conservation Zoning District is to
conserve and protect open space, washes, natural desert lands, wildlife habitats,
and lands agreed to be left undeveloped through the plan approval process. The
primary purpose of designating these areas is to raise the degree of assurance that
such areas will remain open.
P/QP Public/Quasi
Public
District
The purpose of this zoning district is to accommodate large-scale governmental,
public utility, recreational and educational facilities. It is the intent of this district
to recognize, by classification, those uses, which are provided by public usage or
convenience, and to insure compatibility with surrounding uses.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 7
approvals have been issued by the Town.
Those uses permitted as permitted uses,
conditional uses and accessory uses within
each zoning district shall be those uses
listed in Table 4.6-1 to this Ordinance.
B. Uses Not Mentioned. No building permit
shall be issued for a use not specifically
mentioned or described by category in
Table 4.6-1 of this Section. Evaluation of
these uses shall be as follows:
1. Interpretation. The Planning
Administrator shall make a determinat ion
if a use not mentioned can reasonably be
interpreted to fit into a use category
where similar uses are described.
Interpretations may be ratified by the
Town Council upon recommendation by
the Planning Commission at a regularly
scheduled meeting. It is the intent of this
Ordinance to group similar or compatible
land uses into specific zoning districts,
either as permitted uses or as uses
authorized by a conditional use permit .
Uses not listed as a permitted or
conditional use shall be presumed to be
prohibited from the applicable zoning
district. In the event a particular use is
not listed in this Section and such use is
not listed as a prohibited use and is not
otherwise prohibited by law, the Planning
Administrator shall determine whether a
materially similar use does exist, the
regulations governing that use shall apply
to the particular use not listed and the
Planning Administrator's decision shall be
recorded in writing. Should the Planning
Administrator determine that a materially
similar use does not exist, the matter
may be referred to the Planning
Commission for consideration for
amendment to this Section to establish a
specific listing for the use in question.
The Planning Administrator may
determine that a use is materially similar
if it falls within the same industry (5-
digit) classification of the North Americ an
Industry Classification Manual (Executive
Office of the President, Office of
Management and Budget,
1997)(“NAICS”), and if the proposed use
does not generate trips exceeding more
than ten percent (10%), as determined
by the Transportation Research Board,
Highway Capacity Manual (Washington,
D.C.: National Research Council, 3d ed.
1998); which documents are hereby
incorporated by this reference.
2. Non-Interpretation. Where the Planning
Administrator determines that a use not
mentioned is of a type, scope, or impact
that does not fit any existing use
category, the Planning Administrator may
initiate a text amendment procedure for
reviewing the specific use applied for and
its location. An approval does not create
a right for similar use within the same
zone category.
C. Permitted Uses.
1. Generally. No use shall be permitted
pursuant to this Ordinance, and no
Development Permit authorizing a use
may be authorized, issued, or approved
by any officer, official, or agency of the
Town, unless said use is listed as a
permitted, accessory or conditional use in
Table 4.6-1 and all applicable permits and
approvals have been issued by the Town.
Table 4.6-1 lists the principal uses
allowed within Residential Zoning
Districts and Non-Residential Zoning
Districts.
2. Use Categories and Specific Uses. The
use categories listed in the first column of
Table 4.6-1 are defined in this Ordinance.
If there is a conflict between the
abbreviated definition herein and a
definition contained in Section 1.14, the
provisions of Section 1.14 shall control.
Specific Use Types are listed in the
Second column of the table. If a Specific
Use Type is listed in the table, that use
type is allowed only within the districts
indicated, not within every district that
allows the broader Use Category.
[P] Permitted Uses. A “P” indic ates that the
listed use is permitted by-right within the
respective zoning district. Permitted uses
are subject to all other applicable
standards of this Ordinance.
Performance standards may be
applicable.
[C] Conditional Uses. A “C” indic ates that the
listed use is permitted within the
respective zoning district only after
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 8
review and approval of a Conditional Use
Permit, in accordance with the review
procedures of Section 3.5 of this
Ordinance. Conditional Uses are subject
to all other applicable standards of this
Ordinance and those requirements that
may reasonably be imposed by the Town
Council consistent with the criteria set
forth in Section 3.5 of this Ordinance and
any Supplementary Use Regulations,
which apply to said use.
[--]Prohibited Uses. A dash (“- -“) indic ates
that the listed use type is not allowed
within the respective zoning district,
unless it is otherwise expressly allowed
by other regulations of this Ordinance.
[*] Supplemental Use Regulations. An
asterisk (*) indicates that the listed use
type may be permitted, but is subject to
performance standards listed in Article 6,
however, that such designation is
provided merely for the convenience of
the reader, and that the absence of an
asterisk next to the use type shall not
excuse an applicant from complianc e
from any applicable standards or
requirements of Article 6.
[A] Accessory Uses. An “A” indic ates that the
use is permitted only as an accessory use
to a primary use on the same lot or
parcel; such uses cannot be established
unless the primary use has been
established on the lot or parcel.
[T] Temporary Uses. A “T” indic ates that the
use is permitted for a short-term period
of time with the intent to discontinue
such use upon the expiration of such time
and shall comply with the applicable
standards and requirements of Section
3.6.
[W]Permitted with Conditions. A “W”
indicates that the listed use type is
permitted and subject to additional
conditions listed within Section 4.6.D
provided. Performance standards may
be applicable in Section 4.9.
D. Permitted With Conditions Uses.
1. Bed and Breakfast Inns.
a. No receptions, private parties, and
meals serviced to the general public, or
similar activities shall be permitted
unless expressly approved as part of a
Conditional Use Permit or Site Plan
application.
b. No cooking facilities shall be permitted
in the guest rooms.
c. Parking requirements shall adhere to
the standards set in Table 5.6-3 of this
Ordinance and screening will be
provided for the site for more than four
(4) parking spaces.
d. Signage will adhere to the standards
set in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
2. Campgrounds.
a. Sites will provide a minimum of onethousand
two-hundred fifty (1,250)
square feet with at least one-hundred
(100) square feet dedicated to a
recreational area per campground
space.
b. Parking requirements shall adhere to
the standards set in Table 5.6-3 and
provide payment or treatment to
reduce dust.
c. Signage will adhere to the standards
set in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
3. Farming-Related Businesses.
a. Not more than five (5) persons, other
than the owners, partners, or residents
of the farm related businesses business
shall be employed in the farm related
business.
b. Any outdoor storage area shall be
subject to a conditional use and not
loc ated c loser than six feet (6’) to the
rear property line or closer than twenty
feet (20’) to the side property line and
be screened from adjoining roads and
existing residences except for dwellings
located on the same parcel as the farmrelated
business.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 9
4. General Office, Medical Office/Clinic.
a. The business shall not be open to
customers between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
b. The floor area devoted to each
business shall not exceed three
thousand (3,000) square feet.
c. The business shall not receive more
than three (3) commercial deliveries
in a twenty four (24) hour period.
d. Outdoor storage or display shall be
prohibited.
e. Parking requirements shall adhere to
the standards set forth in Table 5.6-3
and provide pavement or treatment to
reduce dust.
f. Signage shall adhere to the standards
set forth in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
5. Industrial and Heavy Equipment Storage.
a. Storage areas shall be screened from all
surrounding land uses and roadways by
a wall or fence not less than eight feet
(8') in height of solid, one-hundred
percent (100%) opaque construction of
wood, masonry or other similar
material.
b. Stored items shall not project above the
screening, and tires, if stacked, shall
not exceed six feet (6’) in height.
Gasoline, oil, or other hazardous
materials, which are removed from
scrapped vehicles or parts of vehicles
kept on the premises shall be disposed
of in accordance with applicable federal,
state, and local regulations.
6. Institutional and Civic Uses. Museums,
art galleries, opera houses, libraries,
community buildings, all other
community services, parks and open
space, educational facilities.
a. Walls which face a public street shall be
stuccoed, have mortar wash finish or
otherwise be designed to match the
primary building on the site. Such walls
shall be a minimum of three feet (3’) in
height.
b. When located within shopping centers
or large commercial projects which are
adjacent to residential uses, a buffer
setback shall be used.
c. Mechanical equipment, whether ground
level or roof-mounted, shall be
screened from public view and designed
to appear as an integral part of the
building. Electrical meter and service
components shall be screened from
public view and painted to match the
exterior color of the building.
d. Noise from loudspeakers or paging
systems shall not be audible from
adjacent properties. Where abutting a
residential district, sirens on vehicles
shall not be activated until emergenc y
vehicles reach the nearest arterial
street.
e. All access shall be taken from a
collector roadway or higher street
classification. Access may be proposed
on a lower street classification through
the conditional use permit process.
7. Limited Day Care. These conditions shall
apply to ‘C’ and ‘W’ Limited Day Care
uses.
a. On-street parking shall be prohibited.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 10
b. Commercial deliveries shall be limited
to not more than three (3) per day.
c. Home based day cares shall operate
only between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
and only on weekdays.
d. Outdoor play area should be provided
in the rear yard, except within the
required front yard fencing
requirements shall comply with the
requirements of Section 5.2 of this
Ordinance.
e. Commercial trash pickup shall be
prohibited on residential zoned
property.
8. Multi-Family Residential/ Multiple
Dwelling.
a. Site shall provide shared access and
connectivity to adjacent residential and
non-residential properties.
b. Site shall provide screening and buffer
setbacks (see Section 5.3) when
adjacent to loading docks when located
within shopping centers or large
commercial projects.
9. Schools.
a. Schools may be located in a residential
zoning district provided that it is
located on an arterial street or at the
intersection of two (2) collector
streets.
b. Schools adhere to the signage
requirements of the C-2 District when
located in Single-Family Residential
Districts
10. Outdoor Sales.
a. Flea markets shall not derive access
from a collector or local street which
serves a residential district located
within twelve-hundred feet (1,200’) of
the site.
b. Sanitary facilities shall be provided on
site. No storage of items, other than
those available for retail sale, may be
stored on the premises unless for
vehicle sales display, indoors, or
confined within an approved screened
storage area.
11. Restaurants.
a. The outdoor dining area shall only be
allowed if located on the same property
as the restaurant; or if located adjacent
to and connected to the same property
as a restaurant within public right-ofway
as an encroachment.
b. The outdoor dining area shall not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of
the restaurant gross floor area.
c. Music or entertainment is limited to
recorded music or one (1) entertainer.
Other live entertainment shall be
permitted only upon securing a use
permit and site plan approval in
accordance with Article 3 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
d. Patron dancing shall be prohibited.
e. Outdoor dining areas should be placed
away from off-site uses that are
sensitive to noise and night-time
activity. Restaurant seating in the
pedestrian portion of the public right-of
way is encouraged and may be
conditionally permitted when not
obstructing pedestrian traffic. Where
space allows, outdoor dining areas
should be used to help synergize
plazas, courtyards, and street
frontages.
f. Consumption of only beer and wine in
restaurants in Agritainment districts is
permitted.
g. Restaurants with full services should
have alcohol sales less than fifty
percent (50%) of gross sales revenue.
12. Self-Storage Mini-Warehouse.
a. The facility shall provide an on-site
manager to maintain the
establishment.
b. The repair, construction, or
reconstruction of any boat, engine,
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 11
motor vehicle, furniture, and the
storage of any propane, gasoline
engine, or storage tank is prohibited.
No business activity other than rental of
storage units shall be conducted on the
premises.
c. Driving lanes shall be at least twentysix
feet (26') wide when cubicles open
onto one (1) side of the lane only and
at least thirty feet (30') wide when
cubicles open onto both sides of the
lane.
d. Parking requirements shall adhere to
the standards set in Table 5.6-3 of this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 12
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses
Use
Category
Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18 R1-
15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PR
C
PQP
Dwelling Units
*Accessory Uses A A -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Live / Work -- -- -- -- -- P P P P C C C C -- -- --
*Accessory Dwelling Unit A A A A -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Single-Family, Detached P P P P P P C -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Single-Family, Attached -- -- -- -- P P C -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Modular Home P P P P P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Manufactured Housing
(Permitted in MHR Overlay
only)
P P P P P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Mobile Home -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Duplex / Triplex / Townhouse -- -- -- -- P -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Multiple Dwelling (See Section
4.6.D.8)
-- -- -- -- P P P P P -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Boarding House or Rooming
House
-- -- -- -- C -- P -- C C -- -- -- -- -- --
All Other Household Living -- -- -- -- C -- C -- C C C C C -- -- --
Group Living
Assisted Living Facility C C -- -- P -- P -- C C P P -- -- -- --
*Group Residential Facility
(Group Home)
P P P P P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Treatment Facility -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C C C C -- -- -- --
Lodging
Hotels, Motels, -- -- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P -- -- -- --
Bed & Breakfast Inns (See
4.6.D.1 )
-- -- -- -- -- W -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Institutional & Civic
Community
Service
Museums, Art Galleries, Opera
Houses, and Libraries (See
Section 4.6.D.6)
W W W W W W W P W W W W -- -- W W
Community Building (See
Section 4.6.D.6)
W W W W W W W P W W W W -- -- W W
All Other Community Service
(See Section 4.6.D.6)
W W W W W W W P W W W W -- -- W W
Day Care
Home-Based Day Care (1-6
children plus 2 children after
school) (See Section 4.6.D. 7)
W W W W W -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Limited Day Care (6-12
children) (See Section
4.6.D.7)
C C C C C W -- W W W W -- -- -- --
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 13
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
Use Category Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Institutional & Civic (Continued)
Day Care
(Continued)
General Day Care (13 or more
children) and Nursery School/
Pre-School (See Section
4.6.D.7)
-- -- -- -- -- -- W -- P W P P -- -- -- --
All other -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C C C C -- -- -- --
Parks & Open
Space
Neighborhood Park (See
Section 4.6.D.6)
W W W W W P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P --
Cemetery (See Section
4.6.D.6)
W W W W W -- -- -- -- C C -- C C W --
Golf Course (See Section
4.6.D.6)
W W W W W -- -- -- C W W C C C W --
Golf Driving Range -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C C C C C C --
Parks/lakes/reservoirs -- -- -- -- -- -- C C C C C C C C C --
All Other Parks/Open Space
(See Section 4.6.D.6)
W W W W W W C C C C C C C C P --
Religious
Institutions
Institution (seating capacity up
to 1,500 persons)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P -- --
Large Institution (seating
capacity greater than 1,500
persons)
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C -- --
All other religious uses -- -- -- -- -- -- C C C C C C -- -- -- --
Safety Services
(See Section
4.6.D.6)
All C C C C C C C C C W W C C C C W
Educational
Facilities
(See Section
4.6.D.6)
Boarding School C C C C C -- C -- C C C C -- -- -- W
Charter, Private and Parochial
School
W W W W W -- W -- W W W W -- -- -- W
Dance/Art/Music Schools -- -- -- -- -- -- W W W W W C -- -- -- W
Elementary Schools W W W W W W W W W W W W -- -- -- W
Riding Academies -- -- -- -- -- P C W C C W C C C -- W
Secondary Schools W W W W W W C W W C W W -- -- -- W
College or University C C -- -- -- -- W W W W W -- -- -- W
Vocational/Tech School -- -- -- -- -- P -- W W W W W W W -- W
All other Schools W W W W W W C C C C C C -- -- -- W
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 14
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
Use Category Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Institutional & Civic (Continued)
Utility, Basic
Utility Facilities and Utility
Service Yards
P P P P P P P -- P P P P P P P P
All other Utility, Basic C C C C C C C -- C C C C P P C P
Utility Corridors
Utility Treatment, Production or
Service Facilities
-- -- -- -- -- C -- -- C C C C C C C P
Detention
Facilities
Jails, Reformatories -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P
Honor Camps -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- P P -- P
Hospital/ Clinic
Clinics/Medical/Dental Offices
(see section 4.6.D.4 )
-- -- -- -- -- W W W W P P P C -- -- --
Adult Day Care -- -- -- -- -- -- P -- P P P P C -- -- --
Blood Bank or Plasma Center -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C C -- -- --
Counseling Centers (nonresident)
-- -- -- -- -- -- C -- P C P P C C -- --
Counseling Centers (nonresident)
for the treatment of
drug abuse and / or alcohol
-- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C C C P C C -- --
Hospital/Mental Hospital -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C C C C -- -- --
Physical and Mental
Rehabilitation (resident)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C C C C -- --
All other medical facilities -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C C C C -- --
Commercial
Eating and
Drinking
Establishments
Bars & Nightclubs (with or
without live music and dancing)
and Alcohol Sales, by the drink
(primary use) (see section
4.6.D.11)
-- -- -- -- -- W P W C C P C -- -- --
Restaurant, limited service (see
section 4.6.D.11)
-- -- -- -- -- P C P P P P P P P -- --
Breweries -- -- -- -- -- P P P P C P P P P -- --
Restaurant, full service (see
section 4.6.D.11)
-- -- -- -- -- W W P P P P P P P -- --
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 15
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
Use Category Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Commercial (Continued)
Eating and
Drinking
Establishments
(Continued)
* Restaurant, with In-Vehicle
Service
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C P P P -- -- -- --
Coffee Houses (see Section
4.6.D.11)
-- -- -- -- -- P C P P P P P -- -- -- --
* Home-based
occupations
All (when AT, DC, MU is
residential use)
P P P P P P -- P P -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Office
General Offices (see section
4.6.D.4)
-- -- -- -- -- W P P P P P P P -- -- --
Coworking space (Business
Incubator)
-- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P P P P -- --
All other offices -- -- -- -- -- C C C C C C P -- -- -- --
Parking,
Commercial
Commercial Parking Lot or
Parking Structure
-- -- -- -- -- C C C C C C C C -- --
Entertainment
Event Major
Indoor Facilities -- -- -- -- -- P C P P C C P P P C --
Outdoor Facilities -- -- -- -- -- P C C C C C C P P C --
Recreation and
Entertainment
Outdoor
Campgrounds and Camps (see
Section 4.6.D.2)
W W -- -- -- W -- -- -- -- -- -- W W W --
Commercial Ranch, Commercial
Stable, Outdoor Guest Ranch
C C -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Equestrian boarding and riding
arenas, (setback 500 feet from
all property lines)
-- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
Equestrian facilities in
conjunction with an approved
single family residential
development
-- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C --
Hunting, fishing, game
preserves and recreational
clubs or camps - not including
recreational vehicle
campgrounds.
-- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P --
Resort, Cabins and Lodges C C -- -- -- P -- -- C -- P C C C C --
Swimming Pools A A A A A -- C -- C C P C -- -- P --
Shooting Ranges C --- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C C --
Commercial Amusement,
Outdoor
C C -- -- -- P -- -- C C C C C C -- --
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 16
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
Use Category Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Commercial (Continued)
Recreation and
Entertainment
Outdoor
(Continued)
Miniature Golf C C -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Zoo C C -- -- -- P -- -- C C C C C C C --
Carnivals, Dances, Circuses -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- -- C -- -- -- --
All Other Outdoor Recreation C C -- -- -- C C -- C C C C C C C --
Recreation and
Entertainment
Indoor
Assembly/Auditorium C C -- -- -- -- P P C C C -- -- -- --
Amusement Center C C -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Bowling Alley -- -- -- -- -- C -- -- -- -- P P -- -- -- --
Commercial Amusement,
Indoor
-- -- -- -- -- P -- P P C P P P P -- --
Clubs, Lodges, Health Club, or
Fitness Center
-- -- -- -- -- C -- P P P P P P -- -- --
Retail Sales and
Service
Alcohol sales, retail -- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P P C -- -- --
Alcohol sales, in restaurant -- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P P C C -- --
Veterinary Hospitals, Kennels -- -- -- -- -- P -- C P -- C P C C -- --
Animal Sales and Care -- -- -- -- -- P P C P P P P P -- -- --
Indoor, small animals -- -- -- -- -- P P C P P P P C -- -- --
Indoor, large animals -- -- -- -- -- P C C C C P C C C -- --
Bed & Breakfast C C -- -- -- P -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Outdoor Sales Operations (see
Section 4.6.D.10)
-- -- -- -- -- P W -- W W W W W W -- --
Arts, crafts and boutiques -- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P P -- -- -- --
Bakeries (small scale not
factory or distribution
warehousing)
-- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P P P -- -- --
Bakeries (large scale, including
distributors or warehousing)
-- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- P P -- --
Banks (excluding drive-thru
facilities)
-- -- -- -- -- C P P P P P P P -- -- --
Bars & Nightclubs (with or
without live music and dancing)
-- -- -- -- -- P -- P P C C P -- -- -- --
* Sexually Oriented Business -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P -- --
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 17
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
Use Category Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Commercial (Continued)
Retail Sales and
Service
(Continued)
* Large Format Retail -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P -- P P -- -- -- --
Book Stores -- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P P -- -- -- --
Cemeteries, Mausoleums -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
Contractor and Trade Shops,
Indoor operations and storage
-- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- C C P P -- --
Supermarkets or Convenience
Stores
-- -- -- -- -- P -- C P P P P -- -- -- --
Delivery and Dispatch Services
(vehicles on-site)
-- -- -- -- -- P -- -- C P P P P P -- --
Department Stores -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P -- P P -- -- -- --
* In-vehicle (“drive-thru”)
service facilities uses, including
automated tellers, cleaners,
liquor and fuel.
-- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C C C P -- -- -- --
Farm-Related Business, such
as: feed stores, fruit, and
vegetable stands. (see Section
4.6.D.3)
-- -- -- -- -- P W -- W W W W -- -- -- --
Fertilizer and Seed Sales -- -- -- -- -- P C -- -- C C C P P -- --
Food Service -- -- -- -- -- P P
Catering -- -- -- -- -- P C P P C P P C C -- --
Funeral Home/Mortuary
Crematorium
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C C P P P -- --
Hardware Stores -- -- -- -- -- P C -- P C P P -- -- -- --
Landscaping Materials -- -- -- -- -- P C -- -- P P C P P -- --
Manufactured Building Sales
and Service
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C P -- --
* Massage Establishments -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C P P -- -- -- --
Motor Vehicle Dealer -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- P P -- -- -- --
*Non-chartered Financial
Institutions
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C -- -- --
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 18
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
Use Category Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Commercial (Continued)
Retail Sales and
Service
(Continued)
Nurseries and Green Houses
where retail sales and services
will be conducted on the
premises
-- -- -- -- -- P P -- C P P P -- -- -- --
* Pawn Shops and Precious
Metals Dealers (We Buy Gold)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C -- -- --
Rental Services (see 4.6.D.5)
where heavy equipment is
involved)
-- -- -- -- -- -- W -- W W W W W W -- --
Repair Services (appliances) -- -- -- -- -- -- P -- P P P P P P -- --
Personal or General Services -- -- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P C C -- --
* Medical Marijuana
Dispensary, Operation or
Cultivation
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C C
Swap Meets and Farmer's
Markets
-- -- -- -- -- P -- P P -- C P C C -- --
Theaters -- -- -- -- -- P -- P P -- -- P -- -- -- --
All Other Retail Sales and
Service
C C -- -- -- C C C C C C C C -- --
Agriculture
General agriculture uses,
agribusiness, entertainment
farming
P P -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Concentrated animal feeding
operation
-- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
Dairy -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
Feed Lot -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
Greenhouses, Plant/Tree
Nurseries
P P -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- P P -- --
Agribusiness P P -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Christmas Tree Sales -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- P P P P --
Feed Lot -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
Greenhouses, Plant/Tree
Nurseries
P P -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- P P -- --
Agribusiness P P -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Christmas Tree Sales -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- P P P P --
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 19
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
Use Category Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Commercial (Continued)
Agriculture
(Continued)
Grain Storage, when not used
in connection or accessory to
use of the property for
agriculture cultivation
P P -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Winery -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
All other agriculture, including
mini-farms, and community
gardens
P P C C C C -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
Self-Service
Storage
Self-Storage (see Section
4.6.D.12)
-- -- -- -- -- -- W -- W W W W W W -- --
Vehicle Service
Automotive Repair -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- P P P P -- --
Body Shop -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C P P -- --
* Car Wash -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- P P -- -- -- --
* Gasoline Service Station -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- P C P P -- -- -- --
* Quick Lubrication -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- C C P P P P -- --
Semi-Truck Repair -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C P -- --
Semi-Truck Stop/Travel Plaza -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P -- --
Tire Recapping and Storage
(not junkyards)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
All other Vehicle Service -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C C -- --
Other
Aviation or
Surface
Passenger
Terminal
Airport/Heliports -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Bus/Commuter Stops -- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P P P P P --
Bus/Railroad Depot -- -- -- -- -- P -- P P C P P P P -- --
Helipads -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P C C P C C -- --
All other Aviation or Surface
Passenger Terminal
-- -- -- -- -- -- C C P C C P C C -- --
Mining
Extractive Use -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Oil or Gas Drilling -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Quarry -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 20
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
Use Category Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Other (Continued)
Mining
(Continued)
Processing -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Sand or Gravel Extraction or
Processing
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
* Telecommunication
Facilities
* Antennas or towers, other C C C C C C C -- P C C P C C C C
*Antennas or towers on
property owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the
Town of Queen Creek
-- -- -- -- -- P P P P P P P P P P P
Satellite Dish Antennas for
private residential use
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P --
Temporary
Uses (see
Section 3.6)
Enterprise Sales T T - - T T T T T T T T T -- --
Temporary Events T T - - - T T T T T T T T T T --
Temporary Retail Sales T T - - - T T T T T T T T T -- --
Temporary real estate and
construction-related uses
T T T T T T T T T T T T T T -- T
Amusement enterprises T T T T T T T T T T T T T T -- --
Promotional activities involving
the display of goods and
merchandise
T T - - - T T T T T T T T T -- --
Special events and activities on
public property
T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T
Display and Sale of Consumer
Fireworks
-- -- -- -- -- T -- -- T T T T T T -- --
Temporary uses not specified T T - - - T T T T T T T T T T T
Industrial
Service,
Manufacturing
and Production
Animal Food Manufacturer -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Cleaning or Processing
Establishment
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P P -- --
Indoor Operations and Storage
such as Assembly, Food
Products, and Manufacturing/
Processing
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P P -- --
ARTICLE 4 – PERMITTED USE TABLE
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 21
Table 4.6-1 Permitted Uses (Continued)
(1) Designation of R1-8 and R1-6 districts is prohibited after August 1, 1998 (pursuant to this Ordinance, and Ordinances 127-98 and 128-98).
Use
Category
Specific Use Type
Residential Zoning Districts Non-Residential Zoning Districts
A1
R1-190
R1-145
R1-108
R1-54
R1-43
R1-35
R1-18
R1-15
R1-12
R1-9
R1-81
R1-7
R1-61
R1-5
R1-4
HDR/
MDR
AT NC DC MU C-1 C-2 C-3
EMP
A
EMP
B
PRC PQP
Industrial
Service,
Manufacturing
and
Production
(Continued)
Indoor Operations with
Outdoor Storage such as
Assembly, Food Products, and
Manufacturing/Processing,
Contractor and Trade Shop
(see Section 4.6.D.11)
-- -- -- -- -- W -- -- -- -- -- -- C W -- --
Outdoor Operations and
Storage such as Assembly,
Food Products, and
Manufacturing/Processing,
Contractor and Trade Shops
(see Section 4.6.D.11)
-- -- -- -- -- W -- -- -- -- -- -- W W -- --
All other Industrial Service -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Warehouse
and Freight
Storage
Indoor Operations, Storage
and Loading
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P P -- --
Indoor Storage with Outdoor
Loading Docks (see Section
4.6.D.11)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- W W -- --
Outdoor Storage or Loading
(see Section 4.6.D.5)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
Waste-
Related Use
Transfer Station:
(Non)Hazardous Waste
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Solid Waste Disposal Sites -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Junkyards/Automotive
Recycler
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
All other waste-related -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
Wholesale
Sales
Wholesale business without
highly flammable material or
liquids
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C -- --
All other wholesale uses -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- C C -- --
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 22
4.7 Dimensional and Density Regulations
A. Purpose. This section establishes minimum
and maximum standards for the location,
height, bulk, number of stories and size of
buildings and structures, the size of lots,
yards, courts and other open spaces, the
percentage of a lot which may be occupied
by a building or structure, access to
incidental solar energy and the intensity of
land use within each zoning district
pursuant to, A.R.S. §9-462.02.A.3.
B. Intensity of Land Use Standards.
1. Computation of Permitted Dwelling Units.
Total permitted dwellings units shall be
computed by multiplying the maximum
net density (Table 4.7-1, Column (B)) by
the net area of the site, as set forth in the
equation below. The maximum net
density (Table 4.7-1, Column (B)) shall
not be construed to guarantee the
establishment of a given number of
dwelling units on any parcel, but is used
exclusively for the calculation of the total
number of dwelling units that may be
established on a given parcel. This
section shall not apply to the computation
of permitted dwelling units for a PCD
district, as set forth in Section 4.10 of this
Ordinance. The following formula shall
be used to compute the total number of
dwelling units on any parcel, which
formula is deemed to be consistent with
the “Residential Net Density” formula as
set forth in part D.2 of the Queen Creek
General Plan:
Standard Residential Density Calculation:
D = DU
A – (C + I + S + a + OS)
DU: Total No of Dwelling Units Permitted
D: Maximum Net Density (Table 4.7-1, Column (B))
A: Total Site Area (Acres)
C: Total Commercial Land Area (acres)
I: Total Industrial Land Area (acres)
S: School Sites Reserved for Purchase by the
School District (acres)*
a: Arterial and Collector Rights-of-Way (acres)
OS: Open Space
* Does not include sites dedicated to the School District.
2. Measurement of Floor Area Ratio. Unless
otherwise stated, all references to nonresidential
intensity refer to the ratio of
enclosed floor area to the gross area of
the lot.
3. Residential and Non-Residential Density
and Intensity. No Application for
Development Approval shall be approved
unless the density, intensity, floor area
ratio, and impervious surface ratio
conform to the requirements as set forth
in Table 4.7-1 and Table 4.7-2 below. In
Table 4.7-1, density (column (B)) is
expressed in dwelling units per acre. In
Table 4.7-2, Floor area ratio and
impervious surface ratio (B) and (C) is a
maximum and is expressed as a ratio.
4. Floor Area Ratio. Applicable to all zones,
except single family residential zones
refer to Table 4.7-2.
5. Impervious Surface Ratio. Not applicable
to single family residential.
Table 4.7-1 Density and Intensity Regulations
(A)
Zoning
District
(B)
Maximum
Net
Density
(A)
Zoning
District
(B)
Maximum
Net Density
A-1 0.1 R1-9 4.0
R1-190 0.2 R1-8* 4.0
R1-145 0.3 R1-7 4.0
R1-108 0.4 R1-6* 4.0
R1-54 0.8 R1-5 5.0
R1-43 1.0 R1-4 8.0
R1-35 1.2 MDR 14.0
R1-15 3.0 HDR 25.0
R1-12 3.0
* Designation of R1-8 and R1-6 districts is
prohibited after August 1, 1998
(pursuant to this Ordinance, and
Ordinances 127-98 and 128-98).
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 23
Table 4.7-2 Intensity Regulations
(A)
Zoning
Districts
(B)
Floor
Area
Ratio
(C)
Impervious
Surface
Ratio
GMU 1.0 0.9
DC 1.0 .9
NC 0.5 0.52
AT
C-1 0.3 0.7
C-2 0.6 0.7
C-3 1.0 0.9
EMP-A 1.0 0.8
EMP-B 1.0 0.9
RC - 0.10
C. Dimensional Standards. Table 4.7-1, Table
4.7-2 and Table 4.7-3 lists the dimensional
standards that apply within zoning
districts. These are required standards,
not guarantees that stated minimums or
maximums can be achieved on every site.
Other regulations of this Ordinance or sitespecific
conditions may further limit
development on a site. The standards
apply to all uses unless otherwise expressly
provided in this Ordinance. The Alternative
Development Standards of this Section
provide additional or supplemental
standards for Flag Lots, Attached Housing,
and Zero Lot Line.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 24
Table 4.7-3: Dimensional Standards
Zoning District
Minimum Area
Minimum Width
Minimum Depth
Maximum Lot Coverage
Maximum Height
Minimum Front Yard Setback
Minimum Side Setback
Minimum Rear Setback
A-1 10 acres 300 - 10 30 60 30 60
R1-190 190,000 sf 300 - 10 30 60 30 60
R1-145 145,054 sf 200 - 10 30 50 30 50
R1-108 108,900 sf 200 - 20 30 40 30 40
R1-54 54,450 sf 100 - 20 30 40 20 40
R1-43 43,560 sf 145 - 25 30 40 20 40
R1-35 35,000 sf 145 - 25 30 40 20 40
R1-18 18,000 sf 120 150 35 30 20(9) 10 30
R1-15 15,000 sf 115 130 35 30 20(9) 10 25
R1-12 12,000 sf 100 120 35(4) 30 20(9) 10 25
R1-9 9,000 sf 90 100 40(4) 30 20(9) 5(3) 25
R1-8* 8,000 sf 80 - 40(4) 30 20(9) 7 25
R1-7 7,000 sf 70 100 40(4) 30 20(9) 5(3) 25
R1-6* 6,000 sf 60 - 40(4) 30 20(9) 5 25
R1-5 5,000 sf 50 100 50(7) 30 20(9) 5(6) 20(10)
R1-4 4,000 sf 40 100 50(8) 30 20(9) 5(6) 15(11)
MDR
(up to
14
du/ac)
-- -- -- 60** 36 10 56 10
HDR*
(up to
25
du/ac)
-- -- -- 60** 40 10 56 10
Non-Residential Zoning Districts
NC -- 50 100 75 30 -- 10 5
DC -- -- -- 100 55,30(1) -- 0(2) 0(13)
MU -- -- -- 80 90 (5) (5) (5)
AT -- (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5)
C-1 -- 50 100 60 30 -- 5(2) 0(2)
C-2 -- 50 100 60 48 -- 0(2) 15(2)
C-3 -- -- -- 80 (5) (5) (5) (5)
EMP-A -- 100 150 80 48 -- 0(2) 15
EMP-B -- 100 150 80 48 -- 0(2) 25
PRC -- -- -- -- 48 60 30 60
P/QP -- -- -- 100 30(1) -- 0(2) 15

Notes:
(1) Building height for commercial uses in the
DC district directly abutting residential
zoning districts shall not exceed a height of
30 feet (30’).
(2) Buffer yard standards apply (See Table 5.3-
1).
(3) In the R1-9 and R1-7 districts, adjoining lots
shall have a minimum spacing of fifteen feet
(15’) between buildings. For example, if
one (1) lot has an existing five foot (5') side


ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 25
yard setback, then the adjoining lot shall
have a side yard minimum of a ten foot (10')
setback. Staggered setbacks are
encouraged to create differentiation in
building orientation to the street.
(4) In the R1-6, R1-7, R1-8, R1-9, and R1-12
districts, lot coverage may increase up to
five percent (5%) for houses that provide a
qualifying front porch.
(5) These dimensional standards for the MU, C-
3, and AT Districts will be established as part
of the development approval PAD process.
(6) Side yard setbac ks may be 0’ for attac hed
housing products and other designs such as
but not limited to detached z-lot
configurations with the application of a use
benefit easement.
(7) 55% for single-story homes.
(8) 60% for single-story homes.
(9) 20’ to front of garage (front entry); 10’ to
front of garage (side entry) and living area;
10’ to c overed front porc h.
(10) 20’ for two-story homes; 15’ for single-story
homes and/or covered patios.
(11) 15’ for two-story homes; 10’ for single-story
homes and/or covered patios.
(12) Utilities. Utilities using land or an
unoccupied building covering less than
1,000 square feet of site area are exempt
from minimum lot area standards.
(13) Commercial uses in the DC district abutting
residential zoning districts shall have a rear
yard landscape buffer of 15’, subject to the
approval of the Planning Administrator.
* 15’ minimum separation is required between
all buildings.
**Lot coverage shall be calculated for the
overall development site.
1. In Table 4.7-3, lot area (B) is expressed
in square footage unless otherwise
specified. In Table 4.7-3, the following
figures are expressed in feet: lot width
(C), lot depth (D), height (E), minimum
and maximum street frontage (G)
through (I).
2. Maximum lot area restrictions do not
apply to lots designated for open space or
recreational uses pursuant to Section 5.5
of this Ordinance.
D. Lot Area. No building permit or
development approval shall be issued for a
lot that does not meet the minimum and
maximum lot area requirements of Section
4.7.C of this Ordinance except in the
following instances:
1. Utilities. Utilities using land or an
unoccupied building covering less than
1,000 square feet of site area are exempt
from minimum lot area standards.
E. Setbacks.
1. Measurement. For purposes of this
Sec tion, the “setbac k line” shall be
deemed the future right-of-way line of a
street or the property line. Setbacks are
measured as the unobstructed,
unoccupied open area between the
furthermost projection of a structure
(except as modified by the standards of
subsection E.3, below) and the nearest
setback line of the lot on which the
structure is located. Structures shall
meet the front yard setback from all
abutting streets unless otherwise
provided in this Ordinance. This
measurement does not apply to corner
lots unless the garage is side loaded in
which case this measurement applies to
both street frontages.
2. Obstructions. Setbacks shall be
unobstructed from the ground to the sky
except as specified in this Section.
3. Exceptions and Permitted
Encroachments. The following features
may encroach into required setbacks:
a. Landscaping;
b. Bay windows, not to exceed three feet
(3’);
c. Chimneys, not to exceed two feet (2’);
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 26
d. Clothesline post;
e. Driveways, curbs and sidewalks;
f. Flagpoles;
g. Heating and cooling units, not to
exceed three feet (3’);
h. Mailboxes;
i. Overhanging roofs, eaves, gutters,
cornices, or similar architectural
features and awnings, not to exceed
three feet (3’);
j. Septic systems, wells and underground
utilities;
k. Signs (in accordance with Article 7 of
this Ordinance);
l. Steps, stairs or fire escapes (nonenclosed),
not to exceed six feet (6’);
m. Uncovered, unenclosed terraces or
porches not to exceed six feet (6’), but
in no case closer than three feet (3’) to
any property line;
n. Accessory buildings or uses, within
required side and rear setbacks only or
as otherwise allowed in Article 6 of this
Ordinance;
o. Fences, in accordance with Section 5.2
of this Ordinance;
p. Yard and service lighting fixtures or
poles;
q. Fire escapes not to exceed six feet (6’);
and,
r. In residential districts covered front
porches may be allowed to encroach up
to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
distance of the required front yard
setback. For example, a lot in the R1-
43 district requires a forty (40)-foot
front yard setback, twenty-five percent
(25%) of which is ten feet (10’).
Therefore, the front porch may
encroach up to ten feet (10’) for that
particular lot. Porches built in the R1-
7, R1-9, and R1-12 districts shall meet
a minimum design criteria outlined in
Article 5 to qualify for this exemption.
4. Measurement of Front Yard Setbacks and
Garage Placement. Front facing garages
shall be setback a minimum of five feet
(5’) from the livable or front porch area
of the building. For purposes of this
subsection, the front face plane shall not
be measured from porch or overhang
encroachments. Alternative setbacks
may be proposed with the intent of
reducing garage door dominance through
the Administrative Appeal Process
outlined in Section 2 of this Ordinance.
F. Height.
1. Measurement. Please refer to Section
1.14, for interpretive purposes.
2. Exceptions. Zoning district height limit s
shall not apply to belfries, cupolas,
steeples, spires, domes, monument s,
airway beacons, structures for essential
services, windmills, chimneys, or
chimney flues. Height limits shall not
apply to any bulkhead, elevator, water
tank, or to any similar structure or
necessary mechanical appurtenance
extending above the roof of any building
if such structure does not occupy more
than thirty-three percent (33%) of the
area of the roof.
3. Navigation Hazards. The construction,
maintenance, or establishment of any
building, tree, smokestack, chimney,
flagpole, wire, tower or other structure or
appurtenances thereto, which may
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 27
constitute a hazard or obstruction to safe
air navigation, landing, or take off of
aircraft near an airport, is prohibited.
4. Flagpoles and Flags. The following
regulations shall apply to all non-single
family zoning districts and uses.
a. Location. Flagpoles shall be depicted on
site plans
b. Flagpole Height. Flagpoles shall not
exceed 1.5 times the allowed building
height for the zone in which it is
located, or have a maximum height of
not more than sixty feet (60’).
c. Flagpole Building Permit. A building
permit shall be required for the
structure.
d. Number Limited. Three (3) flagpoles
are allowed on a site.
e. Flag Order. Any flag flown in
conjunction with the United States or
State of Arizona Flag shall be flown
beneath them and shall not exceed
them in size.
f. Flag Illumination. Flags shall be
illuminated if flown at night.
g. Sign Permit. A sign permit is not
required for a flag or insignia of any
nation, state, county, city or other
political unit or corporate flag.
5. Religious Institutions. The building height
shall be consistent with the zoning district
in which the structure is located. The
height of a church steeple is subject to
Section 4.7.F.2, above, of this Ordinance.
For churches and places of worship
located in or adjacent to residential
zoning districts, the following restrictions
apply. For any height above thirty feet
(30’) (c ongregation seating area only),
the minimum setback for the
congregation seating area is determined
by doubling the zoning distric t’s minimu m
setback requirement (the most restrictive
or adjacent zoning district setback
applies) and for each one foot (1’)
increase in building height above thirty
feet (30’), the setbac k is inc reased by an
additional one foot (1’).
4.8 Density Bonus
A. An applicant may be granted a density
bonus as established in Column (C) of
Table 4.8-1 by providing any of the
community benefits listed in Column (A) of
Table 4.8-1 herein, consistent with the
criteria set forth in Column (B) of Table
4.8-1. No density bonus shall be granted
for mere compliance with the minimum
park dedication, open space dedication, or
agricultural preservation requirements of
this Ordinance. The total number of
dwelling units permitted shall be a density
bonus granted pursuant to this section and
shall not exceed the number of total
dwelling units permitted pursuant to
Section 4.7.B.1, multiplied by the factor set
forth in Column (D) of Table 4.8-1 and
provided further that the total dwelling
units permitted shall not exceed the
maximum density within the applicable
land use category of the General Plan.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 28
Table 4.8-1 Density Bonus
4.9 Performance Criteria
A. Specific A-1 and Residential Zoning District
Performance Criteria. Application for
development approval in the A-1 zoning
district or in any residential zoning district
shall be approved unless the proposed
development conforms to the requirement s
of Article 5 of this Ordinance and all
proposed uses conform to the
requirements of Articles 4, 5, and 6 of this
Ordinance.
B. Specific NC District Performance Criteria.
No application for development approval in
the NC zoning district shall be approved
unless the proposed development
conforms to the requirements of the Town
of Queen Creek Design Standards and any
and all proposed uses conform to the
requirements of Articles 4, 5, and 6 of this
Ordinance and the following additional
criteria:
1. NC districts shall be limited to areas
above the frontage of arterial or collector
streets or the intersection of two (2)
principal, minor arterial streets or
combination thereof, except where an
existing center has been established prior
to the adoption of this Ordinance;
2. NC distric ts shall be loc ated at least 4224’
(8/10ths) of a mile from another
Business or Commercial zone district.
The distance shall be measured between
the closest boundaries of the two (2)
(existing and proposed) districts;
3. Design requirements. See the Town of
Queen Creek Design Standards;
4. All uses in this district shall close to
customers and deliveries and extinguish
illuminated signs not later than 11:00
p.m. daily;
5. Service entrances and service yards shall
be located only in the rear or side yard of
the business use. Service yards shall be
screened from adjacent zones or uses by
the installation and maintenance of a
solid decorative wall, fence or vegetation
having a height of not less than four feet
(4’) or more than six feet (6’). If
vegetation is proposed, it shall be
designed so that it provides immediate
(A)
Community
Benefit
(B)
Criteria
(C)
Density Bonus
(D)
Maximum
Density
Factor
Public Park
Land
Dedication
Acreage shall comply
with Section 5.5 of this
Ordinance.
For each acre in excess of the minimum
requirements of Section 5.5 of this Ordinance, a
density bonus equal to the density permitted per
acre in the zoning district (Table 4.7-1, Column
(B)) may be allowed.
1.3
Open Space
Dedication
The area shall exceed
ten (10) contiguous
acres and comply with
Section 5.5 of this
Ordinance.
For each acre in excess of ten (10) acres dedicated
for open space, a density bonus equal to 1 times
the density permitted per acre in the zoning district
(Table 4.7-1, Column (B)) may be allowed.
1.3
Agricultural
Preservation
Agricultural land
development rights
shall be transferred to
the Town Center
Activity Area or the
Urban Corridor,
pursuant to Section
4.15 of this Ordinance.
One unit for each unit of development potential
transferred to any zoning district located within the
Town Center Activity Area or the Urban Corridor
Tiers. Credit is based on allowable density (e.g., if
allowed density on donor site is one (1) unit per
one (1) acre, then one (1) unit may be transferred
for every one (1) acre reserved through a
conservation easement or dedication.)
1.3
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 29
screening similar to walls and fences;
and,
6. When practical and feasible, refuse
enclosures shall be located at the rear of
the site and screened with a decorative
wall and gate.
C. Specific C-1 District Performance Criteria.
No application for development approval in
the C-1 zoning district shall be approved
unless the proposed development
conforms to the requirements of Article 5
and 6 of this Ordinance and the following
criteria listed below.
1. Where feasible, development shall have a
minimum twenty-five foot (25’) wide
landscape strip abutting adjacent to
rights-of-way to present a favorable
image of the community.
2. The following criteria shall be used (in
addition to the general rezoning criteria
established in Section 3.4.E) in
consideration of the placement of this
zone and the type and arrangement of
uses within it:
a. The zone and its uses shall provide for
the orderly development and
concentration of business and
commercial uses;
b. Pedestrian and vehicular conflicts shall
be minimized by providing for adequate
separation and channeling of
pedestrian and vehicular movements;
c. Appropriate space and site design shall
be provided to satisfy the needs of
automobile oriented commerc ial
development while maintaining
pedestrian access from surrounding
development;
d. The authorized uses shall be compatible
with adjacent development by
providing adequate buffers and safe
connections to adjacent
neighborhoods; and,
e. C-1 uses are typically personal services
in nature and not auto-intensive.
Special considerations should be taken
to ensure neighborhood compatibility.
3. All uses authorized in the C-1 District,
including operations and storage of
goods, shall be performed within an
enclosed building. Outdoor display of
merchandise is authorized subject to the
provisions of Section 3.6 of this
Ordinance.
4. The location, size, number, and
alignment of driveways shall be so
arranged as to prevent traffic hazards
and conflicts. The Town Engineer may
require common driveways, acceleration
and deceleration lanes and / or frontage
roads where it is determined, based on
the trip generation and distribution of
traffic calculated in accordance with
Section 5.1, that such items are
necessary to prevent traffic hazards and
conflicts.
5. The portion of the property forming the
sight triangle of an intersection abutting
a major highway corridor and a major
arterial street shall be landscaped with a
variety of plantings to create a gateway
effect.
6. Service entrances shall be located only in
the rear and side yard of the commerc ial
use.
7. Landscaping requirements are set forth in
Section 5.3.
D. Specific C-2 District Performance Criteria.
No application for development approval in
the C-2 zoning district shall be approved
unless the proposed development
conforms to the requirements of Article 5
and 6 of this Ordinance and any and all
proposed uses conform to the following
criteria listed below.
1. Fabrication, assembly, and repair work
shall be limited to areas within enclosed
buildings.
2. All garage doors, storage unit doors, and
loading areas shall be oriented so that the
door does not open towards an abutting
residential district or arterial street.
3. Outdoor storage shall be screened and
located within the side or rear yards.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 30
4. Outdoor display of merchandise shall be
limited to:
a. Goods that are stored indoors each
night;
b. Automobiles, motorcycles, recreational
vehicles and manufactured housing in
areas outside required parking and
landscaping areas; and,
c. Screened displays in the side or rear
yards.
5. No outside display shall be located within
the right-of-way. Outdoor storage of
other goods shall be limited to screened
areas outside the front yard.
6. Landscaping requirements are set forth in
Section 5.3 of this Ordinance.
E. C-3 District Performance Criteria.
Development in the C-3 District shall
conform to the following criteria:
1. All applications for this zoning district
shall be accompanied by site plan and
PAD applications.
2. Outdoor display is limited to automobiles,
motorcycles, recreational vehicles,
trailers and other similar items, including
temporary retail sales as authorized in
Section 3.6 of this Ordinance.
3. All projects in this zoning district shall
comply with the standards in Section
4.6.D of this Ordinance.
F. Mixed Use District Performance Criteria.
Development in the MU zoning district shall
conform to the following criteria:
1. All applications for this zoning district
shall be accompanied by Site Plan and
PAD applications.
2. Developments in this district shall
integrate residential and commercial uses
to support pedestrian circulation and
transit as an alternative to driving and to
provide employment and housing
options.
G. Specific Employment A District
Performance Criteria.
1. No application for development approval
in the Employment A zoning district shall
be approved unless the proposed
development conforms to the
requirements of Article 5 of this
Ordinance and all proposed uses conform
to the requirements of Article 6 of this
Ordinance.
2. Permitted Uses.
a. Any use indicated as a permitted or
conditional use in the Employment A
column of Table 4.6-1 shall be
permitted subject to the additional
criteria set forth herein.
b. Factory Retail - Retail commerc ial
operations, when the product sold at
retail is the product which is
manufactured as the primary use, not
exceeding ten percent (10%) of the
gross floor area. Factory retail
commercial operation is directly related
to the primary industrial use when the
product sold at retail is the product
which is manufactured or stored is the
primary use. Factory retail commerc ial
operations directly related to the
primary industrial use may exceed ten
percent (10%) of the gross floor area
upon securing a Conditional Use Permit ,
pursuant to Section 3.5 of this
Ordinance.
c. Complementary Retail - Retail
commercial uses which are not directly
related to the primary industrial use,
but which are complementary to the
primary use, the other uses in the
industrial park, or the other uses in the
district and not exceeding ten percent
(10%) of the gross floor area of the
principal use. Complementary Retail
Use may be permitted where so
designated in Table 4.6-1 hereto if the
Planning Administrator finds the
following:
1) The market area of the proposed
retail commercial use is principally
directed toward the primary use, the
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 31
other uses in the industrial park or
other uses in the district;
2) The retail commercial use shall close
to customers not later than 8:00
p.m.; and,
3) The retail commercial use meets one
(1) or more of the following
standards:
a) The use provides cultural or
recreational opportunities for
employees;
b) The use provides day care or preschooling
for the children of the
employees;
c) The use is a restaurant; and,
d) The use sells at retail, products or
services used by the primary use,
the other uses in the industrial park
or the other uses used in the
district.
3. Approval Process. Uses in this district
shall be in full conformance with the
standard of this and other applicable
sections of this Ordinance.
4. Performance Standards. Uses in this
district shall be in full conformance with
the standard of this and other applicable
sections of this Ordinance.
a. At least fifty percent (50%) of the gross
floor area shall be devoted to office or
research. Not more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the employees shall
be engaged in manufacturing
processing at any one time.
b. All activity shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building
c. Principal vehicle access to and from the
site shall be via a primary driveway.
d. No application for development
approval shall be approved or issued
unless the proposed use complies with
the performance standards set forth in
the Design Standards document.
e. All loading shall be from the rear side of
the building, but not facing a public
street or residential neighborhood.
f. All exterior building façades must be of
wood, reinforced concrete, or masonry
construction. Corrugated metal
buildings shall not be permitted.
g. All buildings shall incorporate
architectural elements to relieve long
continuous flat appearances such as:
1) Variety of massing and height of
buildings;
2) Primary architectural elements shall
be included on all sides of the
building to create four (4) sided
architecture; and,
3) Provision of courts and plazas.
h. The following site plan elements shall
be promoted to create an office
complex ambiance and appearance to
the industrial development:
1) Loading courts which are not visible
from any public street. Screening of
these areas shall be by the principal
building;
2) Entry courts and pedestrian plazas;
3) Unique landscape features such as
berming, fountains, and sculpture
gardens, particularly adjacent to the
arterial street;
4) Covered or decked parking
structures which appear as an
integrated part of the industrial
building;
5) Major entry features;
6) The majority of the parking
structures shall not be located
adjacent to the arterial street; and,
7) The principal entrance of the primary
building should be oriented to an
arterial street.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 32
i. Permitted uses shall not cause to be
exhausted or emitted into the air
beyond the industrial district wherein
such use is located, smoke, soot, dust,
fumes or other gases, and vibration.
No uses shall endanger surrounding
neighborhoods through the risk of
explosion or radiation.
j. Landscaping requirements are set forth
in Section 5.3.
k. No use shall emit any continuous,
frequent, or repetitive odor or odor
causing substances which is detectable
at or beyond the point of measurement .
An odor which is emitted no more than
fifteen (15) minutes in any one (1) day
nor more than two (2) days out of the
calendar month shall not be deemed to
be continuous, frequent, or repetitive
under this subsection. Substances
which are not listed in that table shall
not be deemed to be odorous unless
analysis by a competent chemist
demonstrates that a discernible odor is
being emitted.
l. No direct or sky reflected glare,
whether from flood lights or from high
temperature processes, such as
combustion or welding, shall cause
illumination in excess of 1/2 footcandles
at the point of measurement .
In all other districts, no operation or
activity shall be conducted so that any
glare, whether direct or reflected, is
visible at the point of measurement.
H. Specific Employment B District
Performance Criteria.
1. No application for development approval
in the Employment B zoning district shall
be approved unless the proposed
development conforms to the
requirements of Article 5 of this
Ordinance and any and all proposed uses
conform to the requirements of Article 6
of this Ordinance.
4.10 Planned Community District
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned
Community District (PCD) is to provide for
the alternative development of land that
creatively meets or enhances the Town of
Queen Creek General Plan and Zoning
Ordinance requirements while promot ing
flexibility in the design, construction and
processing of residential, commercial and /
or industrial developments of a higher
quality for planned developments that
could not be met under conventional
zoning. The PCD shall achieve the
following goals:
1. Promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of the Town;
2. Encourage creative approaches in land
development and combinations of land
uses;
3. Preserve and utilize open space;
4. Promote the Town of Queen Creek in
order to enhanc e the Town’s strong sense
of community;
5. Establish a unique, distinctive character
of the development; and,
6. Assure the PCD is developed alongside a
Development Agreement.
B. Minimum District Size and Applicability.
1. The minimum area requirement for a
Planned Community District is twohundred
(200) acres held under a single
ownership at the time of application
submittal or under multiple ownership
controlled via a single entity such as a
limited liability company, a corporation or
a partnership at the time of application
submittal.
2. The required minimum acreage may be
reduced upon written request by an
applicant to the Development Services
Director.
3. PCD may be established in any one (1) or
combination of General Plan Land Use
designations.
C. Permitted Uses.
1. Any use may be permitted within the PCD
and shall be specifically listed within the
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 33
approved report, entitled “The
Development Plan for ___________”.
D. Conditional Uses.
1. Any use may be established as a
conditional use and permitted within the
PCD. Such use shall be specifically listed,
with required conditions for approval, in
the approved report, entitled “The
Development Plan for ___________”.
Conditional Uses shall follow the
established Conditional Use Permit
approval process and procedures as
established in Section 3.5 of this
Ordinance.
E. “The Development Plan for ___________”.
1. The report shall including the following at
a minimum:
a. Name and address of recorded
landowner, architect/ engineer/
surveyor and contractor;
b. Date, north arrow, and scale;
c. Vicinity map at a scale of not less than
1” = 2,000 ft.;
d. A complete (surveyed) written legal
description of the aggregate property
boundaries and each individual sub land
use parcel or properties under
application for approval;
e. A survey map noting the property
boundaries and legal description,
topography with a maximum contour
interval of two feet (2') where existing
ground is on a slope of less than two
percent (2%), then either one foot (1')
contours or spot elevation shall be
provided where necessary, existing
structures, adjacent streets (location,
name and width) and significant natural
features;
f. Maps indicating the land use parcel
sizes and zoning categories. Said map
shall be accurately measured and
described, indicating acreage of land
uses and zoning districts proposed
specifying the number of units
proposed for each parcel, with the total
gross acres as defined by the following
equation:
Planned Community District Density
Calculation:
Density= Total Units
Total Acres
g. A plan with notes specifying the
intended land uses, types of structures
and intensity of use, proposed
underlying zoning, primary points of
access and major interior street
alignments; off-street parking and
loading, site perimeter setbacks, typical
landscaping and screening treatments;
total area in open space and drainage
information;
h. The survey map and conceptual plan
should be combined into one (1) plan
and may include other data as
requested by the Planning Department
to assure compliance with this Section;
and,
i. Availability of roads, parks, open space,
sewer, water, and storm water facilities
at, or exceeding the levels of service
established in the Queen Creek General
Plan and land development regulations.
F. PCD Procedures. Subject to the additional
procedures set forth in this section, a PCD
shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures for a rezoning, pursuant to
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance.
1. No application for a rezoning to a PC
District shall be accepted and no PCD
shall be approved by the Town Council
until a neighborhood meeting has been
completed pursuant to Section 3.1.C of
this Ordinance. Failure to meet the notice
and meeting requirements shall render
the PCD application invalid and no further
processing will be completed by the
Town.
2. A specific land use plan shall be
submitted with the PCD and rezoning
application including the following
documents and information:
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 34
a. “The Development Plan for
___________”.
b. Master Open Space, Landscape,
Pedestrian, and Bicycle Plan.
1) A preliminary landscape plan as
defined in Article VI of the
Subdivision Ordinance. A concept
plan may be submitted if no
preliminary plat is submitted along
with the PCD application;
2) A master sign plan, detailing all
proposed signage for the site; and,
3) A pedestrian and bicycle master plan
that details all improvements and
amenities being provided.
c. Master Phasing Schedule. A schedule
for development of the specific,
proposed use or uses for which
rezoning is required. The schedule for
development shall include a
construction schedule for various
phases of the development if
construction phases are anticipated.
d. Residential Design Guidelines. Indicate
at a minimum, typical lot(s), setbacks,
architectural style variations, types of
materials proposed, and the overall
theme of the various districts. Indicate
how garages will be de-emphasized.
e. Preliminary master drainage report as
defined in the Town of Queen Creek
Subdivision Ordinance and required by
the Town Engineer;
f. Preliminary master water report as
defined in the Town of Queen Creek
Subdivision Ordinance and required by
the Town Engineer;
g. Preliminary master sewer report as
defined in the Subdivision Ordinanc e
and required by the Town Engineer;
h. Evidence in both narrative and graphic
form of compliance with this Ordinanc e
and the following standards where
applicable:
1) All state air quality standards;
2) All state water quality standards;
and,
3) School site dedication.
i. An ALTA survey.
1) One full size c opy (24” x 36”). The
survey shall be performed within 12
months of the date of the submission
of the preliminary plat application.
2) The survey shall be sealed by a
licensed surveyor or engineer.
3. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing to consider the proposed
rezoning and master plan according to
the following criteria:
a. The project is consistent with and
implements the Town of Queen Creek
General Plan and the provisions of this
Ordinance;
b. The arrangement of all uses and
improvements reflects the natural
capabilities and limitations of the site as
well as the characteristics and
limitations of the adjacent property;
c. Development is compatible with the
immediate environment of the site and
neighborhood relative to architectural
design, scale, bulk and building height;
historical character and disposition and
orientation of buildings on the lot;
d. Buildings, transportation improvement s
and open space areas are arranged on
the site so that activities are compatible
with the neighborhood and consistent
with adopted ordinances and generally
accepted planning principles;
e. Buildings, transportation
improvements, open space and
landscaping are designed and arranged
to produce an efficient, functionally
organized and cohesive development;
f. Buildings, transportation
improvements, open space, and
landscaping are in favorable
relationship to the existing natural
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 35
topography, natural water bodies, and
water courses, exposure to sunlight and
wind and long views. Planned building
sites are located and designed to
minimize their impact on long views;
g. Buildings, transportation
improvements, open space and
landscaping are designed and arranged
to maximize quality of life of the project
and surrounding areas; and
h. Adequate facilities shall include water,
sewer, storm water, and streets, all of
which shall be constructed to the levels
of service established in these
regulations, the Town of Queen Creek
General Plan or other Town ordinance
and planning policy documents.
4. The Planning Commission may
recommend approval to the Council of
request for modifications to the
requirements of the underlying zoning
districts, except for modifications to the
overall use and density, when the
Planning Commission finds:
a. That the requested modifications to the
requirements of this Ordinance and the
underlying zoning districts are in the
best interests of the Town and are
beneficial to the Town in that a higher
quality or more appropriate design, or
economic benefits (such as
employment) can be achieved by not
requiring strict adherence to the terms
and regulations of this Ordinance;
b. That strict adherence to the
requirements of this Ordinance is not
required in order to ensure the health,
safety and welfare of the future
occupants of the proposed
development;
c. That strict adherence to the
requirements of this Ordinance is not
required in order to ensure that
property values of adjacent properties
will not be reduced; and,
d. That the proposed development is
consistent with the goals, objectives
and policies of the General Plan.
5. PC Districts shall be approved by
ordinance that states:
a. Findings of fact upon which the
approval is based;
b. Any schedule for development for the
specific use or uses for which the PCD
is being requested; and,
c. A stipulation that the PCD is
conditionally approved subject to the
approval of a Final Site Plan or
Preliminary Plat for each land use parcel
within two (2) years of the effective
date of the ordinance. The Council may
refer the application back to the
Planning Commission. An extension of
this time limitation may be extended
upon written request of to the
Development Services Director.
6. The Council may approve or disapprove
any application for PCD zoning. An
approval may include conditions deemed
appropriate by the Council to ensure that
all required findings as stipulated in
Subsection 4.10.I.4. hereto are
substantiated. The applicant and the
Town may enter into a Development
Agreement consistent with A.R.S. §9-
500.05, in order to effectuate the
requirements of this Section.
7. Upon the effective date of the ordinance,
the Official Zoning Map shall be amended
to designate the affected area with a PCD
symbol or symbols on the subject
property.
8. All ordinances establishing a PC District
shall contain, as a condition of rezoning,
a requirement for Final Development Plan
approval within two (2) years, in
accordance with the Master Plan
approved by the Town Council or other
standards adopted by the Town Council
and adopted as an amendment to the
Official Zoning Map. An extension of this
time limitation may be extended upon
written request of to the Development
Services Director.
G. Final Development or Site Plan. Within two
(2) years of the effective date of the
amendment, the applicant shall file with
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 36
the Planning Commission the following
documents:
1. A Final Site Plan or Preliminary Plat for a
phase of development incorporating a
fully dimensioned plan identifying land
use parcel dimensions, acreages, locating
all proposed streets, structures, parking
areas, landscaped areas, walls,
sidewalks, and other elements of the first
phase of the proposed project;
2. Final Master Water and Sewer Report;
3. Final Master Drainage Report;
4. A Final Open Space and Landscape Plan
with representation of the location of all
plant materials, hardscape, walkways,
and screening walls; a plant materials
schedule indicating plant name (Latin and
common), number and sizes used in the
plan and on-center spacing;
5. A Final Pedestrian and Bicycle Master
Plan.
6. Typical building elevations for all
residential units and specific building
elevations for any commercial or
recreational buildings. If specific
residential or commercial buildings are
not known, then conceptual elevations
will suffice as long as attention is paid to
specific architectural features, such as
building scale, form, material types and
colors;
7. The final site plan or final plat for each
land use parcel shall be in substantial
conformance with the land use plan and
all requirements and conditions of the
amendment adopted by the Council;
8. The final site plan or final plat may be
submitted separately for each phase of
development or as a whole; each
submittal shall require a separate public
hearing and approval by the Planning
Commission and Council prior to the
issuing of the zoning and issuance of
building permits. When the final
development or site plan is submitted in
phases, the first phase shall be submitted
as indicated above and each subsequent
phase within two (2) years of approval of
the previous phase; and,
9. Where the Planned Community District is
used to impose special provisions
regarding the design and development of
a subdivision, the Final Plat as described
in the Town’s Subdivision Ordinanc e ma y
c onstitute the applic ant’s Master Plan and
Final Subdivision Map or the Final Site
Plan for the individual parcel, provided,
however, that the Final Site Plan/plat
shall include all the elements and data
provided for in paragraph 1 of this
subsection.
H. Amendments to the Approved PC District.
An amendment to the approved PC District
or “The Development Plan for
___________” may be applied for by the
original applicant or its successors. A
determination shall be made by the
Development Services Director as to
whether the request is considered a major
or minor amendment.
1. Major Amendment. If the Development
Services Director determines the request
to be a major amendment, the request
shall follow the procedures set forth in
subsection F. of this Section.
a. An amendment would be ruled major if
any of the following is being applied for:
1) An increase or decrease in the overall
PC District boundary by more than ten
percent (10%) of the original
approved PC District boundary;
2) An increase by more than ten percent
(10%) of the original approved total
non-residential acreage or total
number of approved dwelling units;
and,
3) Any changes in the land use or
residential density that would have a
net negative effect on public facilities,
utilities infrastructure, or major street
system as determined by the
Development Services Director.
2. Minor Amendment. If the Development
Services Director determines the request
does not meet the criteria listed in
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 37
subsection H.1, the Development
Services Director may administratively
act on the requested amendment and
may add stipulations or conditions of
approval thereto, to meet or exceed the
PCD goals.
3. Appeals to a Minor Amendment Approval.
An action or decision by the Development
Services Director may be appeals within
twenty (20) days from the date of
decision.
a. Appeals shall be submitted in writing to
the Development Services Department
and shall include only the specific
criteria being appealed.
b. The Planning Department shall submit
a report to the Board of Adjustment
(BOA) regarding the appeal request to
be heard at the next BOA meeting.
c. The BOA procedure will follow the
process outlined in Section 3.7.B of this
Ordinance.
I. Administration and Enforcement. The PC
District will continue to be enforced and
regulated regardless of any ownership
transfer. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to inform any prospective
purchasers of the existence of the PC
District and “The Development Plan for
___________”. It is also the responsibility
of the owner to maintain dialogue with the
Development Services Director to ensure
the development maintains all scheduled
hearings and time frames required.
J. Termination of the PCD Classification. Any
zoning ordinance amendment adopted
under the provisions of this Ordinance shall
terminate and the zoning classification of
the affected property shall revert,
subsequent to a public hearing conducted,
to its prior district classification at the end
of the two (2) years following the effective
date of said amendment if the Final Site
Plan or Plat thereof has not been submitted
to the Planning Commission and Council for
approval. When the submittal is phased,
each subsequent phase shall be submitted
within two (2) years of approval of the
previous phase. The Council may grant
one (1) extension of time not exceeding
one (1) year for any phase of the
development. The Planning Commiss ion
and Council shall hold a public hearing prior
to any such reversion.
K. Extension of the PCD Classification. An
extension of the two (2) year time
limitation may be extended upon written
request of to the Development Services
Director. Such written request shall
provide sound justification based one (1) or
more of the following:
1. Financial and / or property dedication to
the PCD’s sc hool distric t, improveme nt
district or other government entity, per
the terms of an established development
agreement for the purpose of furthering
and or implementing the subject PCD;
2. Final design of the PCD’s c ommunit y
infrastructure has been approved; or
3. Other documented financial expenditure
for the purpose of implementation of the
PCD per the terms of the Council approval
and / or Development Agreement.
4.11 Planned Area Development
Overlay District
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Area
Development Overlay District (PAD) is to
provide for the orderly development of land
consistent with the Town of Queen Creek
General Plan and Zoning Ordinance while
permitting flexibility in the design,
construction and processing of residential,
commercial and / or industrial
developments of a quality which could not
be achieved by traditional lot by lot
development under conventional zoning
concepts. While the conventional zoning
districts and the requirements of those
districts set forth in the Town of Queen
Creek Zoning Ordinance are reasonable,
there may be circumstances in which it is
in the Town’s best interests to allow unique
and / or creative designs and techniques
that:
1. Promote the most appropriate use of a
parcel;
2. Allow diversification of use;
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 38
3. Allow economic development;
4. Facilitate the adequate and economical
provision of streets, parks, open space,
schools, storm drainage, sewer and water
utilities;
5. Preserve and utilize open space;
6. Offer recreational opportunities close to
residential uses;
7. Enhanc e the neighborhood’s appearanc e;
8. Counteract adverse effects of
urbanization; and,
9. Provide for the unified control of land
development.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. The uses permitted in the PAD District
shall be governed by the permitted uses
in the underlying district or combination
of underlying districts, as approved by
the Counc il. An “underlying zoning
distric t” shall mean those zoning distric ts
set forth in Article 4 of this Ordinance.
2. The following criteria will be used by the
Town Council in approving a
Development Application for PAD:
a. The development application for PAD
approval proposes substantial land use
planning standards and principles over
and beyond the minimum standards
required in this Ordinance or any
development ordinance adopted by the
Town;
b. The development application for PAD
approval exceeds the minimum intent
of the underlying zoning district(s)
creating neighborhoods and sustainable
communities over and above the
criteria established in this Ordinance;
c. The development application narrative
for PAD demonstrates specific goals
exceeding the General Plan and
demonstrates how the overall goal of
the General Plan is exceeded by the
proposed development; and,
d. The development application for PAD
represents a unique and ingenious
approach to land use development that
separates itself from other typical
suburban and / or urban development ’s
found within the region.
C. Permitted Densities.
1. Mix of Densities. PAD developments shall
contain a mix of zoning districts pursuant
to the General Plan.
2. PAD District Requirements. The PAD
district shall comply with the bulk and
area requirements of the underlying
zoning district(s) except as otherwise set
forth in this Section establishing the
specific PAD district. A PAD district may
be approved with modifications of these
requirements in accordance with
subsection G of this Section.
3. Modifications of Requirements. Any
modification of the requirements of the
underlying zones with respect to overall
density and use shall be approved, by the
Town Council.
4. Permitted densities in areas zoned
Planned Area Development shall adhere
to the following formula:
Planned Area Development Density
Calculation:
D = DU
A – (C + I + S + a + OS)
DU: Total No of Dwelling Units Permitted
D: Maximum Net Density (Table 4.7-1,
Column (B))
A: Total Site Area (acres)
C: Total Commercial Land Area (acres)
I: Total Industrial Land Area (acres)
S: School Sites Reserved for Purchase by
the School District (acres)*
a: Arterial and Collector Rights-of-Way
(acres)
OS: Open Space
* Does not include sites dedicated to the School
District.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 39
5. Applications for Changes or Modifications.
Applications for changes or modifications
of the underlying zoning district(s) shall
be submitted and processed concurrently
with an application requesting approval
of a Planned Area Development Overlay
District.
D. Required Design Elements and Amenities
for PAD. Section DS.6 of the Design
Standards for the Town of Queen Creek
lists required and optional design element s
for a PAD.
E. PAD Procedures. Subject to the additional
procedures set forth in this section, a PAD
shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures for a rezoning, pursuant to
section 3.4 of this Ordinance.
1. No application for a rezoning to a PAD
district shall be accepted and no PAD
shall be approved by the Town Council
until a neighborhood meeting has been
completed pursuant to Article 3.1.C of
this Ordinance. Failure to meet the notice
and meeting requirements shall render
the PAD application invalid and no further
processing will be completed by the
Town.
2. A specific land use plan shall be
submitted with the PAD rezoning
application including the following
documents and information:
a. A narrative document and / or report,
entitled, “The Development Plan for
___________” inc luding the following
at a minimum:
1) Name and address of recorded
landowner, architect/ engineer/
surveyor and contractor;
2) Date, north arrow, and scale;
3) Vicinity map at a scale of not less than
1” = 2,000 ft.;
4) A complete (surveyed) written legal
description of the aggregate property
boundaries and each individual sub
land use parcel or properties under
application for approval;
5) A survey map noting the property
boundaries and legal description,
topography with a maximum contour
interval of two feet (2') where existing
ground is on a slope of less than two
percent (2%), then either one foot
(1') contours or spot elevation shall
be provided where necessary,
existing structures, adjacent streets
(location, name and width) and
significant natural features;
6) Maps indicating the land use parcel
sizes and zoning categories. Said
map shall be accurately measured
and described, indicating acreage of
land uses and zoning districts
proposed specifying the number of
units proposed for each parcel, with
gross density as defined by the
General Plan and this section;
7) A plan with notes specifying the
intended land uses, types of
structures and intensity of use,
proposed underlying zoning, primary
points of access and major interior
street alignments; off-street parking
and loading, site perimeter setbacks,
typical landscaping and screening
treatments; total area in open space
and drainage information;
8) The survey map and conceptual plan
should be combined into one (1) plan
and may include other data as
requested by the Planning
Department to assure complianc e
with this Section; and,
9) Availability of roads, parks, open
space, sewer, water, and storm water
facilities at, or exceeding the levels of
service established in the Queen
Creek General Plan and land
development regulations.
b. Master Open Space, Landscape,
Pedestrian, and Bicycle Plan.
1) A preliminary landscape plan as
defined in Article VI of the Subdivision
Ordinance. A concept plan may be
submitted if no preliminary plat is
submitted along with the PAD
application;
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 40
2) A Comprehensive Sign Plan, detailing
all proposed signage for the site (if
applicable); and,
3) A pedestrian and bicycle master plan
that details all improvements and
amenities being provided.
c. Master Phasing Schedule. A schedule
for development of the specific,
proposed use or uses for which
rezoning is required. The schedule for
development shall include a
construction schedule for various
phases of the development if
construction phases are anticipated.
d. Residential Design Guidelines (if
applicable). Indicate at a minimum,
typical lot(s), setbacks, architectural
style variations, types of materials
proposed, and the overall theme of the
various districts. Indicate how garages
will be de-emphasized.
e. Preliminary master drainage report as
defined in the Town of Queen Creek
Subdivision Ordinance and required by
the Town Engineer;
f. Preliminary master water report as
defined in the Town of Queen Creek
Subdivision Ordinance and required by
the Town Engineer;
g. Preliminary master sewer report as
defined in the Subdivision Ordinanc e
and required by the Town Engineer;
h. Evidence in both narrative and graphic
form of compliance with this Ordinanc e
and the following standards where
applicable:
1) All state air quality standards;
2) All state water quality standards; and,
3) School site dedication or
documentation that sufficient
capacity exists.
3. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing to consider the proposed
rezoning and master plan according to
the following criteria:
a. The project is consistent with and
implements the Town of Queen Creek
General Plan and the provisions of this
Ordinance;
b. The arrangement of all uses and
improvements reflects the natural
capabilities and limitations of the site as
well as the characteristics and
limitations of the adjacent property;
c. Development is compatible with the
immediate environment of the site and
neighborhood relative to architectural
design, scale, bulk and building height;
historical character and disposition and
orientation of buildings on the lot;
d. Buildings, transportation improvement s
and open space areas are:
1) Arranged on the site so that activities
are compatible with the neighborhood
and consistent with adopted
ordinances and generally accepted
planning principles;
2) Designed and arranged to produce an
efficient, functionally organized and
cohesive development;
3) In favorable relationship to the
existing natural topography, natural
water bodies, and water courses,
exposure to sunlight and wind and
long views. Planned building sites are
located and designed to minimize
their impact on long views; and,
4) Designed and arranged to maximize
quality of life of the project and
surrounding areas.
e. Adequate facilities shall include water,
sewer, storm water, and streets, all of
which shall be constructed to the levels
of service established in these
regulations, the Town of Queen Creek
General Plan or other Town ordinance
and planning policy documents.
4. The Planning Commission may
recommend approval to the Council of
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 41
request for modifications to the
requirements of the underlying zoning
districts when the Planning Commiss ion
finds:
a. That the requested modifications to the
requirements of this Ordinance and the
underlying zoning districts are in the
best interests of the Town and are
beneficial to the Town in that a higher
quality or more appropriate design, or
economic benefits (such as
employment) can be achieved by not
requiring strict adherence to the terms
and regulations of this Ordinance;
b. That strict adherence to the
requirements of this Ordinance is not
required in order to ensure the health,
safety and welfare of the future
occupants of the proposed
development;
c. That strict adherence to the
requirements of this Ordinance is not
required in order to ensure that
property values of adjacent properties
will not be reduced; and,
d. That the proposed development is
consistent with the goals, objectives
and policies of the General Plan.
5. PAD districts shall be approved by
ordinance that states:
a. Findings of fact upon which the
approval is based;
b. Any schedule for development for the
specific use or uses for which the PAD
is being requested;
c. Any modifications to the requirement s
of the underlying zoning district or
districts which may be approved; and,
d. A stipulation that the PAD is
conditionally approved subject to the
approval of a Final Site Plan or
Preliminary Plat for each land use parcel
within two (2) years of the effective
date of the ordinance. The Council may
refer the application back to the
Planning Commission.
6. The Council may approve or disapprove
any application for PAD overlay zoning.
An approval may include conditions
deemed appropriate by the Council to
ensure that all required findings as
stipulated in Subsection 4.10.I.4. hereto
are substantiated. The applicant and the
Town may enter into a Development
Agreement consistent with A.R.S. §9-
500.05, in order to effectuate the
requirements of this Section.
7. Upon the effective date of the ordinance,
the Official Zoning Map shall be amended
to designate the affected area with a PAD
symbol or symbols on the subject
property.
8. All ordinances establishing a PAD Overlay
District shall contain, as a condition of
rezoning, a requirement for Final
Development Plan approval within two
(2) years, in accordance with the Master
Plan approved by the Town Council or
other standards adopted by the Town
Council and adopted as an amendment to
the Official Zoning Map.
F. Final Development or Site Plan. Within two
(2) years of the effective date of the
amendment, the applicant shall file with
the Planning Commission the following
documents:
1. A Final Site Plan or Final Plat
incorporating a fully dimensioned plan
identifying land use parcel dimensions,
acreages, locating all proposed streets,
structures, parking areas, landscaped
areas, walls, sidewalks, and other
elements of the first phase of the
proposed project;
2. Final Master Water and Sewer Report;
3. Final Master Drainage Report;
4. A Final Open Space and Landscape Plan
with representation of the location of all
plant materials, hardscape, walkways,
and screening walls; a plant materials
schedule indicating plant name (Latin and
common), number and sizes used in the
plan and on-center spacing;
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 42
5. A Final Pedestrian and Bicycle Master
Plan;
6. Colored, typical elevations for all
residential units and specific building
elevations for any commercial or
recreational buildings;
7. The final site plan or final plat for each
land use parcel shall be in substantial
conformance with the land use plan and
all requirements and conditions of the
amendment adopted by the Council;
8. The final site plan or final plat may be
submitted separately for each phase of
development or as a whole; each
submittal shall require a separate public
hearing and approval by the Planning
Commission and Council prior to the
issuing of the zoning and issuance of
building permits. When the final
development or site plan is submitted in
phases, the first phase shall be submitted
as indicated above and each subsequent
phase within two (2) years of approval of
the previous phase; and,
9. Where the Planned Area Development
Overlay District is used to impose special
provisions regarding the design and
development of a subdivision, the Final
Plat as desc ribed in the Town’s
Subdivision Ordinance may constitute the
applic ant’s Master Plan and Final
Subdivision Map or the Final Site Plan for
the individual parcel, provided, however,
that the Final Site Plan/plat shall include
all the elements and data provided for in
paragraph 1 of this subsection.
G. Amendments to Approval. Following
adoption of the Master Plan or Final
Development or Site Plan, as the case may
be, said plan shall not be changed,
amended, or altered in any manner except
as set forth herein. Any substantial change
or alteration in the physical or spatial
characteristics of the plan or its
configuration shall be considered a
rezoning and shall only be accomplished
pursuant to this Article. The following PAD
Amendment criteria shall be applicable:
1. Minor Amendment. Minor changes in the
design and location of buildings, parking,
landscape areas, retention, etc. may be
authorized by the Planning Administrator.
2. Major Amendment. Major changes shall
consist of a change of land use, changes
to the proposed arterial roadway
transportation circulation system, or any
request pertaining to a Large Single
Retail Use or Large Multiple Use Shopping
Centers. All Major Changes shall be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council for their
review and approval in accordance with
the requirements set forth in section 3.4
of this Ordinance.
H. Termination of the PAD Classification. Any
zoning ordinance amendment adopted
under the provisions of this Ordinance shall
terminate and the zoning classification of
the affected property shall revert,
subsequent to a public hearing conducted,
to its prior district classification at the end
of the two (2) years following the effective
date of said amendment if the Final Site
Plan or Plat thereof has not been submitted
to the Planning Commission and Council for
approval. When the submittal is phased,
each subsequent phase shall be submitted
within two (2) years of approval of the
previous phase. The Council may grant
one (1) extension of time not exceeding
one (1) year for any phase of the
development.
I. Existence of PAD Districts Prior to Adoption
of this Ordinance. Any Planned Area
Development Overlay District (PAD) that
was legally authorized by the Queen Creek
Town Council prior to the adoption of this
Ordinance may remain as a Permitted
Planned Area Development Overlay District
(PAD).
4.12 Manufactured Housing
Overlay District
A. Purpose. The principal purpose of the
Manufactured Housing Residential Overlay
Zoning District is to provide for housing
which is similar to conventional site-built
housing in subdivisions or on individual lots
of record in areas where manufactured
housing is appropriate by taking into
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 43
consideration existing conditions, including
present use of land and public utilities.
B. General Provisions.
1. The Manufactured Housing Residential
Overlay Zoning District is an overlay zone
and may be combined with any
Residential Zoning District and not with
any other Zoning District. The height,
yard, intensity of use, parking, loading
and unloading regulations shall be
governed by the provisions of the
underlying Zoning District.
2. All portions of a lot or parcel located
within the Manufactured Housing
Residential Overlay Zoning District as
designated on the Zoning District maps
shall be subject to the regulations set
forth in this Section and that meet the
design criteria stated in Town of Queen
Creek Design Standards.
C. Use Regulations. The Use Regulations
which apply to property in any Zoning
District with which the Manufactured
Housing Residential Overlay Zoning District
has been combined shall remain the same
as specified in the primary Zoning District,
except that a manufactured house shall be
utilized in lieu of a site-built single-family
dwelling in all cases.
D. Other Regulations. Additional regulations
which apply to property in any Zoning
District with which the Manufactured
Housing Residential Overlay Zoning District
has been combined shall remain the same
as specified in the primary Zoning District
unless otherwise specified herein.
E. Locations Regulations. A manufactured
house shall be oriented on a lot or parcel
so that the wide side of the manufactured
house faces the front lot line, except on lots
or parcels where such an orientation would
not meet side yard width requirements at
every location between the front and rear
setback lines.
F. Permanent Foundation. A manufactured
house shall be permanently attached to a
permanent foundation on a lot or parcel.
4.13 Transfer of Development
Rights
A. Purpose. The density or intensity of a use
that would have been allowed on a site
designated as a critical area in the absence
of the application of this Ordinance may be
used by clustering the development within
non-sensitive areas within the project site
(see Section 4.10.E of this Ordinance) or
off-site through the transfer of
development rights pursuant to this
Section.
B. Development Rights Created. The Town of
Queen Creek Development Rights is hereby
created. All Critical Areas, except for those
owned by a public agency and those
subject to a conservation easement or
other legal restriction precluding the
physical development of the land on the
effective date of this Ordinance, are
assigned Town of Queen Creek
Development Rights at the following ratios:
1. Hillside Protection. Development
potential may be transferred at the ratio
set forth in Section 4.13.D.2 of this
Ordinance.
2. Agricultural Preservation. One-hundred
percent (100%) of the development
potential may be transferred to the Town
Center Activity Area.
3. Owners of Protected Environmentally
Sensitive Areas. Smaller than the
acreage specified above are entitled to
fractional development rights at the
ratios established above. Any fraction
equal to one-half (1/2) or greater shall be
rounded to the nearest whole number.
C. Severability. Town of Queen Creek
Development Rights shall be severable
from the underlying fee and shall be
transferable to receiver parcels of land.
D. Use of Development Rights on Receiver
Parcels.
1. Receiving Districts Designated. Severable
development rights established in
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 44
accordance with subsection B of this
section may be transferred to any of the
following districts up to the maximum
density set forth in Section 4.7 of this
Ordinance:
a. Any zoning district located within the
Town Center Activity Area or the Urban
Corridor Tier.
2. Unique Circumstances. If the Town of
Queen Creek determines, during the
review process established within this
Ordinance, that the parcel proposed for
development reflects unique or unusual
circumstances, or that development of
the parcel at the maximum density would
affect surrounding uses in a manner
contrary to the public health, safety, and
welfare, or would be inconsistent with the
General Plan, the Town Council may limit
the number of development rights that
may be transferred to the receiver parcel.
Any development order that limits the
use of development rights to less than
the indicated maximum density shall
include specific findings of fact on which
the restriction is based and shall specify
what changes, if any, would make the
parcel proposed for development eligible
for development at the maximum
indicated density.
E. Procedure for Transferring Development
Rights.
1. Timing. Development rights allotted to a
Critical Area may be transferred to any
person at any time and shall be deemed,
for taxation and all other purposes, to be
appurtenant to the land from which the
rights are transferred until a
development order is issued authorizing
use of the Development Rights at a
receiver parcel at which time they shall
attach to the receiver parcel for all
purposes.
2. Recordation of Transfer of Development
Rights. No Development Right shall
increase the intensity or density of the
use of a receiver site until the owner of
the transferor parcel has recorded a deed
in the chain of title of the transferor
parcel expressly restricting the use of the
land in perpetuity to a conservation zone.
The deed restriction shall be expressly
enforceable by the Town of Queen Creek,
and a boundary plat for the transferor
parcel shall be recorded reflecting the
restriction.
3. Evidence of Restriction Required For
Development Approval. A developer of a
receiver site must submit, in conjunction
with his application for development
approval, evidence that the transferor
parcel has been restricted to nondevelopment
uses and that a boundary
plat has been recorded in accordance
with the above provisions.
F. Notice and Hearing Requirements. Any
proposed transfer of development rights
from the sending property or to the
receiving property shall be subject to the
notice and hearing requirements of A.R.S.
§9-462.04.
G. Preceding Transfer of Development Rights.
Prior to any transfer of development rights,
the Town Council shall adopt an ordinance
providing for:
1. The issuance and recordation of the
instruments necessary to sever
development rights from the sending
property and to affix development rights
to the receiving property. These
instruments shall be executed by the
affected property owners and lien
holders.
2. The preservation of the character of the
sending property and assurance that the
prohibitions against the use and
development of the sending property
shall bind the landowner and every
successor in interest to the landowner.
3. The severance of transferable
development rights from the sending
property and the delayed transfer of
development rights to a receiving
property.
4. The purchase, sale, exchange, or other
conveyance of transferable development
rights prior to the rights being affixed to
a receiving property.
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 45
5. A system for monitoring the severance,
ownership, assignment, and transfer of
transferable development rights.
6. The right of the Town of Queen Creek to
purchase development rights and to hold
them for resale.
4.14 Phoenix-Mesa Gateway
Airport Overlay District
A. Purpose.
1. Designate an area in the Town that is or
may be impacted by noise generated by
aircraft using the Phoenix-Mesa Gateway
Airport; and,
2. Mitigate the effects of aircraft noise on
the public health, welfare and safety by
prohibiting noise sensitive uses in new
projects in Overflight Area 1, by
establishing noise attenuation
requirements applicable to noise
sensitive uses in new projects in
Overflight Area 2, and by requiring
notification to future owners and
occupants of possible noise impacts on
noise sensitive uses in new projects in
Overflight Areas 2 and 3 of the Phoenix-
Mesa Gateway Airport Overlay District.
B. Applicability. Phoenix-Mesa Gateway
Airport Overlay District overlays base
zoning districts. Base zoning district
regulations that are not modified by an
overlay district shall apply. The Official
Zoning Map shall identify each Overflight
Area within the Phoenix-Mesa Gateway
Airport Overlay District.
1. The provisions of this section shall apply
only to noise sensitive uses in new
projects located wholly or partially within
the Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport
Overlay District.
2. If a new project is located partially within
Overflight Areas 2 and 3, then the
development and notification
requirements for Overflight Area 2 shall
apply to noise sensitive uses in the entire
new project.
3. If a new project is located partially within
Overflight Area 3 and partially outside of
any overflight area, then the
development and notification
requirements for Overflight Area 3 shall
apply to noise sensitive uses in the entire
new project.
4. For the purposes of this Section, the
following words and terms shall have the
following meanings:
a. “Airport” means the Phoenix-Mesa
Gateway Airport owned and operated
by the Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport
Authority.
b. “New projec t” means a projec t with the
following status of development as of
September 18, 2004: 1) no preliminary
plat has been approved; or 2) a
preliminary plat has expired; or 3) no
preliminary design review site plan has
been approved; or 4) a preliminary
design review site plan has expired.
c. “Noise sensitive uses” means single
family or multi-family residential uses,
hospitals, nursing homes, places of
worship, libraries, public and private
schools, and daycare centers.
d. “Overflight Areas” means those areas
designated on the Official Zoning Map
as overflight areas. Overflight areas
are divided into Overflight Areas 1, 2,
and 3.
e. “Projec t” means either, as applic able, a
subdivision with boundaries that have
been or will be established by a final
subdivision plat or a site with
boundaries depicted on a site plan.
f. “Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport
Overlay Distric t” means that area
designated on the Official Zoning Map.
C. Development and Notification
Requirements within the Phoenix-Mesa
Gateway Airport Overlay District. Use and
development of land within the Phoenix-
Mesa Gateway Airport Overlay District shall
conform to the base zoning district
regulations and other requirements of this
code, except as modified by a Development
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 46
Plan for a Planned Area Development
overlay ordinance. An aerial map that is a
minimum of three foot by four foot (3’ x 4’)
which depicts the subject property and the
relationship of that site to the Overflight
Areas 1, 2, 3 be posted in the sales office
or rental office in a location clearly visible
to prospective buyers/renters. Include
information regarding Overflight Areas in
the CC & Rs.
1. Overflight Area 1. No noise sensitive use
shall be permitted in a new project on a
lot that is located wholly or partially in
Overflight Area 1.
2. Overflight Area 2 and 3. New projects
located within Overflight Area 2 that
includes a noise sensitive use shall
comply with the following:
a. Final plats shall note the potential for
objectionable aircraft noise.
Specifically, the plat shall note the
following:
b. “This property, due to its proximity to
Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport, is likely
to experience aircraft overflights, which
could generate noise levels which may
be of concern to some individuals. The
mix of aircraft consists of cargo,
commercial, charter, corporate, general
aviation and military airc raft.”
c. Sales offices for new single family
residential projects shall provide notice
to prospective buyers that the project is
located within an Overflight Area. Such
notice shall consist of a sign at least two
foot by three foot (2’ x 3’) installed at
the entrance to the sales office or
leasing office at each residential
project. The sign shall be installed prior
to commencement of sales and shall
not be removed until the sales office is
permanently closed. The sign shall
state the following in letters of at least
one inc h (1”) in height:
d. “This subdivision, due to its proximit y
to Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport, is
likely to experience aircraft overflights,
which could generate noise levels which
may be of concern to some individuals.
The mix of aircraft consists of cargo,
commercial, charter, corporate, general
aviation and military aircraft. For
additional information contact the
Arizona Department of Real Estate at:
(602) 468-1414 or Phoenix-Mesa
Gateway Airport Public Relations Office
at: (480) 988-7600.”
e. Leasing offices for new multi-family
residential projects shall provide notice
to prospective lessees that the project
is located within an Overflight Area.
Such notice shall consist of a sign at
least two foot by three foot (2’ x 3’)
installed at the entrance to the sales
office or leasing office at each
residential project. The sign shall be
installed prior to commencement of
leases and shall not be removed until
the leasing office no longer leases units
in the new project. The sign shall state
the following in letters of at least one
inc h (1”) in height:
f. Public reports filed with the Arizona
Department of Real Estate shall
disclose the location of the Airport and
potential aircraft overflights. The
following statement shall be included in
the public report:
g. The construction, alteration, moving,
and substantial repair of any human
occupied building or structure in the
new project shall achieve an exterior to
interior Noise Level Reduction (NLR) of
25 decibels (dB) or an exterior to
interior NLR that results in an interior
noise level of 45 DNL or less. The
developer shall submit a signed and
sealed letter from a registered architect
or engineer certifying that construction
materials, methods, and design were
employed to achieve the required noise
reduction. A copy of the certification
shall be submitted with the application
for a building permit.
h. The owners of the new project,
including mortgagees, other lien
holders and easement holders, shall
execute an avigation easement prior to
or concurrently with the recordation of
any final plat or approval of a final site
plan for the new project. The easement
ARTICLE 4 – ZONING DISTRICTS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 4 - Page 47
shall be in a form approved by the
Director of Planning.
i. Properties located in this overflight area
may still be located in the FAA,
Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport 65 DNL
designation. Further, these properties
are to be deed restricted denoting the
65 DNL.
Zoning Ordinance
Article 5.0
Site Improvement Standards
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 1
5.0 Site Improvement Standards
Section Content Page
5.1 Adequate Public Facilities 1
5.2 Fencing and Walls 1
5.3 Landscaping Standards 4
5.4 Open Space 12
5.5 Lighting 15
5.6 Parking and Loading Standards 19
5.1 Adequate Public Facilities
A. Adoption by Reference. The “Town of
Queen Creek Adequate Public Fac ilities”
requirements, a current copy of which is on
file with the Development Services
Department and which may be modif ied
from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference as if set out at length in this
Ordinance.
5.2 Fencing and Walls
A. General Standards.
1. Fencing and screening shall be permitted
as provided in this Section.
2. Fence materials shall be durable and
consistent with abutting fences.
3. The height and location requirements of
this section may be modified as part of a
subdivision, planned area development ,
special use, or conditional use approval.
For fences on retaining walls, see
definition of a retaining wall.
4. Fences in the required front yard setback
shall not exceed thirty-six inc hes (36”) in
height. Such fences may be increased to
forty-eight inches (48”) maximum height
if the fencing material extending above
the thirty-six inc h (36”) height is an open
material such as wrought iron or vinyl
rail. Parcels that are zoned R1-43 and
larger may construct fences up to six feet
(6’) in height, where the solid portion of
the fence, if any, does not exceed thirtysix
inc hes (36”) and does not encroach
any c loser than eight feet (8’) from the
front property line or create any visibility
conflicts that may be determined by the
Town.
5. A fence constructed on a side or rear
property line shall not exceed a height of
six feet (6’) from highest finished grade
adjacent to the fence, nor more than
eight feet (8’) from the lowest grade
adjacent to the fence. Any fence of more
than six feet (6’) height on the low side
shall use berming, landscaping, fence
offset(s) or similar enhancements to
mask height differences, and in no case
shall the fence height exceed eight feet
(8’). Where the fenc e height exc eeds six
feet (6’) on the lower side, a view fence
shall be required for the portion above six
feet (6’) in height (i.e. 6’ solid – 2’ view).
6. Any fence above six feet (6’) in height
shall be designed by an Arizona
registered structural engineer and
approved by the Town.
7. On that part of the lot other than the
required front yard setback area, fences
may be erected up to six feet (6’) in
height.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 2
8. Connecting side yard fences are to be set
back a minimum distance of one-quarter
(¼) of the required front yard setback)
from the front face plane of the
residential structure.
9. When a corner lot abuts a key lot, the
fence or freestanding wall over three
feet, six inches (3’ 6”) but not more than
six feet (6’) in height on the c orner lot
shall be set back from the street side
property line not less than one-half (1/2)
the depth of the required front yard.
10. The fencing details shall show the
proposed method of construction and
anchoring of the fence, posts, and gate.
11. The fencing details shall clearly show the
proposed distance between the fence and
the abutting property lines and the
distance to the sight line of a street right -
of-way intersection. Adequate sight
distance shall be maintained.
12. The height of fences shall be determined
by measurement from the ground level at
all points upon which the fence is located.
An increase in height shall be allowed
when spacing for drainage under the
fence is needed.
13. The use of barbed wire, wire mesh or
chain link shall not be used in any zoning
district.
14. Storage areas, solid waste dumpsters,
and large items for solid waste pick-up
shall be confined in an enclosed area and
shall be of solid construction, six feet (6’)
high with locking gates providing access.
15. Solid fence designs shall require use of a
minimum of three (3) materials including
stone, brick, block, or textured block
including treated, split-face, single-score
or patterned integrally colored block or
similar enhancement and may include
changes in color or texture. Alternative
wall designs may be considered by the
Planning Administrator.
16. All fences/walls visible from an arterial,
collector or local streets shall provide
decorative columns, offsets or
undulations with a minimum of two feet
(2’) change to create additional variety.
The columns/offsets/undulations shall be
provided every one hundred and fifty feet
(150'). Alternative wall designs that meet
the intent of this section may be
considered by the Planning
Administrator.
17. Fences adjacent to parks shall be partial
view fenc ing (4’ solid – 2’ view).
Openings in the perimeter wall are
encouraged at the end of the abutting
interior cul-de-sac streets.
150’ 150’
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 3
B. Rural Zoning Districts A-1, AT, R1-190, R1-
154, R1-108, R1-54, R1-43.
1. Fences adjacent to arterial and collector
streets may be view fencing or a solid
wall regardless of the landscape tract
width separating the lots from the street
and no taller than six feet (6’) in height.
2. All fencing along individual property
boundaries may be view fencing or a solid
wall and no taller than six feet (6’) in
height.
3. All fences shall be decoratively treated on
the public side to match the architectural
style and design of the neighborhood.
C. Suburban Zoning Districts R1-35, R1-18,
R1-15, R1-12, and Urban Zoning Districts
R1-9, R1-8, R1-7, R1-6, R1-5, R1-4, MDR
and HDR
1. Fences adjacent to streets may be solid
regardless of the landscape tract width
separating the lots from the street and no
taller than six feet (6’) in height.
2. All fences shall be decoratively treated on
the public side to match the architectural
style and design of the neighborhood.
D. Non-Residential Zoning Districts.
1. All perimeter fences shall be finished on
all sides to match the commercial and /
or industrial product architectural style
and design.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 4
2. A fence constructed on a side or rear
property line shall not exceed a height of
six feet (6’) from highest finished grade
adjacent to the fence, nor more than
eight feet (8’) from the lowest grade
adjacent to the fence. Any fence of more
than six feet (6’) in height on the low side
shall use berming, landscaping, fence
offset(s) or similar enhancements to
mask height differences, and when
adjacent to single or multi-family
residential the fence height shall not
exceed eight feet (8’).
3. Parking areas adjacent to the required
front yard shall provide a decorative
screen wall or landscape berm or
combination thereof to a height not to
exceed three feet (3') in order to
adequately screen the undercarriages of
the parked vehicles. Parking lot screen
walls shall also be subject to the design
provisions set forth in Section 5.2.A.15 &
16 above.
4. Six inch (6") wide Interlocking Blocks:
Six inc h (6”) wide concrete masonry
blocks designed in accordance with the
approved Town of Queen Creek design
specification are permitted for internal lot
line and privacy fences.
5. Six inch (6”) wide Non-Interlocking
Blocks: All perimeter subdivision fences
adjacent to open space or arterial and
collector rights-of-way shall be
c onstruc ted of a 6” bloc k provided the
fence system is designed by an Arizona
registered structural engineer and
approved by the Town.
6. Eight inch (8”) wide Non-Interlocking
Blocks: 8” non-interlocking block is
permitted in all areas of the subdivision
provided it is designed and installed in
accordance with the Town of Queen
Creek design specification or an Arizona
registered structural engineer.
7. Solid Perimeter Fence Standards. Solid
fencing use along arterial and collector
streets on the perimeter of residential
projects addresses individual property
concerns regarding noise, light, privacy,
and safety. Because solid fence use
affects the image, character, safety, and
privacy of the community, design
upgrades such as material choices and
additional buffering to offset the
reduction in project openness and reduce
the impact of solid fencing is required.
8. Exceptions. Fencing and wall standards
in the Downtown Core (DC) district shall
be in conformance with the DC Design
Guidelines and Chapter 7 of the Design
Standards. Alternative standards that
meet the intent of the Zoning Ordinance
may be considered by the Planning
Administrator. Where a conflict arises
between the applicability of the Zoning
Ordinance and Design Guidelines in the
DC district, the Planning Administrator
shall make the final determination
5.3 Landscaping Standards
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to
implement the goals of the Queen Creek
General Plan in regard to providing
landscaping and buffering standards for
landscaping that will capitalize on the Town
of Queen Creek’s agric ultural c harac ter and
identity while preserving natural resources,
native plants, and scarce water supplies.
These requirements will be applied to all
new development, redevelopment or
building expansion (greater than twentyfive
(25%) of the gross building area)
projects including streetscaping of rightsARTICLE
5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 5
of-ways. Landscape plans, complete with
irrigation plans, shall accompany any
application for development approval.
These minimum landscaping requirement s
will:
1. Establish a landscape theme including
street trees and streetscape design to be
used throughout the Town to promote the
overall Town and neighborhood character
and identity;
2. Provide buffering and transitions between
less intensive land uses abutting
intensive development and land uses and
between washes, multi-use trails and low
intensity residential development;
3. Preserve and ac c entuate Queen Creek’s
agricultural heritage;
4. Preserve existing native vegetation, as an
integral part of the Sonoran Desert and
wildlife habitats, and incorporate native
plants, low-water need plant
communities, and ecosystems into
landscape design;
5. Promote innovative and cost-conscious
approaches to the design, installation,
and maintenance of landscaping while
encouraging water and energy
conservation;
6. Reduce soil erosion and increase
infiltration in permeable land areas
essential to storm water management
and aquifer recharge;
7. Manage efficiently and effectively the
groundwater supplies by using drought -
tolerant, low maintenance, and lowwater
consumptive landscape;
8. Encourage community gardens for
cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables,
or ornamental plants;
9. Maintain and increase property values by
requiring landscaping to be incorporated
into development; and,
10. All plant material shall be selec ted from
the Arizona Municipal Water Users
Association (AMWUA) list of very-low,
low, or moderate water use plants. The
Planning Administrator may approve
alternative plant materials.
B. Interpretation of Landscaping Terms.
Where necessary to interpret the precise
meaning of technical landscaping terms
used in this Section, reference shall be
made to The American Standard For
Nursery Stock, as published by the
American Association of Nurserymen
(AAN), which document is hereby
incorporated by reference as if set forth in
its entirety herein.
C. Exceptions
1. Landscaping standards in the Downtown
Core (DC) district shall be in
conformance with the DC Design
Guidelines and Chapter 7 of the Design
Standards. Alternative standards that
meet the intent of the Zoning Ordinance
may be considered by the Planning
Administrator. Where a conflict arises
between the applicability of the Zoning
Ordinance and Design Guidelines in the
DC district, the Planning Administrator
shall make the final determination.
D. Minimum Standards for Landscaping
Design and Development .
1. Landscape Requirements. Except for
single family uses, the following
minimum requirements shall be provided
for each developed parcel:
a. Street right-of-way landscaping. One
(1) tree and six (6) shrubs for each
thirty feet of street frontage. The front
twenty feet (20’) of the required onsite
landscape buffer setback area may also
be used to satisfy this requirement.
b. On-site landscaping. The following
quantities of landscaping materials are
required in all areas on-site including
the parking lot:
i. Commercial/Office/Retail
Developments- One (1) tree and
ten (10) shrubs per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of landscape
area. Alternative landscape
designs that meet the intent of
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 6
this section may be considered by
the Planning Administrator.
ii. Industrial Developments- One (1)
tree and ten (10) shrubs per one
thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet of landscape area.
Alternative landscape designs that
meet the intent of this section
may be considered by the
Planning Administrator.
c. The planting requirements of this
paragraph, as well as the total square
footage of landscape area required,
may be reduced up to twenty-five
percent (25%) where existing shade
trees in excess of the minimum
requirement are retained upon the
approval of the Planning Administrator
or his or her designee. Existing shade
trees shall measure four inc h (4”)
caliper or more when measured
eighteen inc hes (18”) above ground.
2. Landscape Requirements for single family
uses. See the design criteria stated in
Town of Queen Creek Design Standards
for front yard landscaping options.
3. Minimum Plant Size. The minimum
allowable plant size for new installations
shall be as follows:
a. The minimum size shall be fifteen (15)
gallons, six feet (6’) in height, and a
c aliper of one inc h (1”) measured four
inc hes (4”) above the soil line. Fifty
percent (50%) of the required number
of street frontage trees are to be
twenty-four inch (24”) box size or
larger, six feet (6’) in height, and a
c aliper of one and a half inc h (1 1/2”)
measured four inc hes (4”) above the
soil line.
b. Shrubs shall measure a minimum of
five (5) gallon size upon installation.
c. Organic ground covers shall be a
minimum of one (1) gallon size upon
installation.
d. Inorganic ground covers shall be used
and shall consist of decomposed granite
(minimum size half-inc h (1/2”) minus
or screened, except quarter-inch (1/4”)
minus shall be used on all equestrian
trails) or turf. Where boulders are used
one-third (1/3) of the boulder shall be
buried.
4. All plant material shall meet the minimum
standards contained in the most recent
edition of the Arizona Nursery
Assoc iation’s Growers Committee
Recommended Tree Specifications which
document is hereby incorporated by
reference as if set forth in its entirety
herein, as to size, condition and
appearance. Acceptable Frontage
Landscaping. A minimum of thirty
percent (30%) of all frontage landscaped
areas shall be covered with vegetative or
organic ground cover consisting of turf,
not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
minimum requirement, or other living
plant materials characterized by
horizontal growth which generally do not
exc eed eighteen inc hes (18”) in height.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 7
5. Common Area Landscaping
Requirements.
a. In any single family residential district,
a minimum of two (2) trees per dwelling
unit shall be required, which may
include street trees. In any multifamily
district, a minimum of one (1) tree per
dwelling unit shall be required, which
may include street trees and perimeter
landscaping. A minimum of twenty-five
percent (25%) of required trees shall
be twenty-four inch (24”) box or larger.
b. Office and commercial development s
shall be landscaped not less than fifteen
(15%) of the developed parcel and
industrial developments not less than
ten percent (10%) of the developed
parcel.
6. Landscape Buffer Setbacks.
a. A buffer setback as described in Table
5.3-1 shall be provided to ensure visual
separation between uses when
appropriate; create a transition area; to
preserve and enhance property values;
and, to implement the goals and
policies of the General Plan. To the
extent that there is an inconsistency
between this Section and the
Subdivision Ordinance, the more
restrictive requirement shall be used.
b. A landscape setback may be used for
passive recreation. It may contain
sidewalks or paths, parks, open space,
or storm water retention basins. Active
recreational uses, such as play fields,
swimming pools, or other active,
structured recreational uses or
circulation drives and parking lots, shall
not be permitted in the landscape
setback.
c. A 50% proportional share of the
required landscape setback shall be
installed along each property line by
each development.
d. A landscape setback shall be developed
in the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel
extending to the lot or parcel line. The
landscape setback shall not be located
within any public right-of-way or
private street.
Table 5.3-1 Landscape Buffer Setbacks
SFR MFR COM EMP
SFR 0* 30 30 40
MFR 30 0 20 20
COM 30 20 0 20
EMP 40 20 20 0
SFR - Single Family Residential
MFR - Multi Family Residential
COM - Commercial
EMP - Employment
* A 30 foot buffer may be required adjacent to
rural and large lot suburban zoning districts.
7. Landscape Street Setbacks.
a. For all residential subdivision, multifamily
and non-residential development
a thirty foot (30’) wide landsc aped
setback shall be provided along all
abutting arterial roadways with breaks
for approved access points. A minimum
fifteen foot (15’) wide landsc ape
setback shall be planted along collector
roadways.
8. Landscape Installation. All landscaping
shall be installed in accordance with
accepted planting procedures. If after
three (3) years following installation,
plant materials have not formed an
effective screen, or if an effective screen
is not maintained, the Planning
Administrator may require that another
type of screen be added or additional
plantings be installed. Landscaped areas
shall require protection from vehicular
encroachment. The Planning
Administrator or his or her designee shall
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 8
inspect all landscaping and no Certificate
of Occupancy or similar authorization will
be issued unless the landscaping meets
the requirements herein provided.
General. All required landscaping
materials shall be in place prior to the
time of issuance of a final Certificate of
Occupancy, weather permitting. In
periods of adverse weather conditions, a
temporary Certificate of Occupancy may
be issued, subject to the posting of a cash
escrow or irrevocable letter of credit in an
amount equal to one and one-half (1-
1/2) times the estimated cost of the
landscaping, with said estimated cost to
be certified by a landscaping provider.
The cash escrow or irrevocable letter of
credit may be forfeited if the landscaping
is not completed within one (1) year after
the issuance of the temporary Certificate
of Occupancy. Forfeiture of any cash
escrow or irrevocable letter of credit shall
not relieve the owner of the responsibility
to complete the required landscaping.
a. Trees and shrubs shall be adequately
supported and staked when planted.
No trees shall be planted under
overhead service wires if their mature
heights will interfere with the wires.
b. All landscaped areas shall be finished
with a natural topping material which
may include, but is not limited to, the
following: turf, groundcover planting,
decomposed granite two inches (2”)
minimum in depth, river run rock, or
expanded shale.
c. Trees shall not be planted under
outdoor lighting structures. Landscape
plant material shall be arranged in a
manner not to obstruct security
lighting. Where a conflict arises
between landscape elements required
under this Ordinance and security
lighting, the Planning Administrator
shall make the final determination.
d. Plant material installed within the site
triangle at roadway intersections shall
not exceed twenty-four inc hes (24”) in
height at maturity. Tree canopy height
shall not be less than six feet (6’). The
site triangle at an intersection shall be
calculated according to Chapter 9,
Section 9.2 of the Maricopa County
Department of Transportation Roadway
Design Manual. The Town of Queen
Creek’s offic ial referenc e for roadway
design standards.
e. All plant materials used in public right -
of-way, medians, or parking lot islands
shall come from the Arizona Municipal
Water Users Association Low Water Use
Plant List.
9. Site Stabilizations. The applicant shall
revegetate the graded and / or disturbed
land where any construction activity has
occurred in order to prevent erosion by
water, wind or subsidence, as follows:
a. Revegetate the construction area with
native species or with revegetation
seed mixes. Revegetative native plants
include: desert trees, desert shrubs and
grasses, large specimen cacti or
seeding of the same.
b. Weedy species such as Russian Thistle,
Telegraph Plant, Desert Broom,
Pigweed or Burrow Bush shall be
weeded to prevent growth and spread
of such species onto adjacent
properties.
c. Slopes steeper than three to one (3:1),
where revegetation and plant material
alone will not hold soil in place, shall be
held in place with turf, retaining walls,
rip-rap, or shall be developed with a
system of terraces or diversions to
ensure slope stability, control surface
water runoff and encourage rapid
vegetation establishment, or any
method deemed appropriate by the
Town.
10. Dust Control. During grading and until
revegetation is established, the applicant
shall use the following methods to reduce
and mitigate the production of dust and
such methods shall be addressed in the
grading permit prior to commencement
of construction.
a. Dust palliative approved by Town
Engineer;
b. Watering during grading;
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 9
c. Use of decomposed granite or other
decorative landscape material as a
groundcover for non-slope and
vehicular/pedestrian areas; and,
d. The use of motor oil, oil treatment,
sodium chloride, or any other palliative
method that cause adverse effects on
human, animal or plant life or that may
cause property damage shall be
prohibited.
E. Prohibited Plants. The “Swan Hill Olive” and
the “Wilson Hill Olive” varieties may be
used due to their non-flowering non-pollen
status and are exempt from the prohibited
plants list:
1. Olive Trees (Olea Europaea) are
prohibited for reasons of their profuse
production of allergy producing pollen
except for the two (2) varieties as
mentioned above;
2. Fountain Grass (Pennisetum Setaceum)
is prohibited as a defined weed with the
potential to spread throughout the Town
and become a fire hazard;
3. Common Bermuda grass (Cynodon
Dactilon) is prohibited as a defined weed
and for its profuse production of allergy
producing pollen. (For clarification
purposes, non-allergenic species are
permissible as approved by the Town);
and,
4. Mulberry Trees (Morus) are prohibited as
noxious pollen producers.
F. Street Rights-Of Way Landscaping.
1. Street trees and other plant materials
(i.e. shrubs, ground cover, accent
plantings, etc.) shall be planted within all
street right-of-ways in all zoning districts.
2. Trees shall not be planted in planting
strips that are less than five (5) feet wide,
measured from the back of curb to the
edge of the adjacent sidewalk.
3. All parcels located at the intersection of
an arterial intersection, shall observe a
buffer setback pursuant to Table 5.3-1.
Said buffer shall not be encumbered by
parking areas, buildings or other
improvements. The Planning
Administrator or his or her designee shall
have the authority to impose special
conditions or guidelines on the
development of property at arterial
intersections that affect the following
design elements in order to achieve the
purposes of this section:
a. Landscape architecture;
b. Building architecture;
c. Building orientation;
d. Vehicular ingress, egress, and
circulation;
e. Walls and screening devices; and,
f. Building setbacks.
4. Street trees shall be spaced on each side
of the street and within medians where
applicable, in order to form a pleasant
experience for motorists, pedestrians,
and building occupants, as applicable.
5. Planting shall be spaced at regular
intervals without regard to property lines
in order to present a balanced
appearance. Required spacing shall be
not greater than thirty feet (30’) or
fraction thereof to achieve a tree-lined
street appearance. Linear planting is
preferred.
6. Trees for an entire block shall be planted
at the same time.
7. Up to two (2) different species of trees
may be planted alternately where an
entire block is developed.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 10
8. A minimum of six (6) shrubs are required
per every one (1) tree planted.
9. The entire area of the right-of-way,
between the property line and back of
curb (BOC) and / or pavement except for
approved driveways, walkways and bike
paths, shall be landscaped.
G. Parking Lot Landscaping. Parking lots shall
be landscaped in accordance with the
requirements of Section 5.6 of this
Ordinance.
H. Retention Basin Landscaping and Design
Requirements.
1. All private retention basins in single
residence, duplex, multifamily,
commercial, or industrial projects, or
districts shall be landscaped. Such basins
shall not exceed more than fifty percent
(50%) of the linear street frontage.
2. Retention basins shall be contoured and
designed as an integral part of any
frontage landscaping and shall not take
on the appearance of a ditch or basin.
I. Native Plant Preservation and Landscape
Plan Standards.
1. Purpose. The purpose of these standards
is to protect native plants and to ensure
appropriate re-vegetation for all
development projects. The standards
provide for in-place preservation
protection of existing plants and the
transplanting of native plant materials
indigenous to the area such as: varieties
of Acacia, Mesquite and Cercidium trees,
Ocotillo, Cholla, Bursage and mixed Palo
Verdi-Cacti Community, Hedge Hog
Cactus and Barrel Cactus, shrubbery and
succulents typical of the Sonoran Desert
Region. These standards protect the
public health, safety and general welfare
by:
a. Preserving organic and inorganic
characteristics of the Sonoran Desert
Region;
b. Preserving desert wildlife habitats and
food sources;
c. Requiring protection re-vegetation of
native plants, disturbed during land
development;
d. Encouraging the use of native plants
that are drought tolerant and require
low maintenance and minima l
groundwater after establishment; and,
e. Reducing the potential for erosion by
water, wind, or subsidence.
2. Standards.
a. All existing native plants shall be
preserved in their original location
except within those areas permitted to
be graded. Large and / or unique
native plants within areas proposed for
grading shall be preserved in place.
b. In no case, shall native plants be
removed, destroyed, or relocated from
an existing stand of native plants which
is to be preserved in place.
c. Protected native plants (as defined by
the Arizona Department of Agriculture)
determined to be transplantable shall
be salvaged and relocated on-site when
they are located within areas
designated to be graded. Salvaged
plants may be maintained in a
temporary nursery pending relocation
in accordance with the approved
landscape plan. All temporary
nurseries shall:
1) Provide automatic drip irrigation
system.
2) Provide fertilizer to promote plant
health.
d. Native plants are to be transplanted onsite
and shall be used within those
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 11
areas designated as “c ommon area” or
landscaped area that has been graded
as part of the approved grading plan
and within the front yards of residential
lots.
e. Mistletoe infestations shall be removed
from all salvaged plants prior to
relocation.
3. Determination of Salvageability.
a. Salvageability shall be indicated on the
Landscape Plan submittal during the
site plan process.
b. All plants rec eiving a “high” rating shall
be preserved in place or salvaged and
transplanted within on-site landscaped
areas. All “medium” and “low” rated
plants shall be placed in a salvage pool
from which fifty percent (50%) of the
plants shall be used on site or replaced
on a two to one (2:1) basis with nursery
stock.
High: A “high” rating will be assigned
to plants meeting the following criteria:
1) Plant health is good to excellent with
no major infestations or apparent
diseases.
2) Plant age is young enough to suggest
a likely chance of transplant survival.
3) Plant is undamaged and is conducive
to box or space transplanting,
(upright branching).
4) Soils can be excavated, are cohesive,
and seem capable of supporting a
boxed or spaded rootball.
5) Surrounding topography permit s
access with the appropriate
equipment needed to box or spade
and remove the plant.
6) Adjacent plants do not pose a likely
interference with root systems or
interfere with plant removal.
4. Inspections. All protected native plants
scheduled to remain in place or
authorized for destruction, removal or
relocation by the approved Landscape
Plan shall be tagged and numbered prior
to an on-site inspection by the Planning
Administrator. Salvage operators shall
not commence until the Planning
Administrator has performed an
inspection and given approval to begin
salvage.
5. Tagging shall be completed as outlined
below:
a. Tags shall be color-coded according to
the following schedule so that the
status of each plant may be easily
identified: plants proposed for
destruction shall be tagged with red
plastic tape; plants proposed for
relocation on-site shall be tagged with
blue plastic tape; plants proposed for
relocation to another site shall be
tagged with yellow plastic tape; and
plants proposed to remain in place shall
be tagged with white plastic tape.
b. Tags required by this Section shall be
affixed in a visible location on the plant.
The initial inspection will be performed
once tagging is completed and an
inspection request has been received
by the Planning Administrator.
c. Once affixed, the tags shall not be
removed until the approved Landscape
Plan is implemented and a final
inspection has been performed by the
Planning Administrator.
d. All areas designated to remain as
natural open space shall be fenced or
taped off for protection during the
grubbing and / or grading operation.
The developer is responsible for
maintaining this “no disturbanc e”
boundary line and no plants shall be
salvaged from this protected area.
e. No permit for grubbing or grading of a
site may be issued prior to the
completion of the initial on-site
inspection.
6. For single-family lot development, the
Planning Administrator shall verify limit s
of grading and the relocation of any
salvaged plants in accordance with the
approved site plan.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 12
7. A follow-up inspection shall be performed
which verifies the required on site
relocation of salvaged plants to their new
locations or the holding nursery, and the
required in place preservation of native
plants.
J. Irrigation Guidelines. An irrigation plan is
required and subject to review and
approval by Planning Administrator or his
or her designee.
K. General Landscaping and Site
Maintenance.
1. The applicant, property owner, and / or
subsequent or successor owners and
their agents shall be responsible for
maintenance of landscaping on the
property on a continuing basis for the life
of the development as specified in this
Section. All required landscaping shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly manner
at all times. This shall include, but not be
limited to, mowing, edging, pruning,
fertilizing, watering, weeding, and other
activities common to the maintenance of
landscaping.
2. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of
trash, litter, weeds and other materials or
plants not a part of the landscaping.
3. All required plant material shall be
maintained in a healthy, growing
condition as is appropriate for the
season. Plant materials which exhibit
evidence of insect pests, disease, and /
or damage shall be appropriately treated,
and dead plants promptly removed and
replaced within the next planting season
after installation. If replacement is
necessary, all plants and other non-living
landscape materials shall be equal in size,
density and appearance as originally
required at the time of the approval of the
development order or development
permit.
5.4 Open Space
A. All new development in the Town of Queen
Creek shall provide Open Space as
provided herein and designed as required
in Chapter 6 of the Town of Queen Creek
Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Community Trails System. The applicant
shall provide a community open space
network and / or trails system, which
system shall be integrated with the Parks
Trails and Open Space Master Plan, which
is hereby incorporated by this reference as
if set forth in its entirety herein. The trails
shall be maintained by the applicant.
C. Required Open Space. Required open
space shall be reserved for any
development in the zoning districts types
forth in Column “A” of Table 5.4-1, below,
based upon the percentage of net acres in
the proposed development corresponding
the zoning district as set forth in Columns
“B” and “C” in Table 5.4-1 hereto.
Table 5.4-1 Required Open Space
1. Active Open Space. Active Open Space
shall be provided as referred in Table 5.4-
1 may include, but shall not be limited to:
recreational activities as golf courses,
sport courts / fields, picnic areas,
playgrounds and trails as defined in
Section 1.14. Additional active amenities
and reduction in active open space may
be approved by the Planning
Administrator.
2. Passive Open Space. Open Space not
defined as Active maybe considered as
(A)
Zoning District
(B)
Total Open
Space
(C)
Active Open
Space
Rural Residential
(A-1, R1-190, Rl-
145, R1-108)
0% 0%
Estate Residential
(R1-54 R1-43)
0% 0%
Suburban Type-A
(R1-35)
5% 10%
Suburban Type-B
(R1-18, R1-15, R1-
12)
7.5% 15%
Urban Residential
(R1-9, R1-8, R1-7,
R1-6, R1-5, R1-4,
R1-3, MDR, and
HDR)
20% 30%
Commercial
(B1, C-1, C-2, C-3,
MU, and AT )
15% N/A
Industrial (EMP-A
and EMP-B)
10% N/A
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 13
Passive Open Space as defined in Article
1, Section 1.14 of this Ordinance.
D. Open Space Designation. Open space shall
not be further than the following distances
from any lot or, if the proposed
development does not involve a
subdivision, any primary building, and the
entrance allowing people, bikes, or
equestrians to enter into the open space or
view the open space area:
1. One-sixth (1/6th) of a mile or eighthundred
and eighty feet (880’) from
passive open space; and,
2. One-fourth (1/4th) of a mile or onethousand,
three-hundred and twenty feet
(1,320’) from active open space.
E. Open Space Maintenance. Land designated
as open space shall be maintained as open
space and may not be separately sold,
subdivided, or developed except as
provided below.
1. Any areas reserved as open space shall
be indicated on the sketch plan and
preliminary site plan or subdivision plat.
An Open Space Provision and
Maintenance Plan shall be submitted as a
part of the application for development
approval including the project phasing
schedule. This plan shall designate and
indicate the boundaries of all open space
areas required by this Ordinance. The
plan shall:
a. Designate areas to be reserved as open
space. The specific design of open
space areas shall be sensitive to the
physical and design characteristics of
the site;
b. Designate the type of open space which
will be provided; and,
c. Specify the manner in which the open
space shall be perpetuated,
maintained, and administered.
2. The types of open space which may be
provided to satisfy the requirements of
this Ordinance, together with the
maintenance required for each type, are
as follows:
a. Passive open space shall be maintained
in a healthy, neat, clean, and weed-free
condition. Waterways and landscaped
areas lying between public right-of-way
lines and the property, unless such
streets, waterways, or landscaped
areas are expressly designated to be
maintained by a designated
governmental authority shall be freeflowing
and devoid of debris;
b. No specific maintenance is required for
agricultural uses;
c. Active open space areas shall be
accessible to all residents of the
development. Maintenance is limited to
insuring that there exist no hazards,
nuisances, or unhealthy conditions;
and,
d. Greenways are linear green belts
linking residential areas with other
open-space areas. These greenways
may contain bicycle paths, footpaths,
and bridle paths. Connecting
greenways between residences and
recreational areas are encouraged.
Maintenance is limited to a minimum
removal and avoidance of hazards,
nuisances, or unhealthy conditions.
3. All designated open space shall be of
suitable size, location, dimension,
topography and general character and
shall have proper road and / or
pedestrian access, as may be
appropriate, to be usable open space.
a. The minimum dimension for usable
open space shall be thirty feet (30') and
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 14
the minimum area shall be onethousand
(1,000) square feet.
b. Retention areas or detention basins
which are required as part of this
Ordinance or the Subdivision Ordinanc e
shall not qualify as an open space area
unless fifty percent (50%) or more of
the active and usable area is above the
twenty-five (25) year storm and is
designed for multiple area(s) conforms
to the requirements of subsection (1)
and (2) below. This standard shall not
apply to non-residential development s
which shall be permitted to calculate
the retention and detention are as part
of the required open space area.
1) Retention or detention areas shall be
an integral part of the subdivision
either as a greenbelt, or as a single
basin. Retention areas shall be
improved so as to be useable and
accessible. Site and architectural
amenities, such as armadas or
benches shall be provided. “Tot lots”,
playground equipment, and sport
courts equipment shall be elevated
above the bottom of the basin for
uninterrupted use.
2) Retention or detention areas shall be
given a natural character and shall be
constructed of natural materials.
Terracing, berming and contouring is
required in order to naturalize and
enhance the aesthetics of the basin.
Basin slopes shall not exceed a three
to one (3:1) slope.
c. Open space areas shall be landscaped
and the majority of the area shall be
visible from at least one (1) adjoining
arterial, collector, or local street.
F. Preservation of Open Space. Open space
areas shall be maintained so that their use
and enjoyment as open space are not
diminished or destroyed. Open space areas
may be owned, preserved, and maintained
as determined by the Town Council by any
of the following mechanisms or
combinations thereof:
1. Dedication of open space to the Town, an
appropriate public agency, or a non-profit
entity if there is a public or non-profit
agency willing to accept the dedication
and financially capable of maintaining
such open space. The Town may not
accept the dedication of open space
unless such dedication is part of a linked
open space or trails system included in
the Queen Creek Open Space and Trails
Plan. Dedication of Sonoqui and Queen
Creek washes may be required along with
rezoning and / or plat approval if the
Town demonstrates that impacts of the
development on stormwater discharge,
public recreation, or water quality are
proportionate to the amount of wash area
being dedicated. The applicant for plat
approval or rezoning may consent to said
dedication, pursuant to Section 3.4 of this
Ordinance or as a condition of
development approval, and said consent
shall be deemed to waive any and all
constitutional challenges to said
dedication requirement;
2. Common ownership of the open space by
a homeowner’s or neighborho o d
association which assumes full
responsibility for its maintenance except
for lands dedicated to the Town. The
restrictive covenants shall provide that,
in the event that any private owner of
open space fails to maintain same
according to the standards of this
Ordinance, the Town may, following
reasonable notice and demand that
deficiency of maintenance be corrected,
enter the open space to maintain same.
The cost of such maintenance shall be
charged to those persons having the
primary responsibility for maintenance of
the open space and shall constitute a lien
upon the property and buildable lots of
the subdivision or development site; and,
3. Payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of
open space, if:
a. The Town Council establishes an Open
Space Acquisition Trust Fund for the
receipt of fees and other financial
commitments for the acquisition and
development of public open space.
b. The Town Council adopts an ordinance
establishing a fee in lieu or dedication
of land for open space. The ordinance
shall include the following:
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 15
1) The fee amount per residential
dwelling unit or equivalent residential
dwelling unit;
2) Time of determination of the fee;
3) Time of payment of the fee;
4) Form of payment of the fee;
5) Restrictions on use of the fees
collected;
6) Time limit on expenditure of fees;
7) Placement of fees in the Open Space
Acquisition Trust Fund;
8) Maintenance of financial records;
9) Allocation of interest on trust fund
accounts; and,
10) Refund procedures.
G. Open Space Requirements. As a part of any
application for development approval such
as rezoning, site plan, and subdivision and
in conjunction with the required landscape
plans in Section 5.3, the applicant shall
submit an Open Space Provision and
Maintenance Plan meeting the requirement
of subsections A through C herein.
5.5 Lighting
A. Purpose. These provisions are intended to
control the use of outdoor artificial
illuminating devices emitting rays into the
night sky which have a detrimental effect
on the rural atmosphere, astronomic al
observations, and which create glare. It is
the intention of this Ordinance to
encourage good lighting practices such that
lighting systems are designed to conserve
energy and money, to minimize glare, to
protect the use and enjoyment of
surrounding property, and to increasing
nighttime safety, utility, security, and
productivity. The provisions of this Section
are authorized by Section 49-1106, A.R.S.,
which provides that the provisions of
Section 49-1101 through Section 49-1106,
A.R.S., are cumulative and supplemental
and shall not apply within any county, city
or town which by ordinance or resolution
has adopted provisions restricting light
pollution which are equal to or more
stringent than the provisions of this
Section.
B. Conformance with Applicable Codes.
1. All outdoor artificial illuminating devices
shall be installed in conformance with the
provisions of this section and the building
code of the Town of Queen Creek.
2. Where any provisions of the Arizona
Revised Statutes, or any Federal law, or
any companion Ordinance conflicts with
the requirements of this outdoor light
control provision, the most restrictive
shall govern.
3. The provisions of this section are not
intended to prevent the use of any
material or method of installation not
specifically prescribed by this Ordinance.
In considering any variance from the
provisions of this Ordinance, the Board of
Adjustment shall take into consideration
any state of the art technology which is
consistent with the intent of the
Ordinance as new lighting technology
develops which is useful in reducing light
above the horizontal plane.
C. Shielding and Filtration.
1. All non-exempt outdoor lighting fixtures
shall limited to the types of fixtures
specified in Table 5.5-1 of this Ordinanc e
and shall have shielding and filtration as
required by Table 5.5-1 of this Ordinance.
2. Light source locations shall be chosen to
minimize the hazards of glare. The ratio
of spacing to mounting height shall not
exceed a four to one (4:1) ratio.
3. Poles and standards. All poles or
standards used to support outdoor
lighting fixtures shall be anodized or
otherwise coated to minimize glare from
the light source.
D. Illumination. In order to minimize glare and
hazardous conditions, illumination levels
shall not exceed the levels set forth in Table
5.5-2 for any use permitted by this
Ordinance. The maximum illuminat ion
shall be measured at grade at the property
line of the site in accordance with
subsection J of this Section.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 16
Table 5.5-1 Shielding Requirement
Notes:
[1] This is the preferred light source to
minimize undesirable light emission into
the night sky affecting astronomic al
observations.
[2] Metal halide lighting used primarily for
display purposes shall not be used for
security lighting after 11:00 p.m. Metal
halide lamps shall be installed only in
enclosed luminaries.
[3] Outdoor advertising signs of the type
constructed of translucent materials and
wholly illuminated from within, do not
require shielding. Dark backgrounds with
light lettering or symbols are preferred,
to minimize detrimental effects.
[4] For the purposes of this Code, quartz
lamps shall not be considered an
incandescent light source.
[5] Warm white and natural lamps are
preferred to minimize detrimental
effects.
[6] Metal halide fixture lamp types shall be
filtered. “Filtered” means any outdoor
light fixture which has a glass, acrylic or
translucent enclosure of the light source
(quartz glass does not meet this
requirement).
E. Control of Glare.
1. Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated
at a total of more than 1,800 lumens and
all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or
lamps rated at a total of more than 900
lumens shall not emit any direct light
above a horizontal plane through the
lowest direct light emitting part of the
luminaire.
2. Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated
at a total of more than 1,800 lumens and
all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or
lamps rated at a total of more than 900
lumens shall be mounted at a height not
exceeding the value 3 + (D3), where D is
the distance in feet to the nearest
property boundary. The maximum
height of the luminaire shall not exceed
twenty-five feet (25’).
3. Exceptions.
a. Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps
rated at a total of 1,800 lumens or less
and all flood or spot luminaires with a
lamp or lamps rated at 900 lumens or
Table 5.5-2 Illumination Standards
Fixture Lamp
Type
Shielded Filtered
Low Pressure Sodium
[1]
Partially None
High Pressure
Sodium
Fully None
Metal Halide Fully [2, 6] Yes
Fluorescent Partially [3, 5] Yes
Quartz [4] Partially None
Incandescent,
Greater than 150W
Partially None
Incandescent,
150W or Less
No None
Fossil Fuel No None
Glass Tubes filled
with Neon, Argon,
Krypton
No None
Area / Activity Lux
(lx)
Footcandles
(fc)
Residential Zoning Districts
Building Exterior 50 5.0
Front, side, or rear yard (at
property line)
10 1.0
Non-residential zoning districts
Adjoining another nonresidential
zoning district
along major arterial
20 2.0
Adjoining residential zoning
district along major arterial
10 1.0
Adjoining another nonresidential
zoning district
along minor arterial or
collector street
6 0.6
Adjoining another nonresidential
zoning district
along local street
4 0.4
Adjoining another nonresidential
zoning district
along property line
10 0.9
Adjoining residential zoning
district along property line
2 0.2
Outdoor Events
Adjoining non-residential
zoning district
1,00
0
100
Adjoining or within onethousand
feet (1,000’) of
residential zoning district
100 10
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 17
less may be used without restriction to
light distribution or mounting height
except that if any spot or flood
luminaire rated 900 lumens or less is
aimed, directed or focused such as to
cause direct light from the luminaire to
be directed toward residential buildings
on adjacent or nearby land or to create
glare perceptible to persons operating
motor vehicles on public ways, the
luminaire shall be re-directed or its light
output controlled as necessary to
eliminate such conditions.
b. Luminaires used for public roadway
illumination may be installed at a
maximum height of twenty-five feet
(25’) and may be positioned at that
height up to the edge of any bordering
property.
c. All temporary emergency lighting
needed by the Police, the Fire
Departments or other emergenc y
services as well as all vehicular
luminaires shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Ordinance.
F. Prohibitions.
1. Mercury Vapor Fixtures and Lamps. The
installation of any mercury vapor fixture
or lamp for use as outdoor lighting is
prohibited.
2. Certain Other Fixtures and Lamps. The
installation of any low pressure sodium,
high pressure sodium, metal halide,
fluorescent, quartz or incandescent
outdoor lighting fixture or lamp that does
not comply with the shielding
requirements of Table 5.5-1 and the
illumination standards of Table 5.5-2 is
prohibited.
3. Laser Source Light. The use of laser
source light or any similar high-intensity
light for outdoor advertising, when
projected above the horizontal, is
prohibited.
4. Searchlights. The operation of
searchlights for advertising purposes is
prohibited between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and sunrise.
5. Recreational Facilities. No outdoor
recreational facility, public or private,
shall be illuminated by non-conforming
means after 11:00 p.m., unless
otherwise permitted by the Town Council
pursuant to a conditional use permit ,
except to conclude specific recreational
or sporting event or any other activity
conducted at a ball park, outdoor
amphitheater, arena, or similar facility in
progress prior to 11:00 p.m. All
recreational outdoor lighting shall comply
with height restrictions as specified in the
building codes. Outdoor lighting for
open-air arenas primarily used for rodeo
and roping activities, shall be permitted
to a maximum height of thirty feet (30’),
provided shielding and filtration
requirements are met.
6. Outdoor Building or Landscaping
Illumination. The unshielded outdoor
illumination of any building, landscaping,
signing or other purpose is prohibited,
except with incandescent fixtures of 150
Watts or less, or low pressure sodium
fixtures.
G. Exceptions. The following types of light
fixtures shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Section:
1. Non-Conforming Fixtures. All outdoor
light fixtures installed prior to January 1,
1985, those equipped with a permanent
automatic shut-off device may remain
unchanged, except that the subject light
fixtures shall not be operated between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise.
2. Fossil Fuel Light. Light which is produced
directly or indirectly by the combustion of
natural gas or other utility-type fossil
fuels.
3. Low Intensity Fixtures. Any outdoor
lighting fixture which has a maximum
candle power or less than one-thousand
(1,000) candelas is exempt from these
provisions, if equipped with an automatic
device which shuts off the fixture
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
sunrise.
4. Lighting Fixtures in the Downtown Core
(DC) district shall be in conformance
with the DC Design Guidelines and
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 18
Chapter 7 of the Design Standards.
Alternative standards that meet the
intent of the Zoning Ordinance may be
considered by the Planning
Administrator. Where a conflict arises
between the applicability of the Zoning
Ordinance and Design Guidelines in the
DC district, the Planning Administrator
shall make the final determination.
H. Recreational Facilities. Any light source
permitted by this Ordinance may be used
for lighting of outdoor recreational facilities
(public or private), such as, but not limited
to football fields, soccer fields, baseball
fields, softball fields, tennis courts, auto
race-tracks, horse race-tracks or show
arenas, consistent with the illuminat ion
standards specified in Table 5.5-2 herein,
provided all of the following conditions are
met:
1. All fixtures used for event lighting shall
be fully shielded, or shall be designed or
provided with sharp cut-off capability, so
as to minimize up-light, spill-light and
glare.
2. All events shall be scheduled so as to
complete all activity before or as near to
10:30 p.m. as practical, but under no
circumstances shall any illumination of
the playing field, court, or track be
permitted after 11:00 p.m.; except to
conclude a scheduled event that was in
progress before 11:00 p.m. and
circumstances prevented concluding
before 11:00 p.m.
3. The height of such lighting shall be a
maximum of eighty feet (80’).
I. Outdoor Display Lots. Any light source
permitted by this Ordinance may be used
for lighting of outdoor display lots such as,
but not limited to, automobile sales or
rental, recreational vehicle sales or building
material sales, provided all of the following
conditions are met:
1. All fixtures used for display lighting shall
be fully shielded, or be designed or
provided with sharp cut-off capability, so
as to minimize up-light, spill-light and
glare.
2. Display lot lighting shall be turned off
within thirty (30) minutes after the
closing of the business. The full
illumination of the lot may be permitted
after 11:00 p.m., pursuant to a
Temporary Use Permit (see Section 3.6).
Any lighting used after shall be used as
security lighting.
J. Residential Neighborhoods. Adequate
lighting for residential neighborhoods may
be provided for all outdoor amenities areas
used at night (i.e. parks, trails, fields, open
space areas, sport courts, etc). Lighting
sources shall be appropriately shielded
from adjacent residential uses to minimize
any negative impacts. The following
additional standards shall apply:
a. All outdoor amenity area lighting within
100 feet of a residential property line
shall not exceed a maximum height of
fifteen feet (15’);
b. In all other amenity areas lighting shall
not exceed a maximum height of
twenty five feet (25’);
c. All outdoor amenity area lighting shall
be setback from all property lines by a
minimum distanc e of fifteen feet (15’);
d. Submittal Requirements. A Lighting
Plan shall be submitted as part of the
Site Plan or Preliminary Plat application
which details the location and
specifications of all proposed lighting.
An ISO foot-candle diagram shall also
be provided to indicate the level and
extent of proposed lighting.
K. Measurement.
1. Metering Equipment. Lighting levels are
to be measured in foot-candles with a
direct-reading, portable light meter. The
meter typically has a color and cosinecorrected
sensor with multiple scales and
shall read within an accuracy of plus or
minus five percent (5%). It shall have
been tested, calibrated, and certified by
an independent commercial photometric
laboratory or the manufacturer within
one (1) year of its use.
2. Method of Measurement . The meter
sensor shall be mounted not more than
six inches (6”) above ground level in a
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 19
horizontal position. Readings are taken
by qualified personnel only after the cell
has been exposed long enough to provide
a constant reading. Measurements are
made after dark with the light sources in
question on, then with the same sources
off. The difference between the two (2)
readings shall be compared to the
maximum permitted illumination and
property line at ground level. This
procedure eliminates the effects of
moonlight and other ambient light
sources. Where light patterns overlap,
their total intensity shall be the sum of
their individual intensities.
5.6 Parking and Loading Standards
A. Off-Street Parking.
1. Purpose. This section sets minimum
standards for off-street requirements for
new construction and expansion of or
changes to existing uses.
2. Uses Not Identified. The Planning
Administrator shall determine the parking
requirement for uses which do not
correspond to the categories listed in
Table 5.6-2. In such instances, the
applicant shall provide adequate
information by which the proposal can be
reviewed, which includes but may not
necessarily be limited to the following:
a. Type of uses;
b. Number of employees;
c. Building design capacity;
d. Square feet of sales area and service
area;
e. Parking spaces proposed on-site;
f. Parking spaces provided elsewhere;
and
g. Hours of operation.
3. Exceptions
a. Parking and loading standards in the
Downtown Core (DC) district shall be
in conformance with the DC Design
Guidelines and Chapter 7 of the Design
Standards. Alternative parking
solutions such as shared parking
models, parking reductions, and street
parking may be considered by the
Planning Administrator in the DC
District. Where a conflict arises
between the applicability of the Zoning
Ordinance and Design Guidelines in
the DC district, the Planning
Administrator shall make the final
determination.
4. Multiple Uses. In those instances, where
there is clearly identified accessory or
multiple uses within a structure or
multiple structures, the minimum
standards shall apply to each use or
structure, resulting in a total parking
requirement when summed, except as
provided in paragraph 4, Shared Parking
Facilities.
5. Shared Parking Facilities. Off-street
parking requirements of a given use may
be met with off-site, off-street parking
facilities of another use when the
following conditions are met:
a. The off-site, off-street parking facilities
are within five-hundred feet (500’) of
the property;
b. The parking demands of the individual
uses, as determined by the Planning
Administrator based upon minimum
off-street parking requirements, are
such that the total parking demand of
all the uses at any one time is less than
the total parking stalls required; and,
c. A written agreement between the
owners and lessees is executed for a
minimum of twenty years, approved by
the Planning Administrator, recorded
with title to the land, and a copy
maintained in the project file. Should
the lease expire or otherwise terminate,
the use for which the off-site parking
was provided shall be considered
nonconforming and any and all
approvals, including Conditional Use
Permits, shall be subject to revocation.
Continuation or expansion of the use
shall be prohibited unless the use is
brought into compliance with the
parking regulations of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 20
d. Developments which contain a mix of
uses on the same parcel requesting to
reduce the amount of required parking
shall submit a shared parking analysis
to the Town that clearly demonstrates
the feasibility of shared parking.
e. In C-1, C-2, and NC Zoning Districts
the parking design standards of
Section 4.9.C.3 shall govern
development in order to encourage
and protect pedestrian activity.
f. In EMP-A and EMP-B Zoning Districts,
parking may be allowed in front of the
building
g. Where a nonresidential use in the
Downtown Core District cannot
provide all the required parking
spaces on site, off-site parking may
be approved by the Planning
Administrator that demonstrates the
following through documentation as
part of a development submittal:
i. Location.
ii. Safety.
iii. Pedestrian Circulation.
iv. Evidence of adequate total
parking.
v. Cross-access easements and/or
written agreements between
owners and lessees.
vi. All state and federal accessibility
requirements shall be met.
vii. Any other applicable information
of support.
6. Location. The parking area shall be
provided on the same parcel as the
principal structure wherever practicable.
In non-residential zoning districts, the
parking may be up to five-hundred feet
(500’) from the property, but shall be
located within a zoning district which
allows business, commercial, or industrial
parking. Parking spaces shall not be
located in the front yard setback, or a
side yard setback when adjacent to a
residential zoning district.
7. Parking Lot Landscaping. The minimum
landscaping requirements are intended to
alleviate adverse visual and
environmental effects associated with
parking facilities for all development
except single family detached and duplex
dwellings including climate modification.
The application of these standards will
improve the compatibility and the
appearance of such facilities, impleme nt
the public realm goals of the General
Plan, provide relief from unshaded paved
areas, reduce heat gain, and minimize
glare and lights associated with parking
areas. The following landscaping
standards shall apply:
a. The interior area of a parking facility is
defined as the perimeter of the curbs or
the edge of pavement. All landscaped
areas shall be located and designed in
such a manner as to break up the
expanse of paving and better define
parking lot circulation. Where possible,
existing large trees shall be maintained.
All required parking area landscaping
shall be in addition to required
perimeter and street frontage
landscaping;
b. All landscape areas shall provide
raised concrete curbing to define and
protect all landscaping.
c. Interior parking lot islands shall be a
minimum of ten feet (10') in width and
shall run the entire length of the
parking stall and shall be provided a
minimum of one (1) every twelve (12)
parking spaces.
d. A minimum of one (1) tree and
sufficient coverage of shrubs and
ground cover shall be provided for
eac h 10’ x 20’ landsc ape island. All
trees at planting shall be a minimum
size of fifteen (15) gallons and shrubs
one (1) gallon.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 21
e. Plant Materials. All plants used in
parking lot islands shall be from the
AZDWR list of low water use plants and
in accordance with the requirements of
Section 5.3 of this Ordinance. The
foliage crown of trees shall not be used
in calculating this percentage. The
remaining twenty-five percent (25%) of
the required landscape area may be
covered with inorganic materials such
as decomposed granite (minus,
screened size) of either a desert or
Madison Gold or similar color.
f. Use of Landscape Paving Material.
Pedestrian crossing areas in parking
lots (especially near building areas)
shall be constructed of alternative
materials such as, but not limited to,
surface pavers, such as brick, stone
blocks, interlocking brick pavers,
stamped concrete or other materials
that form a smooth surface but contrast
with asphalt, as may be approved by
the Planning Administrator;
g. Responsibility of Maintenance. The
maintenance of all required
landscaping, whether located on the
property in question or on adjoining
right-of-way shall be the responsibility
of the property owner. The property
owner is responsible for obtaining
required permits for the location of
landscaping in a public right of way;
h. Submittal Requirements. A Conceptual
Landscape Plan shall be submitted as
part of the Site Plan or Preliminary Plat
application.
8. Parking Lot Lighting Requirements .
Adequate lighting shall be provided for
surface parking facilities used at night.
Lighting sources shall not be directly
visible from adjacent roadways or
residential uses. The following additional
standards shall apply:
a. Lighting Height, Maximum. The
maximum height of required lighting is
fifteen feet (15’). Lighting located near
buildings and adjacent to sidewalks
shall not exceed twelve feet (12’) in
height. This provision does not apply to
lighting on buildings;
b. Lighting Location. Parking area lighting
shall be located in landscaped areas
such as planting islands and buffers;
c. Submittal Requirements. A Lighting
Plan shall be submitted as part of the
Site Plan or Preliminary Plat application
which details the location and
specifications of all lighting provided.
An ISO foot-candle diagram shall also
be provided to indicate the level and
extent of proposed lighting.
9. Vehicle Traffic Areas. All parking and
vehicular traffic surfaces are subject to
the following:
a. All required parking and vehicular
traffic surfaces shall be graded for
drainage and surfaced with concrete or
bituminous pavement in accordance
with Town standards. The Town
Engineer may permit a gravel or similar
surface to be used in overflow parking
areas, low-traffic storage yards, or as
provided in (b) below, if the applicant
establishes that dust in excess of the
amount which would be generated by a
paved surface area will not be
generated. Dust control applications
may be required as determined
necessary by the Town. Overflow
parking means parking in addition to
the minimum required by this
Ordinance, which is designed not to be
used more than ten (10) times per
year. A low-traffic storage yard means
a storage area generating less than 30
ADT (average daily trips);
b. All surfaces shall be maintained in
sound condition and free of weeds,
dust, trash, and debris. All vehicular
traffic areas shall meet or exceed
construction standards established by
the Town Engineer;
c. A temporary parking lot shall be used
only with an approved site plan.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 22
Temporary surface parking lots are
parking areas which serve as a
transitional use of a property during
development and shall not be used for
more than twenty-four (24) months
from issuance of a Town permit .
Temporary parking lots shall be a
permitted use in the non-residential
zoning districts and shall be subject to
site plan review as required in Section
3.3 of this Ordinance. Temporary
parking lots shall be hard surfaced or
gravel be applied with a Town approved
dust control agent and shall be graded
for drainage and maintained in sound
condition and free of weeds, dust , trash
and debris. Temporary parking lots
shall be subject to all landscaping and
screening requirements;
d. Vehicular traffic areas shall be screened
in order to minimize disturbance to
occupants of adjacent residential
buildings. For each boundary line
directly abutting a residential zone or
use, a decorative solid wall or fence at
least three feet (3’) in height shall be
erected, in accordance with Section 5.2
of this Ordinance.
e. All entrances and exits to vehicular
traffic areas shall be located and
constructed to minimize traffic
congestion on the public street system.
Wheel or bumper guards shall be
provided, located, and arranged so that
no part of any parked vehicle will
extend beyond the boundaries of the
parking area.
f. All above-grade equipment at gasoline
service stations or public garages for
the service of gasoline, oil, air, or water
shall be completely screened from
public view and no closer than ten feet
(10’) to any public right-of-way.
10. Measurement. Parking Stall and Aisle
Dimensions shall comply with the
following standards:
a. Off-street parking areas shall be
surfaced with permanent pavement and
striped as required herein;
b. Except where a wall is required, a
minimum six inch (6”) high vertical
concrete curb shall be constructed so
that no part of a vehicle extends
beyond the property line;
c. Parking spaces and driveways shall be
arranged to require ingress and egress
from the lot to a street by forward
motion of the vehicle; and,
d. Minimum dimensions of parking spaces
(other than compact car parking
spaces) and maneuvering area shall be
as set forth in Table 5.6-2.
Table 5.6-2 Parking Aisle Dimensions
Parking
Angle
Stall
Width
Stall
Depth
One-
Way
Aisle
Width
Two-
Way
Aisle
Width
0º 22’ 10’ 12’ 20’
45º 10’ 20’ 13’ 24’
60º 10’ 21’ 18’ 24’
70º 10’ 21’ 19’ 24’
90º 10’ 20’ 24’ 24’
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 23
Table 5.6-3 Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Categories Specific Uses Minimum Vehicle Spaces
Minimum Bicycle
Spaces
Residential
Group Living
Assisted Living Facilities;
Treatment Facility
0.3 per room N/A
Household Living
Bed and Breakfast
1 per guest room plus 2
spaces for owner’s portion
N/A
Rooming/Board House 1 per room N/A
Dormitories/ Fraternities/
Sororities
1 per 2 beds 0.5 per unit
Single-Family and Duplex
2 accessible (non-tandem)
spaces per dwelling unit
N/A
Elderly housing 1 per three units N/A
All Other Dwelling Units 1 per unit N/A
Lodging
Hotels/Motels; Bed and Breakfast
Inn
1 per room + 1 per 800 sf of
public meeting area and
restaurant space
N/A
Multi-Family
Complex
One Bedroom 1.5 per unit .2 per unit
Two Bedroom 2 per unit .5 per unit
Three or more bedrooms
2.5 per unit and - .5 per
additional bedroom
.75 per unit
Institutional
Colleges All 1 per 4 students
1 per 5 vehicle
spaces
Community Services All 1.5 per 250 sf GFA
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces
Cultural
Museums, Art Galleries, Opera
Houses, Libraries
1.5 per 1,000 sf GFA 2 per 1,000 sf GFA
Day Care
Limited Day Care and General
Day Care (see Appendix C)
1 per 375 sf GFA N/A
Hospital or Medical
Clinic
All
1 per 200 sf + 1 space per
physician or 3 spaces per bed
.2 per 1,000 sf GFA
Parks and Open
Space
All Other
20 per athletic field or ball
diamond or 1 per 4 seats,
whichever is more
1 per 10 vehicle
spaces
Public Safety
Service
All
1 per employee + 1 per each
3 volunteer personnel on
normal shift + 1 per 200 sf
usable office space
2% of number of
parking spaces
Religious Assembly All 1 per 8 seats N/A
Schools
Elementary and Junior Highs
1 per classroom +
1 per 200 sf office space
1 per 10 students
High Schools 1 per 200 sf 1 per 20 students
Schools of Private Instruction 1 per 200 sf 1 per 10 students
Utilities, Basic All 1 per employee N/A
Commercial
Office
General 1 per 350 sf GFA
1 per 30 vehicle
spaces, 4 space
minimum
Medical 1 per 200 sf GFA
1 per 30 vehicle
spaces, 4 space
minimum
Recreation and
Entertainment
Indoor
Assembly/Auditorium
1 per 6 seats or 1 per 50 sf of
GFA if no permanent seats
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces
Amusement Center, Skating Rink,
and Dance Hall
1 per 250 sf of GFA
1 per 10 vehicle
spaces
Bowling Alley 2 per lane
1 per 10 vehicle
spaces
Clubs/Lodges
1 per 3 persons or 1 per 200
sf whichever greater
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces
Funeral Home/
Mortuary/Crematorium
1 per 4 seats N/A
Health Club/Fitness Center
10 spaces + 1 per 200 sf in
excess of 1,000 sf
1 per 10 vehicle
spaces
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 24
Table 5.6-3 Off-Street Parking Requirements (Continued)
Use Categories Specific Uses Minimum Vehicle Spaces
Minimum Bicycle
Spaces
Commercial (continued)
Recreation and
Entertainment
Outdoor
All Other Outdoor Recreation,
including amusement parks,
miniature golf, batting ranges,
and water slides
1 per 600 sf outdoor
recreation area
N/A
Driving Range 1 per 2 tees N/A
Golf Course
4 per hole + 1 per 200 sf for
clubhouse
N/A
Retail Sales and
Service
General 1 per 300 sf GFA
1 per 10 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Appliance sales/ repair shops,
nurseries, green houses and
similar uses
1 per 300 sf GFA
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Bank
1 per 250 sf GFA, plus
required stacking spaces for
drive-thru (if applicable)
1 per 30 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Bars/Nightclubs 1 per 2 seats
1 per 10 vehicle
spaces
Convenience Store 6 per 1,000 sf GFA
1 per 10 vehicle
spaces
Drive-In Cleaners; Drive-In Liquor 1 per 250 sf GFA N/A
Fuel: full-service with
repair/service facility; full service
no repair/service facility; selfservice
1.5 per 1,000 sf GFA N/A
Other Service Business, Stand-
Alone (e.g. salon/barber, frozen
food lockers, laundries, and
similar uses)
1 per 300 sf GFA
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Outdoor Sales (e.g. plant
nurseries, building supplies) and
Vehicle Sales, (including
Recreational Vehicles/Boats)
1 per 375 sf GFA of sales and
service building
N/A
Restaurants
1 per 75 sf GFA + 1 per 400
sf outdoor dining area
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Restaurant with Drive-In Facilities
1 per 50 sf GFA of patron
seating area + 1 per 200 sf
office/food prep. area
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces
Shopping Centers less than
50,000 sf
3 per 1,000 GFA
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Swap meets/ farmer’s markets
1 per 100 sf gross public sales
area
N/A
Supermarkets, department and
hardware stores, book stores, big
box stores and similar uses
greater than 50,000 sf
1 per 300 sf GFA
1 per 10 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Theaters 1 per 6 seats
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Industrial
Industrial
Manufacturing and Production,
Warehouse and Freight
Movement, Wholesales Sales
0.3 per employee + 1 space
per 1,000 sf GFA to 10,000 sf,
then 1 space for each 10,000
sf over
1 per 20 vehicle
spaces; 4 space
minimum
Waste-Related Uses All 1 per employee N/A
Other
Agriculture All None N/A
Aviation, Surface
Passenger
Terminals
All
1 per employee + spaces
required to satisfy projected
peak parking needs
N/A
Telecommunication
Facilities
All 1 per service employee N/A
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 25
11. Minimum Amounts. Table 5.6-3
establishes the minimum numbers of
parking spaces required and the
maximum number of parking spaces
permitted for the uses indicated. For the
purposes of parking calculations, the
gross area of any parking garage within a
building shall not be included within the
Gross Floor Area of the building.
12. Exceptions. In unusual circumstances,
the standard parking requirement may
not be appropriate. The Planning
Administrator shall have the authority to
vary the parking requirement, either
upward or downward by up to ten percent
(10%) of the required number of vehicle
parking or bicycle parking.
13. Accessible Parking.
a. Accessible parking spaces shall be a
minimum of sixteen feet by twenty feet
(16’ X 20’) for a single spac e [eleven
feet (11’) in width in addition to a five
foot (5’) ac c ess aisle]; or twenty-seven
feet by twenty feet (27’ X 20’) for a
double space [eleven feet in width for
eac h spac e with a five foot (5’) ac c ess
aisle between the spaces].
b. All off-street parking areas other than
for single family dwellings shall include
reserved spaces for use by disabled
persons. The Town of Queen Creek
requires accessible parking spaces in
accord with the ADA (American with
Disabilities Ac t) “Universal Parking
Spac e” design, as may be amende d.
The number of spaces provided shall be
in accordance with Table 5.6-4.
A – Width of Stall: Eleven feet (11’)
B – Width of Access Aisle: Five feet (5’)
C – Length of Space: Twenty feet (20’)
D – Overall With of Single Space: Sixteen feet (16’)
E – Overall Width of Double Space: Twenty-seven feet (27’)
Table 5.6-4 Accessible Parking Spaces Required
14. Existing Parking Lots. Parking areas
provided before the effective date of this
Section may combine and convert
existing parking spaces to accessible
parking spaces and associated access
aisles, provided that the overall reduction
in total parking spaces availability shall
not exceed five percent (5%) below the
quantity of off-street parking spaces
otherwise required by this Ordinance.
15. Large Vehicle Parking. Certain uses may
be required to install larger customer
parking spaces for trucks and trucks
hauling equipment. A maximum of
twenty percent (20%) of the total
required parking may be used to meet
large vehicle parking requirement s.
Minimum dimension standards for large
vehicles shall be thirty-five feet by twelve
feet (35’ x 12’). Said spac es shall be
clearly marked for customer use.
Applicants shall be required to
differentiate on applications the type of
customer parking provided.
16. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking
space shall be connected with a public
street by a paved driveway which affords
safe and convenient ingress and egress.
The minimum width of driveways shall be
twenty feet (20’) if ingress and egress are
the same. If ingress and egress are
separate drives, then the maximum
width shall be twelve feet (12’).
Total Number of
Spaces
Number of Accessible
Spaces Required
1-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
101-150 5
151-200 6
201-300 7
301-400 8
401-500 9
501-1,000 2% of total
1,001 and more
20 plus 1 for each 100
over 1,000
C
D
C
E
A B A B A
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 26
17. Compact Parking Allowance. Where there
is less than one-hundred (100) parking
spaces, a compact parking allowance
may be permitted where, up to ten
percent (10%) of the required total
number of parking spaces may be
designated as compact parking where
there is more than one-hundred (100)
parking spaces, up to twenty percent
(20%) may be designated as compact
parking.
a. The minimum size for a compact
parking space shall be eight one-half
feet by sixteen feet (8 1/2’ x 16’).
b. All compact parking spaces are to
include a sign or pavement marking.
c. No more than eight (8) compact spaces
shall be located within a single cluster.
A minimum radius of sixty feet (60’)
shall separate multiple clusters.
18. Continuation of Use. The area reserved
for off-street parking or loading in
accordance with the requirements of this
Ordinance shall not be reduced in area or
changed to any other use unless the
permitted use which it serves is
discontinued or modified, except where
equivalent parking or loading space is
provided. Street parking allowed
adjacent to any land use shall not reduce
the off-street parking requirements.
19. Parking or Storage of Large Vehicles.
a. Parking or Storage of these classes of
vehicles is permitted as follows:
1) In any Residential zone while
actively loading or unloading for a
time period not to exceed forty-eight
(48) hours;
2) In R1-190, R1-145, and R1-108
Residential Districts; and,
3) In R1-54 and R1-43 Residential
Districts consisting of two (2) or
more contiguous acres.
b. Parking or Storage of these classes of
vehicles is prohibited as follows:
1) In Residential Districts R1-54, R1-
43, R1-35, R1-18, R1-15, R1-12, R1-
9, R1-8, R1-7, R1-6, R1-4, R1-3 and
R1-2; and,
2) Closer than ten feet (10’) from any
property line in R1-190, R1-145, R1-
108, R1-54 and R1-43 Residential
Districts.
c. Where permitted in R1-190, R1-145,
R1-108, R1-54 and R1-43 Residential
Districts, large vehicles shall be parked
behind the back wall of the primary
residence and no closer than ten feet
(10’) from any property line.
d. Vacant lots or open area in any
Residential District. The use of vacant
lots or open land area in any Residential
District for parking of customer or
employee passenger vehicles or large
vehicles is prohibited.
e. Inoperable vehicles shall be stored only
in conjunction with an industrial use
completely screened from view of a
public street.
f. Bus parking. Buses shall not be parked
in the front yard of any Residential
District.
20. Parking or Storage of Recreational
Vehicles
a. Such vehicles may be parked for short -
term purposes in any district for
purposes of loading and unloading.
b. For long-term purposes, these types of
vehicles shall be parked behind the
minimum front yard setback required
by the zoning district and where
possible, screened through the use of
masonry fence walls, solid gates, and
landscaping.
1) In the R1-18 and all smaller lot
residential Zoning Districts, not more
than one (1) may be parked for
short-term or long-term purposes at
any one time and such vehicle shall
not be parked in front of the home
during long-term storage.
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 27
2) In the R1-35 and all larger lot
residential Zoning Districts, such
vehicle may be parked in front of the
home during long-term storage,
provided it is not parked in the
required front setback.
*Home Owners Associations may
have additional requirements.
21. Parking or Storage of Boats or Trailers.
a. Temporary parking may be permitted
in any single-family residential zoning
district while actively loading or
unloading for a time period not to
exceed forty-eight (48) hours;
b. Long-term parking or storage is
permitted in residential districts as
follows:
1) Shall be parked behind the front yard
setback and where possible,
screened through the use of masonry
fence walls, solid gates, and
landscaping.
*Home Owners Associations may
have additional requirements.
B. Loading.
1. There shall be provided on the same lot
with each commercial and industrial
building or structure adequate space for
off-street loading, unloading and the
maneuvering of commercial vehicles.
There shall be no loading or unloading of
commercial vehicles on the public street.
Off-street maneuvering space shall be
provided so that no backing onto or from
a public street is required. All loading and
maneuvering areas shall:
a. Be surfaced with hard, impervious
surface dustless material;
b. Be properly drained;
c. Be designed with regard to pedestrian
safety;
d. Have direct access to public streets;
e. Shall be screened from adjacent
residentially zoned property as
provided in Section 5.3 of this
Ordinance; and,
f. No loading docks, service bays, or
service windows shall be visible from an
arterial or collector right-of-way.
2. Off-street loading spaces shall be not less
than twelve feet (12’) in width and thirtyfive
feet (35’) in length, exclusive of
ARTICLE 5 – SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 5 - Page 28
access aisles and maneuvering space.
3. A Multi-Family Residential, Commerc ial
or Industrial structure or use (except
self-service storage warehouses) that
has an aggregate gross floor area of
25,000 square feet or more shall provide
off-street truck loading or unloading
berths in accordance with Table 5.6-6.
Table 5.6-6 Off-Street Loading Requirements
Notes:
Off-street loading facilities required shall be on
the same lot or parcel of land as the structure
they are intended to serve. In no case shall the
required off-street loading space be part of the
area to satisfy the off-street parking
requirements of this Ordinance.
Square Feet of Aggregate
Gross Floor Area Devoted
to Such Use:
Required
Number of
Berths
25,000-40,000 Sq. Ft 1
40,001-100,000 Sq. Ft 2
100,001-160,000 Sq. Ft 3
160,001-240,000 Sq. Ft 4
240,001-320,000 Sq. Ft 5
320,001-400,000 Sq. Ft 6
400,001-490,000 Sq. Ft 7
For Each Additional
100,000 Sq. Ft
+1
Zoning Ordinance
Article 6.0
Supplemental Use Regulations
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 1
6.0 Supplemental Use Regulations
Section Content Page
6.1 Accessory Buildings and Uses 1
6.2 Animal Regulations 3
6.3 Group Residential Facilities 6
6.4 Home-Based Occupations 7
6.5 In-Vehicle Service Facilities 8
6.6 Massage Establishments 10
6.7 Sexually Oriented Businesses 12
6.8 Large Format Retail 14
6.9 Wireless Communications 19
6.10 Non-Chartered Financial Institutions 28
6.11 Medical Marijuana 28
6.1 Accessory Buildings and Uses
A. General Standards.
1. Accessory buildings or uses shall not be
constructed or established on a lot until
construction of the principal building has
been substantially commenced or the
primary use established. Accessory
buildings shall not be used for dwelling
purposes, except as provided in
subsection B of this Section.
2. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the
height regulations of the zoning district
within any part of the buildable lot area,
and shall not exceed fifteen feet (15’) in
height in any required yard.
3. Detached accessory buildings shall not be
located in the required front yard
setback. Detached accessory buildings
may be built in the required rear yard
setback area, but such accessory
buildings shall not occupy more than
thirty percent (30%) of said area and
shall not be c loser than five feet (5’) from
the rear lot line.
4. Except as permitted per Section 6.2,
Animal Regulations, detached accessory
buildings shall meet the side yard setback
of the corresponding zoning district.
5. Accessory buildings on through lots shall
not be closer to either street than a
distance equal to the required front yard
of such lot.
6. Accessory buildings that are not a
guesthouse as defined by the Queen
Creek Zoning Ordinance shall be allowed
to install an electrical meter. Any
accessory building that is later converted
to a guest house shall be required to
remove the meter and connect to the
electrical service of the main residence
and meet all of the terms and conditions
stated in Section 6.1.B., Accessory
Dwelling Units.
7. Accessory buildings used in conjunction
with a home occupation shall be subject
to the requirements of Section 6.4 Home-
Based Occupations.
8. Covered structures, such as stables, for
the purpose of sheltering animals are
considered detached accessory buildings
and shall conform to standards set forth
in Section 6.2.
B. Detached accessory buildings in Rural
Zoning Districts A-1, AT, R1-190, R1-154,
R1-108, R1-54, R1-43:
1. Detached accessory buildings (dwelling
units, garages, sheds, barns, workshops,
ramadas, pergolas. etc.) are not required
to match the design of the primary
residence. The color(s) of detached
accessory buildings should be consistent
with the primary residence.
2. Shade structures for animals may be
designed with alternative materials and
colors.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 2
*Home Owner’s Assoc iations may have
additional requirements.
C. Detached accessory buildings in Suburban
Zoning Districts R1-35, R1-18, R1-15, R1-
12, and Urban Zoning Districts R1-9, R1-8,
R1-7, R1-6, R1-5, R-4, R-3, and R-2 .
1. Detached accessory buildings (dwelling
units, garages, sheds, workshops,
ramadas, pergolas, etc.) shall be of the
same architectural design, including
building materials, roof type, and color as
the primary residence.
2. Barns and other shade structures for
animals (applicable in R1-35 only) shall
be of the same architectural design,
including building materials, roof type,
and color as the primary residence.
D. Detached Accessory Dwelling Units.
Detached accessory dwelling units, where
permitted pursuant to Section 4.6 of this
Ordinance, shall not be established except
in accordance with the following criteria in
addition to the criteria set forth in Section
6.1.A hereto:
1. Detached accessory dwelling units shall
comply with the minimum yard and
intensity of use regulations as set forth in
Section 4.7 of this Ordinance;
2. Total square footage of a detached
accessory dwelling unit, including
attached garages and covered patios,
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the under roof square footage of the
primary structure;
3. Detached accessory dwelling units shall
be connected to the primary structure's
utilities and meter, subject to the
exceptions set forth in subsection 4
hereto;
4. Detached accessory dwelling units shall
be connected to the primary structure's
central sewer connection, however, a
separate septic system may be allowed;
5. Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall
be permitted per lot; and,
6. Required parking for the detached
accessory dwelling unit shall be located
on the property of the principal structure
in accordance with the standards
established in Section 5.6 of this
Ordinance.
E. Swimming Pools. The following standards
shall apply where swimming pools are
permitted as an accessory use.
1. A swimming pool shall not be located in
the required front yard or a side yard
required for vehicle access, required
landscaped areas or closer than three
feet (3’) from the water’s edge to any lot
line.
2. All fish ponds and other contained bodies
of water, either above or below ground
level, with the container being eighteen
inches (18”) or more in depth and / or
wider than eight feet (8’) at any point
measured in the long axis shall conform
to the location and enclosure
requirements for swimming pools.
3. Swimming pool shall be secured from
unauthorized access by an enclosure as
provided in Town Code Chapter 7.
F. Tennis Courts. Where permitted as an
accessory use, private tennis courts may
be allowed up to 10 feet from side and / or
rear property lines. Tennis court fences or
walls shall not exc eed twelve feet (12’) in
height or six feet (6’) in height in any
required side or rear yard. Any lights for
the tennis court shall be consistent with the
height provisions for accessory uses in
Section 6.1 and shall be shielded so as to
not direct or reflect light on adjoining
properties, pursuant to Section 5.4 of this
Ordinance.
G. Conflict with Other Regulations. If there is
a conflict between the accessory dwelling
unit standards of this Section and any other
requirement of this Ordinance, the
standards of this Section shall control.
Otherwise, accessory dwelling units are
subject to all other applicable requirement s
of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 3
6.2 Animal Regulations
A. Purpose and Scope. The purpose is to
provide rules and regulations for the
keeping of agricultural animals, household
pets and other animals so that these
animals do not become a nuisance, hazard,
and / or health problem to the adjoining
neighbors and the general public.
1. The area used for grazing, exercising, or
training of said animals shall be securely
fenced to prevent the animals from
straying, or a suitable restraint shall be
provided to prevent straying. For lots
less than one (1) acre in size, no
confinement area shall be located in the
front yard, and the grazing of livestock
shall be limited to the side and rear
yards.
2. Fencing shall be required for all
agricultural animals and shall consist of a
view or partial view type fence, pipe rail
or other similar fencing material, or a wall
of sufficient height to restrain the
animal(s). Such fence or wall shall be
maintained and kept in a sound condition
at all times.
3. Where permitted, stables used for the
keeping of agricultural animals shall be
located behind the front face plane of the
principal building or structure. Stables
shall be set back a minimum of five feet
(5’) from the rear property and five feet
(5’) from the side property lines. Stables
shall not exceed the height regulations of
the zoning district in which they are
located. Where allowed to be located
within the setbacks, stable height shall
not exceed fifteen feet (15’). Any
structure one-hundred twenty (120)
square feet or larger is required to obtain
a building permit as established in
Section 3.2 of this Ordinance.
4. Where permitted by Section 4.6 of this
Ordinance, private stables for the
housing of agricultural animals shall be
constructed so as to facilitate
maintenance in a clean and sanitary
condition. Sheet metal buildings are
discouraged. See section 6.1.A of this
ordinance for additional regulations.
5. Corrals, or yard areas used for the
keeping of agricultural animals on lots
less than one (1) acre shall be located
within the rear half of the lot (or side
yard) or parcel and shall be enclosed by
a view or partial view-type fence, pipe rail
or other similar fencing material, or wall
of sufficient height to restrain the
animal(s). Such fence or wall shall be
maintained and kept in a sound condition
at all times.
Table 6.2-1 Permitted Animal Units Allowance
Square Footage
Of Residential Lot
Number of Animal
Units Permitted
35,000 sf to 39,999 sf 2
40,000 sf to 43559 sf 3
43,560 sf and larger* 4
Exceptions:
? One (1) additional animal unit
permitted per 3,000 sf in excess of
one (1) acre (43,560 sf).
? Offspring (under the age of six (6)
months) of animals on-site, do not
count towards the number of
permitted animal units.
? Animals used for educational
purposes as stated in Subsection F do
not count towards the number of
permitted animal units.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 4
One (1) animal unit shall consist of the
following:
? One (1) large livestock animal
(weaned beef animal over six (6)
months of age, horse, llama, alpaca,
mule, burro, ostrich or similar
animals). Swine are only permitted as
part of an educational project as stated
in Section 6.2 of this Ordinance) or;
? Five (5) medium livestock animals
(goats, sheep, or similar animals) or;
? Ten (10) small livestock animals
(rabbits, ducks, chickens, geese, fowl
(excluding pea fowl) or similar
animals.
6. Chickens in smaller lot residential zoning
districts.
a. On each lot that is at least 5,000 square
feet and less than 10,000 square feet in
area, up to 5 total chickens are
permitted.
b. On each lot that is at least 10,000
square feet and less than 35,000
square feet in area, up to 10 total
chickens are permitted.
c. Roosters are only permitted on lots one
(1) acre and larger.
d. Aviaries (i.e. chicken coops) shall be
located within the building envelope or
the rear one-half of the lot. If located
within the rear one-half of the lot, the
aviary shall be a minimum of five (5)
feet from any property line. All aviaries
shall be no taller than six (6) feet in
height and screened by a six (6) foot
tall block wall.
e. The maintaining and keeping of
chickens within the Town shall be
allowed only so long as they not cause,
create, contribute to or become a public
nuisance due to noise, odors, dust,
accumulation of animal waste, garbage,
refuse or other obnoxious or putrescible
material, or for any other like reason.
For purposes of this subsection, a public
nuisance is defined as maintaining any
of the conditions described above to the
extent that one or more adjacent
property owners are restricted in the
use of their property due to the
existence of the public nuisance.
7. Animal wastes shall be stored at least
fifty feet (50’) from any property line,
open space, drainage channel or surface
waters and shall not violate the health
and sanitation provisions of the Town
Code and Maric opa County’s Health Code.
B. Household Pets.
1. It shall be unlawful to keep any
household pet or animal as defined in this
ordinance in such a manner so as to
disturb the peace, comfort or health of
any person residing within the Town. Any
person violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to civil penalties
as determined by the Town municipal
court authority.
a. It shall be unlawful to keep any animal
in such condition that any offensive,
disagreeable or noxious smell or odor
shall arise therefrom to the injury,
annoyance or inconvenience of any
inhabitant of the neighborhood thereof.
b. The keeping of all animals within the
Town is subject to all pertinent
regulations of the town, county and the
state.
c. The premises upon which animals,
livestock and poultry are kept shall
always be sanitary and subject to
inspection and regulation by the Town
Code Enforcement Division.
d. The maintaining and keeping of animals
within the Town shall be allowed only so
long as they not cause, create,
contribute to or become a public
nuisance due to noise, the presence of
flies, mosquitoes, insects, vermin,
rodent harborage, odors, dust,
standing water, accumulation of
manure, garbage, refuse or other
obnoxious or putrescible material, or
for any other like reason. For purposes
of this subsection, public nuisance is
defined as maintaining any of the
conditions described above to the
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 5
extent that one or more adjacent
property owners are restricted in the
use of their property due to the
existence of the public nuisance.
e. This subsection does not apply to areas
properly zoned and actively utilized for
agricultural purposes.
2. The requirements of subsection 1 above
shall not apply to those small animals
kept within a residence including fish,
cats, small birds (parakeets, parrots),
rodents (mice, rats), and reptiles (nonpoisonous
snakes, lizards).
3. Dogs confined in kennels shall not be
kept closer than twenty feet (20') from
the nearest principal residential structure
on an adjacent property. Such permission
may be revoked at any time. Upon
revocation, the owner of the animals(s)
shall have thirty (30) days to move the
animal(s) so that compliance is achieved.
All agreeing parties shall have their
signatures notarized.
C. Kennels. Facilities for the boarding of all
dogs and other household pets shall
conform to the following:
1. No shelter or building used for boarding
of said animals or the storage of feed and
supplies shall be located closer than
thirty feet (30’) from any property line.
2. A conditional use permit is required for
commercial boarding and kennel
facilities.
3. Animal wastes shall not be stored any
closer than fifty feet (50’) from any
property line, open space, drainage
channel, or surface waters.
4. The area used for grazing, exercising or
training of said animals shall be securely
fenced to prevent the animals from
straying or a suitable restraint shall be
provided to prevent straying.
D. Animal Husbandry. Offspring (under the
age of six (6) months of age) of animals
on-site is not counted toward the number
of permitted animal units.
E. Animal Husbandry for Educational
Purposes.
1. Any agricultural/livestock activity or
project conducted primarily for
educational purposes or school credits,
are permitted in the R1-35 and larger
zoning districts.
2. Under this provision, animals utilized in
projects are not counted toward the
number of permitted animal units.
Animals may include swine. The
following criteria shall be met:
a. Active membership must be maintained
and verification of such may be
required upon request; and,
b. A sign designating a given member is in
residence must be posted on the
property at all times any such project
or activity is in progress.
F. Bees and Bee Keeping. The rearing and
breeding of honeybees; apiculture.
1. Definitions. The following definitions shall
apply to the use of bees and bee keeping.
a. "Apiary" means one or more hives or
colonies of bees at one location.
b. "Colony" means the inhabitance of the
hive including the queen, drones,
worker bees and brood.
c. "Hives" means the domicile of bees
including any receptacles or containers
inhabited by bees.
d. "Swarm" means a population of
transient bees that have not
permanently established themselves.
2. Permits. The following shall be required
to obtain a permit for the operation of
apiculture activities:
a. Prior to the keeping of any hive, colony
or apiary within the limits of the town,
all persons shall be required to obtain a
beekeeping license issued by the town
clerk. The application form for the
license shall include the name, address
and telephone number of the person
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 6
seeking the license as well as the name,
address and telephone number of the
property owner. If the applicant is other
than the property owner, then the
application shall also include written
permission of the owner for the use of
the property for keeping a hive, colony
or apiary. The form shall also include a
drawing of the property indicating the
location for the keeping of the hive,
colony or apiary and an
acknowledgment that prior to the
placing of the hive, colony or apiary
upon the property that an adequate
supply of water is available on the
property in close proximity to the hive,
colony or apiary.
b. An annual fee of ten dollars shall be
charged and collected for the issuance
of each license and a separate license
will be required for each separate
location at which bee keeping will
occur.
c. Any receptacle or container inhabited
by bees shall be marked on the outside
in such a manner as to reflect the
license number issued by the town.
d. A permanent and adequate water
supply must be available on the
property at all times within thirty feet
of the hive, colony or apiary.
e. All hives, colonies and apiaries shall be
located no closer than thirty feet to any
exterior property line.
3. Prohibited Acts. The following are
prohibited:
a. The keeping of bees whether or not for
commercial purposes without first
having obtained a permit.
b. Failure to provide adequate water
supply as set forth subsection d above.
c. Any act or omission the result of which
is to allow bees to be kept in such a
manner so that they present a hazard
to the public health, safety and welfare
of the residents.
4. Exceptions. The provisions of this section
do not apply to any property owner upon
whose property a swarm of transient
bees are attempting to or have
established a domicile.
5. Penalty. Upon conviction of a violation of
any provision of this Section, the first
offense shall be punished as a petty
offense and all subsequent convictions
within a two-year period shall be treated
as class I misdemeanors.
6. Abandoned Hives, Colonies and Apiaries.
Any hive, colony or apiary which does not
contain the marking requirements, the
water supply requirement of Section
6.2.F and for which no permit has been
issued shall be presumed to be
abandoned. The town upon a complaint
may take all action necessary to remove
the abandoned hive, colony or apiary
from the property.
6.3 Group Residential Facilities
A. Purpose.
1. Group Residential Facilities are defined as
set forth in Article 1 of this document.
2. The purpose of these regulations is to
permit persons requiring common
support, care, training, supervision, or
counseling to reside in single family
residential neighborhoods, while
preserving the residential character of
the neighborhood.
3. A complete application shall be submitted
to the Development Services Department
on a form established by the Department .
4. Prior to registration, a request for zoning
confirmation may be submitted to the
Development Services Department to
confirm that the proposed location of the
Group care home is permitted under
Article 4 of this document.
5. Group Residential Facilities are permitted
in all residential zoning districts as
specified in this Ordinance (see table 4.6-
1), subject to final approval by the
Development Services Department. The
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 7
Development Services Department shall
review all applications for Group
Residential Facilities submitted pursuant
to this section. Group Residential
Facilities shall be located, developed, and
operated in compliance with the following
standards:
a. The Group Residential Facility provides
twenty-four-hour assistance to no more
than ten (10) persons. In determining
the number of persons served by a
Group Residential Facility, the following
individuals shall not be counted: the
operator of the facility, members of the
operator's family, and persons
employed at the facility as staff.
b. No signs, graphics, displays, or other
visual means of identifying Group
Residential Facilities shall be visible
from a public street.
c. Large and/or multiple trash receptacles
not usually found in the residential area
in which the Group Residential Facility
is located shall be completely screened
from public view.
d. The Group Residential Facility shall
comply with all applicable Building and
Fire Safety regulations.
e. Group Residential Facilities shall not be
located within one-thousand two
hundred (1,200) feet from any existing
Group Residential Facility. For the
purposes of this Section, all distances
shall be measured from the property
lines of the Group Residential Facility,
including any rights-of-way.
f. All Group Residential Facilities shall be
subject to an annual inspection by the
Town of Queen Creek to ensure
compliance with applicable law,
including the standards set forth in this
Section.
6. Any applicable requirements or
provisions of State law, including but not
limited to any applicable requirement s
set forth in Title 36 of the Arizona Revised
Statutes, shall apply in addition to the
provisions set forth in this Section. To
the extent that applicable State law
conflicts with the provisions of this
Section, such laws shall preempt any
conflicting term, but shall not affect the
remaining provisions of this Section.
6.4 Home-Based Occupations
A. Purpose. A home based occupation is
permitted as an accessory use in all
residential districts. The purpose of the
home based occupation regulations and
performance standards are:
1. To establish criteria for operation of home
based occupation in dwelling units within
residential districts;
2. To ensure that such home based
occupations are compatible with, and do
not have a deleterious effect on nearby
residential properties and uses;
3. To allow residents to use their residences
as places to enhance or fulfill personal
economic goals, under certain specified
standards, and criteria;
4. To enable the fair and consistent
enforcement of home based occupations;
and,
5. To promote and protect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
B. Standards. The following performanc e
standards shall apply to all home-based
occupations in all zoning districts:
1. Obtain permits, per Section 3.2.G and
conforms to applicable town ordinances
and regulations;
2. Home shall continue to be used and
maintained as a residence and maintain
a residential character and appearance;
3. Not more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the gross floor area of the primary
structure to be used for the home based
occupation;
4. No exterior indication of a non-residential
use, other than one (1) non-illuminated
sign not exceeding three (3) square feet
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 8
attached to the building or placed in a
window;
5. Full-time home resident is the business
operator;
6. Only one (1) non-resident employee is
allowed on lots zoned R1-35 and larger;
7. The home is not to be used as a location
for the assembly of employees for
instruction or dispatch to other locations;
8. Five (5) or fewer clients per day.
Customer hours between 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.;
9. Music, art, sports, or similar lessons: Five
(5) or fewer clients per day;
10. Storage of all products and use of all
equipment, and materials shall be done
within an enclosed building;
11. No hazardous equipment or hazardous or
toxic chemicals or materials shall be kept
at the property;
12. Parking shall be provided only on the
driveway or in the garage/carport and
shall not create hazards or street
congestion. Overnight on-street parking
is not permitted;
13. Storage of goods and materials shall be
inside and shall not include flammable,
combustible or explosive materials;
14. Outside storage of heavy equipment or
materials shall be prohibited; and,
15. No generation of dust, odors, noise,
vibration or electrical interference or
fluctuation shall be perceptible beyond
the property line.
16. Home Day Care:
a. Six (6) or fewer children per day
allowed in all zoning districts.
b. Up to twelve (12) children per day
allowed in R1-35 and larger zoning
districts.
6.5 In-Vehicle Service Facilities
A. Description. In-vehicle sales and service
uses include all uses which perform sales
and / or services in vehicles, or to vehicles
which may be occupied at the time of such
activity. Such uses often have traffic
volumes which exhibits their highest levels
concurrent peak traffic flows on adjacent
roads. Examples of such land uses include
drive-in, drive-up, and drive-through
facilities, vehicular fuel stations, and car
washes. If performed in conjunction with a
principal use, in-vehicle sales and service
land uses shall considered accessory.
B. Performance Standards. All in-vehicle
services facilities are subject to a
conditional use permit review procedure.
1. Pedestrian walkways should not intersect
the drive-through drive aisles, but where
they do, they shall have clear visibility,
and they must be emphasized by
enriched paving, such as products to
similar to boomanite, stone, etc.)
2. Drive-through aisles shall have a minimum
twelve foot (12') width on curves and a
minimum eleven foot (11') width on
straight sections.
3. Vehicle Stacking. Drive-through lanes for
all restaurants shall provide at least 160
total feet of stacking distance (80 feet of
stacking distance between pick-up
windows and order-placing speakers, and
at least 80 feet of stacking distance
between order-placing speakers and the
entry to the drive-through lane).
Distances shall be measured along the
centerline of the drive-through lane.
Vehicle stacking for all other businesses
with drive-through lanes (i.e. banks, car
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 9
washes, pharmacies, etc.) shall be
determined at the time of site planning.
For redevelopment areas or unique
properties an alternative standard may
be approved by the Planning
Administrator.
4. Landscaping shall screen drive-through or
drive-in aisles, payment, and pick-up
windows from the public right-of-way and
shall be used to minimize the visual
impact of menu boards, and directional
signs.
5. The building shall be the main element of
the overall site plan, and parking shall be
oriented on the side or rear of the site.
6. Menu boards shall comply with Section
7.2.L of this Ordinance.
7. Drive-through uses within an integrated
shopping center shall have an
architectural style consistent with the
theme established in the center. The
architecture of any drive-through use
must provide compatibility with
surrounding uses in form, materials,
colors, scale, etc. Structure plans shall
have variation in depth and angle to
create a variety and interest in its basic
form and silhouette. Articulation of
structure surfaces shall be encouraged
through the use of opening and recesses,
which create texture and shadow
patterns. Structure entrances shall be
well articulated and project a formal
entrance through variation of
architectural planes, pavement surface
treatment and landscaping plaza.
8. No drive-through aisles shall exit directly
onto a public right-of-way.
C. Internal Circulation Requirements.
1. A traffic study shall be submitted to the
Town along with the required application
packet. The traffic study shall address
the following issues:
a. Nature of product or service being
provided;
b. Method by which the order is being
processed;
c. Time required to serve a typical
customer;
d. Arrival rate of customers;
e. Peak demand hour;
f. Anticipated vehicular stacking required;
and,
g. Location of the storage of loading area
with respect to parking spaces of
circulation aisles.
2. Traffic study shall include a scaled
drawing delineating all parking spaces,
circulation facilities, driveways and
nearest public street.
3. Each drive-through lane shall be
designed to prevent circulation
congestion, both on-site and on adjacent
public and private streets and access
ways.
4. The stacking lanes for drive-thru facilities
should not cross or pass through offstreet
parking areas nor cross or be
crossed by pedestrian access ways.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 10
D. Elevations. Elevations for all sides shall be
submitted along with the application
packet.
E. Refuse Disposal Areas. Refuse disposal
areas shall be located to the rear of the site
and screened with a decorative masonry
wall and gate matching the main building
architecture.
F. Noise Related Impacts. Any in-vehicle
service facility shall not be allowed to emit
audible noise greater than forty-five (45)
decibels (dBA) beyond the property line
when adjacent to any residential zoning
district. When abutting any residential zone
or use, all in-vehicle service facilities with
noise generating equipment must
document in advance that the facility will
meet the above noise standards. Noise
generating equipment includes items such
as music, buzzers, speakers, mechanical
car washes, vacuum cleaners, and exterior
air compressors, etc.
6.6 Massage Establishments
A. Purpose. The Town Council hereby finds
and determines that massage parlors can,
if not regulated properly, serve as covers
for lewd or illegal conduct which can
produce secondary impacts on surrounding
neighborhoods, crimes such as prostitution
and money laundering, and a reduction in
property values. The Town Council further
finds that massage establishments which
are properly regulated can operate in a
manner compatible with surrounding
issues. The standards established herein
are designed to ensure that:
1. The massage establishment is operated
for the legitimate purpose of massage
therapy and not as a front for
prostitution, money laundering, or other
crimes;
2. The massage establishment does not
become a de facto sexually oriented
business without the proper licensing;
3. The massage establishment is clean and
sanitary, and accordingly, does not
become a blighting influence on the
neighborhood; and,
4. The areas in which massage activities
occur are adequately lighted and open so
as to permit inspection for complianc e
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Location. A massage establishment may
be located in any zoning district where
permitted as a primary use, and as an
accessory use to any medical or
chiropractic office, athlete club, health
club, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa, or
hotel, subject to the following reasons:
1. Where permitted as a primary use, no
massage establishment shall be located
within:
a. Five-hundred feet (500’) of a public or
private school, park, playground, civic
center, cultural, site, or church site; or,
b. Within five-hundred feet (500’) of
another massage establishment.
2. Where permitted as an accessory use,
the area if the massage establishment
shall not exceed the lesser of:
a. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor
area of the primary use; or,
b. Four-hundred (400) square feet.
C. Owner/Operator and Minimum Training. No
application for development approval shall
be accepted to establish a massage
establishment unless evidence is provided
that the owner, operator, responsible
managing employee, manager, or licensee
in charge of or in control of any massage
establishment, and any masseuse or
masseur employed therein, has passed the
National Certification Exam and has
completed not less than five-hundred (500)
hours of training by a school approved by
the American Massage Therapy Association
("AMTA") Commission on Accreditation and
Training. No massage shall be
administered by any person who is not
certified as a full member, in good
standing, of AMTA. Proof of such
membership shall be provided to the
Planning Administrator and the City Clerk.
D. Nude Massaging Prohibited.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 11
1. No massage establishment shall be
established or conducted as part of a
sexually-oriented business.
2. No owner, operator, responsible
managing employee, manager, or
licensee in charge of or in control of any
massage establishment shall permit any
person in any area within the massage
establishment which is used in common
by the patrons or which can be viewed by
from such an area (excluding bathrooms,
dressing rooms, or any room utilized for
dressing purposes), unless the person's
specified anatomical areas are fully
covered. In addition, no owner, operator,
responsible managing employee,
manager, or licensee in charge of or in
control of a massage establishment shall
permit any person to be in any room with
another person unless all persons'
specified anatomical areas are fully
covered.
3. No owner, operator, responsible
managing employee, manager or
licensee in charge of or in control of a
massage establishment shall permit any
masseur, masseuse, or employee to be
on the premises of a massage
establishment during its hours of
operation while performing, or available
to perform any task or service associated
with the operation of a massage
business, and no masseur/masseuse or
employee shall be on the premises of a
massage establishment during its hours
of operation while performing or available
to perform any task or services
associated with the operation of a
massage business, unless the
masseur/masseuse or employee is "fully
covered". For purpose of this subsection,
"fully covered" means the state of dress
in which the covering shall be of an
opaque material and shall be maintained
in clean and sanitary condition, and which
extends from a point not to exceed four
inches (4”) above the center of the knee
cap to the base of the neck.
4. No masseur/masseuse or employee,
while performing any task or service
associated with the massage business,
shall be present in any room with another
person unless the person's specified
anatomical areas are fully covered.
E. Massage Rooms.
1. Rooms in which massage is to be
administered shall have at least fifty (50)
square feet of clear floor area and shall
maintain a light level of not less than
forty (40) foot-candles as measured
three feet (3’) above the floor. Such
rooms shall be equipped with cabinets for
the storage of clean linen and chemicals
and approved receptacles for the storage
of soiled linen. Such rooms shall contain
a door incapable of being locked from the
exterior or interior. Such door shall
contain a transparent window pane no
less then twelve inches (12”) wide and
twelve inches (12”) long, such that an
obstructed view of the room is provided
from a hallway or other less common
access area, which is immediately
adjacent to the room.
2. Separate bathing, dressing, locker, toilet,
and massage room facilities shall be
provided for female and male patrons, so
that female and male patrons can be
served simultaneously without viewing
one another while bathing, dressing,
washing, or receiving a massage, if both
sexes are permitted by the
establishment.
3. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers,
bathtubs, steam room, hand basins, and
all other physical facilities for the
massage establishment must be in good
repair and maintained in a sanitary
condition. Wet and dry heat rooms,
steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor
cabinets, shower compartment s,
bathtubs, hand basins, and toilet rooms
shall be thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected at least once each day the
business is in operation. For purpose of
this subsection, "sanitary" means free
from vegetative cells of pathogenic
microorganisms.
F. Hours of Operation. No massage
establishment shall open earlier than 8:00
a.m. or remain open later than 10:30 p.m.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 12
6.7 Sexually Oriented Businesses
A. Purpose and Findings.
1. The Town Council finds that this
Ordinance in order to protect the Town
for the potential secondary effects adults
business including crime, the protection
of the Town's retail trade, the prevention
of the blighting of neighborhoods and the
maintenance of property values,
protecting and preserving the quality of
the Town's quality of life, the increased
threat of the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases, and the protections
of the peace, welfare and privacy of
persons who patronize adult businesses.
Experience in this Town, as well as in
cities and counties within and outside of
Arizona including the County of Los
Angeles, the City of Garden Grove and
the cities of Renton, Washington; Seattle,
Washington; Detroit, Michigan; Austin,
Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; and
Phoenix, Arizona have demonstrated that
such uses have objectionable secondary
effects upon immediately adjacent
residential and commercial areas. The
Town recognizes and relies upon the
experience of these other cities and
counties in adopting adult businesses
regulations including the County of Los
Angeles (as discussed in Smith v. County
of Los Angeles 211 Cal.App.3d 188
(1989)); City of Renton, Washington (as
discussed in City of Renton v. Playtime
Theaters, Inc.475 U.S. 41 (1976)); The
City of Seattle, Washington (as discussed
in Northern Cinema v. City of Seattle 90
Wash 90.2d 709, 585 P.2d 1153 (1978));
and the County of Palm Beach, Florida (as
discussed in Movie & Video World v.
Board of County Commissioners 723
F.Supp. 695 (S.D. Fla.1989)) in support
of this Ordinance. The Town also
recognizes and relies upon the studies
done by: (1) the 1979 Adult Use Study by
the Phoenix Planning Department; (2)
Tucson, Arizona (1990); (3) the 1991
report to the City of Garden Groves by
Drs. McCleary and Meeker on the
relationship between crime and adult
business operations; (4) the City of Los
Angeles in 1977; (5) the 1984 "Analysis
of Adult Entertainment Business in
Indianapolis" by the Department of
Metropolitan Development; (6)
Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980); (7)
Cleveland, Ohio (1977); (8) Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma (1986); (9) Austin,
Texas' study of effects of adult
businesses; (10) Amarillo, Texas (1977);
(11) Beaumont, Texas (1982); (12)
Houston, Texas (1983); and (13) Seattle,
Washington (1989).
2. Prior to the Adoption of this Ordinanc e
the Town Council reviewed the detailed
studies prepared by other jurisdictions
regarding the social and economic effects
on a persons and properties surrounding
established adult used facilities. Copies of
these studies are available for the public
review upon request. The Town Council
believes the following statements are
true, in part based upon its
understanding of the experiences of
various jurisdictions identified.
3. Crime rates tend to be higher in
residential areas surrounding adult uses
than in industrial areas surrounding adult
uses.
4. Areas within one-thousand feet (1,000’)
of single and multiple family dwellings
should be free of adult uses.
5. Adult uses should be restricted to specific
areas of the Town which are specified
distance from sensitive uses such as
residences, parks, religious institutions,
and schools, irrespective of whether
physical barriers are present. This is
necessary to (1) insure that the impact
on such sensitive uses by adverse
secondary effects cause by adult uses are
mitigated to the maximum extent
possible; (2) to prevent ad hoc decisions
with respect to potential adult use site
which does not meet the criteria set forth
herein; and (3) to provide certainty to the
residents of the Town and adult use
operators with respect to potential adult
use sites.
6. The image of the Town of Queen Creek as
an attractive place to reside will be
adversely affected by the presence of
adult uses in closed proximity to
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 13
residential uses, schools, religious
institutes and parks.
7. The existence of adult uses in close
proximity to residential areas has been
shown in some cities to reduce the
property values in those residential
areas.
8. A reasonable regulation of the location of
adult uses protects the image of the
community and its property values and
protects its residents for the adverse
secondary effects of adult uses, while
providing those who desire to patronize
adult uses an opportunity to do so in
appropriate areas in the Town.
9. There is substantial evidence that an
increase in crime tends to accompany,
concentrate around, and being
aggravated by adult businesses,
including but not limited to an increase in
the crimes of narcotics distribution and
use, prostitution pandering, and violenc e
against persons and property. The
studies from other cities establish
convincing evidence that adult which are
not regulated as to permissible locations
often have a deleterious effect on nearby
businesses in residential areas, causing,
among other adverse secondary effects,
an increase in crime and a decrease in
property values. Regulations for adult
business should be developed to prevent
deterioration and / or degradation of the
vitality of the community before the
problem exists, rather than waiting for
problems to be created.
10. The Town Council recognizes and relies
on the findings set forth in the 1986
Attorney General's Report on
pornography in support of this Ordinanc e
including, but not limited to its
recommendations that local government s
band certain features of video booths that
facilitate carnal sexual encounters. A
copy of the Attorney General's Report on
Pornography is available for public review
upon request.
11. The Town Council finds the following, in
part based upon its understanding of the
document and judicial decisions in the
public record:
a. Evidence indicates that some dancers,
models and other person who publicly
perform specified sexual activities or
publicly displayed anatomical parts in
adult businesses (collectively referred
to as "performers") have been found to
engage in sexual activities with patrons
of adult businesses on the site of the
adult business;
b. Evidence has demonstrated that
performers employed by adult
businesses have been found to offer
and provide private shows to patrons
who, for a price, are permitted to
observe and participate with the
performers in live sex shows;
c. Evidence indicates that performers at
adult businesses have been found to
engage in acts of prostitutions in acts
with patrons of the establishment; and,
d. As a result of the above, and the
increase of incidence of AIDS and
Hepatitis B, which are both sexually
transmitted diseases, Town have a
substantial interest in adopting
regulations which will reduce, to the
greatest extent possible, the possibilit y
for the occurrence of prostitution and
casual sex acts at adult businesses.
12. The Town Council has determined that
the establishment of an adult use
development permit process is a
legitimate and reasonable means of
insuring that:
a. Operators of adult businesses comply
with the reasonable regulations of this
Ordinance;
b. The recognized secondary impacts of a
proposed adult use business in a
specific location are mitigated; and,
c. Adult use operators have specific
guidelines with respect to where they
can establish or operate an adult
business.
13. It is not the intent of the Town Council in
adopting this Ordinance to suppress any
activities protected by the First
Amendment, but rather to enact content
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 14
neutral Ordinance, which addresses the
secondary effects that adult uses have on
the Town.
14. The Town Council desires to protect the
rights conferred by the United States
Constitution to adult use businesses in a
manner that insures the continued and
orderly development of property within
the Town and diminishes those
undesirable negative secondary effects
the previously mentioned studies have
shown to be associated with the
development and operation of adult uses.
15. The Town Council and Planning
Commission have held duly noticed public
hearings, to receive input and testimony
from the public concerning the subject of
regulation of adult uses and this
proposed Ordinance.
G. Location Standards.
1. No sexually-oriented businesses shall be
located within one-thousand feet (1,000’)
of any other sexually-oriented business.
2. No sexually-oriented business shall be
located within five-hundred feet (500’) of
an establishment having an Arizona
Spirituous Liquor License with any of the
following classifications; Bar License
(Series #06), or Beer and Wine License
(Series #07), or the equivalent of any
such license. No person shall, on
premises having an Arizona Spirituous
Liquor License, perform acts of or acts
which constitute or simulate: (1) sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by
law; or (2) the touching, caressing or
foundling of the breast, buttocks, anus,
or genitals; or (3) the displaying of post -
pubertal human genitals, buttocks, or
public area, or the female breast below
the top of the nipple. No person shall, on
such licensed premises use artificial
devices or inanimate objects to perform,
simulate or depict any of the prohibited
conduct or activities described in the
Section. It shall be unlawful for any
person to show, display, or exhibit, on
licensed premises, any film, video, still
picture, electronic reproduction, or any
other visual reproduction or image of any
act or conduct describes in this Section.
No operator shall allow or permit to
remain in or about the licensed premises
any person who performs acts of or acts
which constitute or simulate: (1) sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by
law; or (2) the touching caressing or
fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or
genitals; or (3) the displaying of post -
pubertal human genitals, buttocks, or
pubic area, or the female breast below
the top of the nipple.
3. No sexually-oriented business shall be
located within one-thousand feet (1,000’)
of a public or private school, public or
private daycare center, public or private
recreation center, or church or park used
by the public for recreational purposes.
4. No sexually-oriented business shall be
located within five-hundred feet (500’) of
a hotel, motel, or boarding house that
has fewer than forty (40) sleeping rooms.
5. No sexually-oriented business shall be
located within one-thousand feet (1,000’)
from any single of multifamily dwelling.
6.8 Large Format Retail
A. Purpose. The following standards and
guidelines are applicable to any single-user
retail structure in excess of fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet or any shopping
center in excess of twenty-five thousand
(25,000) square feet.
B. Standards.
1. Pedestrian Circulation. Pedestrian
accessibility opens auto-oriented
developments to the neighborhood,
thereby reducing traffic impacts and
enabling the development to project a
friendlier, more inviting image. This
section sets forth standards for public
sidewalks and internal pedestrian
circulation systems that can provide
user-friendly pedestrian access as well as
pedestrian safety, shelter, and
convenience within the center grounds.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 15
All internal pedestrian walkways shall be
distinguished from driving surfaces
through the use of durable, low
maintenance surface materials such as
pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to
enhance pedestrian safety and comfort,
as well as the attractiveness of the
walkways.
a. Sidewalks at least eight feet (8’) in
width shall be provided along all sides
of the lot that abut a public street.
b. Continuous internal pedestrian
walkways, not less than eight feet (8’)
in width, shall be provided from the
public sidewalk or right-of-way to the
principal customer entrance of all
principal buildings on the site. At a
minimum, walkways shall connect focal
points of pedestrian activity including,
but not limited to, transit stops, street
crossings, building and store entry
points, and shall feature adjoining
landscaped areas that include trees,
shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground
covers, or other such materials for no
less than fifty percent (50%) of its
length. Four foot (4’) wide pedestrian
walkways shall be provided in the
parking aisle medians.
c. Sidewalks, not less than ten feet (10’)
in width, measured from the face of the
building to the face of the columns,
raised permanent planters or other
permanent amenities that define the
outer edge of the sidewalk, shall be
provided along the full length of the
building along any façade featuring a
customer entrance, and along any
façade abutting public parking areas.
Should such sidewalks be utilized for
outdoor display of retail goods, a
minimum of eight feet (8’) clear walking
area shall be maintained at all times.
Such sidewalks shall be located at least
six feet (6’) from the façade of the
building to provide planting beds for
foundation landscaping, except where
features such as arcades or entryways
are part of the façade.
d. Internal pedestrian walkways provided
in conformance with part (b) above
shall provide weather protection
features such as awnings or arcades
within thirty feet (30’) of all customer
entrances.
2. Parking Lot. Parking areas shall provide
safe, convenient, and efficient access.
Buildings shall be placed along the
required setbacks and between the street
frontage and parking areas in order to
provide a visual buffer. No parking is
permitted within the required buffer area
or landscape areas. Parking areas shall
be distributed around large buildings in
order to shorten the distance to other
buildings and public sidewalks and to
reduce the overall scale of the paved
surface. No more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the off-street parking
area for the entire property shall be
located between the front façade of the
principal building(s) and the primary
abutting street.
3. Outdoor Storage, Trash Collection, and
Loading Areas. The following standards
are intended to reduce the impacts of
outdoor storage, display of retail goods,
loading and operations areas on adjacent
land uses, on-site visitors and improve
general public street curb appeal of the
use.
a. Areas for truck parking and loading
shall be screened by a combination of
structures and evergreen landscaping
to minimize visibility from adjacent
streets and property lines.
b. Areas for outdoor storage, trash
collection or compaction, loading, or
other such uses shall be located in the
rear of the lot. If that is not feasible,
then the side yard can be used, but in
no case shall such areas be located
within twenty feet (20’) of, and shall
not be visible from, any public street,
public sidewalk, or internal pedestrian
way.
c. Outdoor storage, HVAC equipment ,
trash collection, trash compaction, and
other service functions shall be
incorporated into the overall design of
the building and the landscaping plan.
Views of these areas shall be screened
from visibility from all property lines
and separated from pedestrian areas.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 16
d. Screening structures shall be made of
the same materials as the principal
structure.
e. Non-enclosed areas for the storage and
sale of seasonal inventory shall be
permanently defined and screened with
walls and / or fences. Materials, colors,
and design of screening walls and / or
fences shall conform to those used as in
the principal structure. If such areas
are to be covered, then the covering
shall conform to the exposed roofing
colors on the building.
f. No delivery, loading, trash removal or
compaction, or other such operations
shall be permitted between the hours of
10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. unless the
applicant submits evidence that sound
barriers between all areas for such
operations effectively reduce noise
emissions to a level of 45 dB, as
measured at the lot line of any
adjoining property.
g. Outdoor display of retail goods shall be
limited to the Plaza area and / or
building front sidewalk. A maximum of
sixty percent (60%) of the plaza area
may be utilized for outdoor display. No
individual item or stack of items may
exc eed eight feet (8’) in height. The
minimum clear walking area shall be
maintained consistent with Article
6.17C.
4. Screening. To the greatest extent
possible, mechanical appurtenances shall
be located within the structure. External
mechanical appurtenances such as
heating and air conditioning equipment
shall be screened and finished to match
the colors of adjacent building materials.
5. Entryways. Superstores shall feature
multiple entrances to reduce walking
distances from cars, facilitate pedestrian
and bicycle access from public sidewalks,
and provide convenience where certain
entrances offer access to individual
stores, or identified departments of a
store. Multiple entrances also mitigate
the effect of the unbroken walls and
neglected areas that often characterize
building façades that face bordering land
uses.
a. All sides of a principal building that
directly face an abutting public street
shall feature at least one (1) customer
entrance. Where a principal building
directly faces more than two (2)
abutting public streets, this
requirement shall apply only to two (2)
sides of the building, including the side
of the building facing the primary
street, and another side of the building
facing a second street.
b. Entryway design elements and
variations shall provide orientation and
aesthetically pleasing character to the
building. The following standards
identify desirable entryway design
features. Each principal building on a
site shall have clearly defined, highly
visible customer entrances featuring no
less than three (3) of the following:
1) Canopies or porticos;
2) Overhangs or arcades;
3) Recesses/projections;
4) Raised cornice parapets over the
door;
5) Peaked roof forms or arches;
6) Outdoor patios;
7) Display windows;
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 17
8) Architectural details such as tile work
and moldings which are integrated
into the building structure and
design;
9) Integral planters or wing walls that
incorporate landscaped areas and /
or places for sitting; or,
10) Building Height. Building height shall
not exceed thirty-five feet (35’)
measured from the average natural
grade. Average grade is the average
elevation of the highest point of the
building perimeter and the lowest
point measured at prior to site fill or
excavation.
C. Design Criteria.
1. Community Spaces. Superstores and big
box retail uses shall provide outdoor
spaces and amenities to link structures
with the remainder of the community.
Bus stops, drop-off and pick-up points
shall be integrated with traffic patterns
on the site. Special design features shall
enhance the building's function as a
center of community activity.
2. Features. Each development shall
provide a roofed arcade extending along
at least sixty percent (60%) of the length
of the building front. Arcades shall be at
least ten feet (10’) in width as measured
from the building face to the columns
supporting the arcade. In addition, at
least one (1) of the following design
features shall be provided: patio/seating
area, pedestrian plaza with benches,
window shopping walkway, outdoor
playground area, kiosk area, a fountain
or water feature, or a clock tower.
3. Plaza. A plaza area shall be provided
along at least sixty percent (60%) of the
length of the front of the building. The
plaza shall start at the outside face of any
columns, planters or other amenities
provided as part of the arcade or
walkways, and extend a maximum of
twenty feet (20’) measured perpendic ula r
to the building face. The plaza shall be
equal in grade (flush) with the adjacent
sidewalk and drive aisles. It shall also
provide decorative materials to define the
perimeter of the plaza and enhance the
plaza itself. The plaza shall further
incorporate bollards or other decorative
elements and signage to prevent parking,
loading, and / or unloading at the main
entry.
4. Façades. The following standards shall
apply to all building façades and exterior
walls that are visible from adjoining
public streets or properties. Façades
greater than one-hundred feet (100') in
length, measured horizontally, shall
incorporate wall plane projections or
recesses having a depth of at least three
percent (3%) of the length of the façade
and extending at least twenty percent
(20%) of the length of the façade. No
uninterrupted length of any façade shall
exceed one-hundred fifty (150)
horizontal feet. These façades shall
utilize raised permanent planters, seating
areas, screen walls or other amenities
between the columns of the arcade to
provide visual interest, and provide a
background for outdoor display but not to
obscure display windows. Ground floor
façades that face public streets shall have
arcades, display windows, entry areas,
awnings, or other such features along no
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 18
less than sixty percent (60%) of their
horizontal length.
5. Off-Street Bus Stop. Each development
shall provide an off-street bus stop.
6. Roofing. The following standards are
intended to foster variations in roof lines
to add interest to, and reduce the
massive scale of large buildings. Roof
features shall complement the character
of adjoining development. Roofs shal l
have no less than two (2) of the following
features:
a. Parapets concealing flat roofs and
rooftop equipment, such as HVAC units
from public view. The average height
of such parapets shall not exceed
fifteen percent (15%) of the height of
the supporting wall and such parapets
shall not exceed, at any point, one-third
of the height of the supporting wall.
Such parapets shall feature three
dimensional cornice treatments and
shall not be of a constant height for a
distance of greater than one-hundred
fifty feet (150’);
b. Overhanging eaves, extending no less
than three feet (3’) past the supporting
walls, for no less than thirty percent
(30%) of the building perimeter;
c. Sloping roofs that do not exceed the
average height of the supporting walls,
with an average slope greater than or
equal to one foot (1’) of vertical rise for
every three feet (3’) of horizontal run
and less than or equal to one foot (1’)
of vertical rise for every one foot (1’) of
horizontal run; or,
d. Three or more roof slope planes.
7. Materials and Colors. The following
standards are intended to ensure that
large structures are compatible with
neighboring development.
a. Predominant exterior buildings
materials shall be high quality materials
such as brick, wood, stucco, sandstone,
native stone, and
tinted/textured/concrete masonry
units.
b. Façade colors shall be low reflectance,
subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors.
The use of high intensity colors,
metallic colors, black, or fluorescent
colors is prohibited.
c. Building trim and accent areas may
feature brighter colors, including
primary colors.
d. Predominant exterior building materials
shall not include smooth-faced concrete
block or tilt-up concrete panels, or prefabricated
steel panels.
D. Landscaping.
1. Peripheral. A thirty foot (30’) wide
landscaped setback shall be provided
along the front property line and along all
abutting arterial roadways with breaks
for approved access points. A minimum
fifteen foot (15’) wide landscape setback
shall be planted along all other property
lines and along all internal roadways.
2. Where the façade faces adjacent
residential uses, an earthen berm and /
or opaque fence, no less than six feet (6’)
in height, containing at a minimum
evergreen trees planted at intervals of
twenty feet (20’) on center, or in clusters
or clumps and shrubbery shall be
provided.
3. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of
the parking area shall be landscaped.
Landscaped areas shall be protected by
raised curbs and shall be a minimum of
one-hundred fifty (150) square feet in
size except that parking lot islands shall
be a minimum of ten feet (10') in width
between parallel parking rows and shall
run the length of the parking aisle capped
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 19
at each end by the termination of the
island. Landscaped planters shall be
provided a minimum of one (1) every
twelve (12) parking spaces. For other
types of parking configurations,
Landscaping Standards shall prevail.
4. Required Plantings.
a. Street Tree Spacing. Trees shall be
planted on thirty-foot (30’) centers.
For variety, trees may be occasionally
grouped to accent an area.
b. Number of Trees and Shrubs. Trees and
shrubs shall be provided consistent with
Section 5.3 of this Ordinance.
c. Ground Cover Areas. All areas shall be
planted at a minimum with turf or
grass. Ground covering such as ivy or
similar material shall be used to accent
planting areas.
E. Public Art. Large Format Retail shall be
required to install public art as part of the
development pursuant to the following:
1. Public art should celebrate any distinct
characteristics found in the surrounding
area around the site;
2. Pieces shall be placed in public view and
should be made accessible to a
pedestrian; and,
3. Art should not impede or block
pedestrian travel within the site.
6.9 Wireless Communications
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is
to establish general guidelines for the siting
of wireless communications towers and
antennas. The goals of this Ordinance are
to:
1. Protect residential areas and land uses
from potential adverse impacts of towers
and antennas;
2. Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential
areas;
3. Minimize the total number of towers
throughout the community;
4. Strongly encourage the joint use of new
and existing tower sites as a primary
option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers;
5. Encourage users of towers and antennas
to locate them, to the extent possible, in
areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
6. Encourage users of towers and antennas
to configure them in a way that minimizes
the adverse visual impact of the towers
and antennas through careful design,
siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
7. Enhance the ability of the providers of
telecommunications services to provide
such services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently;
8. Consider the public health and safety of
communication towers; and,
9. Avoid potential damage to adjacent
properties from tower failure through
engineering and careful siting of tower
structures. In furtherance of these goals,
the Town of Queen Creek shall give due
consideration to the Town of Queen
Creek General Plan, the Town of Queen
Creek Zoning Ordinance, existing land
use, and environmentally sensitive areas
in approving sites for the location of
towers and antennas.
B. Applicability.
1. New Towers and Antennas. All new
towers or antennas in the Town of Queen
Creek shall be subject to these
regulations.
2. Exceptions.
a. Amateur Radio Station
Operators/Receive Only Operations.
This ordinance shall not govern any
tower, or the installation of any
antenna, that is under the maximum
building height of the zoning district in
which such structure is located and
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 20
which is owned and operated by a
federally-licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively for
receive only operations.
b. Pre-existing Towers or Antennas.
Legally established pre-existing towers
and preexisting antennas shall not be
required to meet the requirements of
this Ordinance, other than the
requirements of subsection 6 and 7 of
this Section
c. AM Array. For purposes of
implementing this Ordinance, an AM
array, consisting of one (1) or more
tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one (1) AM
broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one (1) tower.
Measurements for setbacks and
separation distances shall be measured
from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional
tower units may be added within the
perimeter of the AM array by right
C. General Requirements.
1. Principal or Accessory Use. Antennas and
towers may be considered either principal
or accessory uses. A different existing
use of an existing structure on the same
lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot.
2. Lot Size. For purposes of determining
whether the installation of a tower or
antenna complies with district
development regulations, including but
not limited to setback requirements, lot
coverage requirements and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on
leased parcels within such lot.
3. Inventory or Existing Sites. Each
applicant for an antenna and / or tower
shall provide to the Planning
Administrator an inventory of its existing
towers, antennas, or sites approved for
towers or antennas, that are either within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Queen
Creek or within one (1) mile of the border
thereof, including specific informat ion
about the location, height, and design of
each tower. Each applicant shall also
provide a one-year build out plan for all
other proposed wireless communications
facilities within the Town. Planning
Administrator may share such
information with other applicants
applying for administrative approvals or
conditional use permits under this
Ordinance or with other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Queen Creek,
provided, however that the Planning
Administrator is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available
or suitable.
4. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall
meet the following requirements:
a. Towers shall be configured in a way that
minimizes adverse impacts by careful
design, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques or,
subject to any applicable standards of
the FAA, be painted a neutral color so
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness; and,
b. At a tower site, the design of the
buildings and related structures shall,
to the extent possible, use materials,
colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding
buildings; and,
c. If an antenna is installed on a structure
other than a tower, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color
that is identical to, or closely
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 21
compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the
antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
5. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially
lighted, unless required by the FAA or
other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and
design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
6. State or Federal Requirements. All towers
must meet or exceed current standards
and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and
any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such
standards and regulations are changed,
then the owners of the towers and
antennas governed by this Section shall
bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of such standards and
regulations, unless a different complianc e
schedule is mandated by the controlling
state or federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into complianc e
with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for
the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
7. Building Codes; Safety Standards. To
ensure the structural integrity of towers,
the owner of a tower shall ensure that it
is maintained in compliance with
standards contained in applicable state or
local building codes and the applicable
standards for towers that are published
by the Electronic Industries Association
(EIA) and by the Telecommunications
Industries Association (TIA), as amended
from time to time. If, upon inspection,
the Town of Queen Creek concludes that
a tower fails to comply with such codes
and standards and constitutes a danger
to persons or property, then upon notice
being provided to the owner of the tower,
the owner shall have thirty (30) days to
bring such tower into compliance with
such standards. Failure to bring such
tower into compliance within said thirty
(30) days shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
8. Measurement. For purposes of
measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated
and applied to facilities located in the
Town of Queen Creek irrespective of
municipal and county jurisdictional
boundaries.
9. Not Essential Services. Towers and
antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this chapter and
shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, public utilities, or
private utilities.
10. Franchises. Owners and / or operators of
towers or antennas shall certify that all
franchises required by law for the
construction and / or operation of a
wireless communication system in the
Town of Queen Creek have been obtained
and shall file a copy of all required
franchises with the Planning
Administrator.
11. Public Notice. For purposes of this
Section, any conditional use request shall
require public notice pursuant to section
3.5 of this Ordinance except that the
notice required shall include posting of
the property, and mailing to all property
owners within three-hundred feet (300’)
of the proposed use, and publication in a
newspaper of general circulation
regardless of any expression to the
contrary in Section 3.5.
12. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an
antenna, on a tower or on any portion of
the premises leased for wireless
telecommunication use.
13. Buildings and Support Equipment .
Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall
comply with the requirements of
subsection 14 of this Section.
14. Co-Location and Multiple Antenna/Tower
Plan. The Town of Queen Creek
encourages tower and antenna users to
submit a single application for approval of
multiple towers and / or antenna sites
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 22
and to submit applications which utilize
co-location with an existing wireless
telecommunications provider.
Applications for approval of multiple sites
or for co-location with an existing
provider shall be given priority in the
review process.
15. Security Fencing. Towers shall be
enclosed by security fencing not less than
six feet (6’) in height and no more than
eight feet (8’) in height, shall be
constructed of a block or masonry and
shall be equipped with an appropriate
anti-climbing device; provided, however,
that the Town Council may waive such
requirements as it deems appropriate.
16. Landscaping. The following requirement s
shall govern the landscaping surrounding
towers; provided, however, that the
Town Council may waive such
requirements if the goals of this chapter
would be better served thereby:
a. Tower facilities shall be landscaped with
a buffer of plan materials that
effectively screens the view of the
tower compound from residential
property. The standard buffer shall
consist of a landscaped strip at least
four feet (4’) wide outside the
perimeter of the compound;
b. In locations where the visual impact of
the tower would be minimal, the
landscaping requirement may be
reduced or waived; and,
c. Existing mature plan growth and
natural land forms on the site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
D. Permitted Uses.
1. General. The uses listed in this
subsection are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall only require administrat ive
approval.
2. Permitted Uses. The following uses are
specifically permitted:
a. Antennas or towers located on property
owned, leased or otherwise controlled
by the Town of Queen Creek, provided
a license or lease authorizing such
antenna or tower has been approved by
the Town of Queen Creek Town Council.
No such license or lease shall be issued
for a tower located within threehundred
feet (300’) of any residentially
zoned property until a public hearing
has been held at a regular or special
Town Council meeting as part of the
Conditional Use Permit process outlined
in subsection E. This subsection shall
not apply to property presently known
as Town Hall.
b. Antennas or towers located in any
Industrial Zoning District (EMP-A or
EMP-B); provided, however, that
freestanding towers or antennas shall
not exceed sixty-five feet (65’) in
height without a special use permit, and
that roof mounted antennas shall not
extend more than ten feet (10’) above
the tallest point on such roof and in no
case shall the total combined height of
the building and the roof-mounted
antenna exceed fifty feet (50’) in
height; and,
c. Amateur Radio Towers.
1) Non-commercial, private residential
use allowed but subject to an
administrative over-the-counter
permit; non-residential uses require a
conditional use permit.
3. Setback and height standards: minimum
three feet (3’) from property line for
towers up to fifteen feet (15’) in height.
Over fifteen feet (15') in height, then an
additional one foot (1') setback for each
one foot (1') of tower and antenna height
(over fifteen feet (15')) with a maximum
height of eighty feet (80').
4. Towers are prohibited in the front yard
and shall not be placed in front of the
front face plane of the principal building.
5. Limitation on quantity of towers by
zoning district:
a. R1-35 SFR Zoning District and larger lot
zoning districts: two (2) primary
transmission and reception towers per
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 23
lot of record and subject to the setback
and height standards established in
above.
b. All other zoning districts: one (1) tower
permitted per lot of record.
c. Additional towers, greater in number
prescribed in subsection 3.d.1 and
3.d.2 above, may be permitted in any
zoning district, but shall be subject to
securing a conditional use permit.
6. Towers are prohibited in any airport clear
zone or landing zone designated by FAA.
E. Conditional Use Permits.
1. General. The following provisions shall
govern the issuance of conditional use
permits for towers or antennas by the
Town Council:
a. If the tower or antenna is not a
permitted use under this subsection D
of this Section, then a conditional use
permit shall be required for the
construction of a tower or the
placement of an antenna in all zoning
districts. The maximum height of any
such tower shall be eighty feet (80’);
b. Applications for conditional use permit s
under this Section shall be subject to
the procedures and requirements of
Section 3.5 of this Ordinance, except as
modified in this Section;
c. In granting a conditional use permit ,
the Town Council may impose
conditions to the extent such conditions
are necessary to minimize any adverse
effect of the proposed tower on
adjoining properties;
d. Any information of an engineering
nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical,
shall be certified by an Arizona licensed
professional engineer;
e. An applicant for a conditional use
permit shall submit the informat ion
described in this section and a nonrefundable
fee established pursuant to
a Resolution of the Town Council; and,
f. A Conditional Use Permit issued under
this Section shall be conditioned upon
verification by the Engineer or his
designee that such tower structure is
structurally sound. Such verification
shall be received by the applicant prior
to submission and at five (5) intervals
from the date of issuance of such
permit.
2. Towers.
a. Information Required. In addition to
any information required for
applications for conditional use permit s,
as defined in the Town’s applic at ion(s)
and / or process guide(s), on file with
the Town’s Development Servic es
Department, applicants for a
conditional use permit for a tower shall
submit the following information:
1) A scaled site plan clearly indicating
the location, type and height of the
proposed tower, on-site land uses and
zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning
(including when adjacent to other
municipalities), General Plan
classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable
separation distances set forth in
subsection F.2, adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks
from property lines elevation
drawings of the proposed tower and
any other structures, and other
information deemed by the Planning
Administrator to be necessary to
assess compliance with this article;
2) The setback distance between the
proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit and residentially
zoned properties;
3) The separation distance from other
towers described in the inventory of
existing sites submitted, shall be
shown on an updated site plan or
map. The applicant shall also identify
the type of construction of the
existing tower(s) and the
owner/operator of the existing
tower(s), if known;
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 24
4) Method of fencing and finished color
and, if applicable, the method of
camouflage and illumination;
5) A description of compliance with the
subsections of the Section, and all
applicable federal, state or local laws;
6) A notarized statement by the
applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate colocation
of additional antennas for
future users;
7) Identification of the entities providing
the backhaul network for the tower(s)
described in the application and other
cellular sites owned or operated by
the applicant in the municipality;
8) A description of the suitability of the
use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology
not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to
be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower;
9) A description of the feasible
alternative location(s) of future
towers or antennas within the Town
of Queen Creek based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological
or geographical limitations in the
event the proposed tower is erected;
and,
10) A statement of compliance with
Federal Communications Commiss ion
(FCC) Radio Frequency (RF) exposure
standards;
b. Noise. No permit shall be issued for any
facility which generates a noise level
greater than fifty decibels (50 dB) as
measured at the edge of the sited
property.
c. Factors Considered in Granting Special
Use Permits for Towers. In addition to
any standards for consideration of
special use permit applications, the
Town Council shall consider the
following factors in determining
whether to issue a conditional use
permit, although the Town Council may
waive or reduce the burden on the
applicant of one (1) or more of these
criteria if the Town Council concludes
that the goals of this Ordinance are
better served thereby:
1) Height of the proposed tower;
2) Proximity of the tower to residential
structures and residentially zoned
district boundaries;
3) Nature of uses on adjacent and
nearby properties;
4) Surrounding topography;
5) Surrounding tree coverage and
vegetation;
6) Design of the tower, with particular
reference to design characteristics
that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
7) Proposed ingress and egress; and,
8) Availability of suitable existing
towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring
the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in subsection d below.
d. Availability of Suitable Existing Towers,
Other Structures, or Alternative
Technology. No new tower shall be
permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Town Council that no
existing tower, structure, or alternative
technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can
accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit
information requested by the Town
Council related to the availability of
suitable existing towers, other
structures, or alternative technology.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate
that no existing tower, structure, or
alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna may consist of any of the
following:
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 25
1) No existing towers or structures are
located within the geographic area
which meets applicant's engineering
requirements;
2) Existing towers or structures are not
of sufficient height to meet applicant's
engineering requirements;
3) Existing towers or structures do not
have sufficient structural strength to
support applicant's proposed antenna
and related equipment;
4) The applicant's proposed antenna
would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or
structures would cause interference
with the applicant's proposed
antenna;
5) The fees, costs, or contractual
provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or
structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new
tower development are presumed to
be unreasonable;
6) The applicant demonstrates that
there are other limiting factors that
render existing towers and structures
unsuitable; or,
7) The applicant demonstrates that an
alternative technology that does not
require the use of towers or
structures, such as a cable microcell
network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a
wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs
of alternative technology that exceed
new tower or antenna development
shall not be presumed to render the
technology unsuitable.
3. Setbacks. The following setback
requirements shall apply to all towers for
which a conditional use permit is
required. The Town Council may reduce
the setback requirements if the goals of
this subsection would be better served.
a. Towers shall be set back a distance
equal to at least one-hundred percent
(100%) of the height of the tower from
any adjoining lot line; provided,
however, that separation distances
from residential uses shall be in
accordance with Table 6.9-1 set forth
below.
b. Accessory buildings must satisfy the
minimum zoning district setback
requirements.
F. Co-Location.
1. Good Faith. Applicants and permittees
shall cooperate and exercise good faith in
co-locating wireless telecommunications
facilities on the same support structures
or site, if the Town so requests. For the
purposes of this section only, a site may
accommodate more than one (1) tower
and its accompanying equipment ;
provided, however that no site shall
exceed ten (10) acres. Good faith shall
include sharing technical information to
evaluate the feasibility of co-location, and
may include negotiations for erection of a
replacement support structure to
accommodate co-location. A competitive
conflict to co-location or financial burden
caused by sharing such informat ion
normally will not be considered as an
excuse to the duty of good faith.
2. Third Party Review. In the event a
dispute arises as to whether a permittee
has exercised good faith in
accommodating other users, the Town
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 26
may require the applicant to obtain a
third party technical study at the
applic ant’s expense. The Town ma y
review any information submitted by the
applicant and permittee(s) in
determining whether good faith has been
exercised.
3. Exceptions. No co-location may be
required where the shared use would or
does result in significant interference in
the broadcast or reception capabilities of
the existing wireless telecommunications
facilities or failure of the existing wireless
telecommunications facilities to meet
federal standards for emissions.
4. Violation; Penalty. Failure to comply with
co-location requirements when feasible
may result in denial of a permit request
or revocation of an existing permit.
G. Minimum Setbacks and Separation.
1. Separation. The following separation
requirements shall apply to all towers and
antennas; provided, however, that the
Town Council may reduce the standard
separation requirements if the goals of
this chapter would be better served
thereby:
a. Tower separation comply with the
minimum standards and shall be
measured from the base of the tower to
the lot line of the off-site uses and / or
designated areas as specified in Table
6.9-1.
Table 6.9-1 Separation Requirements
Off-site
Use/Designated Area
Separation
Distance
Single-family or duplex
residential units
200’ or 300% of
tower height,
whichever is greater
Vacant single-family or
duplex residentially
zoned land which is
either platted or has
preliminary plat approval
which is not expired
200’ or 300% of
tower height,
whichever is greater
measured from base
of tower to closest
building setback line
Vacant unplatted
residentially-zoned land
100’ or 100% of
tower height,
whichever is greater
Existing multi-family
residential units greater
than duplex units
100’ or 100% of
tower height,
whichever is greater
Non-residential zoned
lands or uses
Only setbacks apply
2. Exception. The minimum separation
requirements of this section shall not
apply to towers which are co-located on
a single site.
a. Separation Distances between Towers.
Separation distances between towers
shall be applicable for and measured
between the proposed tower and
preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing
or following a straight line between the
base of the existing tower and the
proposed base, pursuant to a site plan,
of the proposed tower. The separation
distances (listed in linear feet) shall be
as shown in Table 6.9-2.
Table 6.9-2 Minimum Separation Distances
More
than 65’
in height
40’ in
height to
65’ in
height
Less than
40’ in
height
More than
65’ in height
2,000’ 1,500’ 1,000’
40’ in height
to 65’ in
height
1,500’ 1,500’ 1,000’
Less than
40’ in height
1,000’ 1,000’ 750’
H. Buildings or Other Equipment Storage.
1. Antennas Mounted on Structures or
Rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 27
structure used in association with
antennas shall comply with the following:
a. The cabinet or structure shall not
contain more than one-hundred-twenty
(120) square feet of gross floor area or
be more than eight feet (8') in height
and shall be located on the ground;
and,
b. Equipment storage buildings or
cabinets shall comply with all applicable
building codes.
2. Antennas Mounted On Utility Poles, Light
Poles, or Towers. The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with
antennas shall be located in accordance
with the following:
a. In residential zoning districts, the
equipment cabinet or structure may be
located:
1) In a required front yard or required
street side yard provided the cabinet
structure is no greater than three
and one-half feet (3 1/2’) in height
or twenty (20) square feet of gross
floor area and the cabinet/structure
is located a minimum of three feet
(3’) from all lot lines. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened
by sight-obscuring landscaping
which obscures at least ninety-five
percent (95%) of the structure at
planting and throughout the duration
of the cabinet or structures existence
with an ultimate height not to exceed
forty-two inches (42”);
2) In a required rear yard, provided the
cabinet or structure is no greater
than five feet (5’) in height or onehundred-
twenty (120) square feet in
gross floor area. The cabinet/
structure shall be screened by sight -
obscuring landscaping which
obscures at least ninety-five percent
(95%) of the structure at planting
and throughout the duration of the
cabinet or structures existence with
an ultimate height of six feet (6’);
and,
3) The entry or access side of a cabinet
or structure shall be gated by a solid,
sight-obscuring gate that is separate
from the cabinet or structure.
b. In commercial or industrial districts, the
equipment cabinet or structure shall be
no greater than fourteen feet (14’) in
height or three-hundred (300) square
feet in gross floor area. The structure
or cabinet shall be screened by sightobscuring
landscaping with an ultimate
height of sixteen feet (16’) and a
planted height of at least six feet (6’).
The entry or access side of a cabinet or
structure shall be gated by a solid,
sight-obscuring gate that is separate
from the cabinet or structure. Such
access way shall not face residentially
zoned property.
3. Modification of Building Size
Requirements. The requirements of
Section 6.9.F.1 to 6.9.F.3 may be
modified by the Town Council in the case
of uses permitted by conditional use to
encourage co-location.
I. Removal of Abandoned Antennas and
Towers. Any antenna or tower that is not
operated for a continuous period of ninety
(90) days shall be considered abandoned,
and the owner of such antenna or tower
shall remove the same within ninety (90)
days of receipt of notice from the Town of
Queen Creek notifying the owner of such
abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said
ninety (90) day period shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense. If there are two (2) or
more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until
all users cease using the tower for the
prescribed period.
J. Non-Conforming Uses.
1. Not Expansion of Non-Conforming Use.
Towers that are constructed and
antennas that are installed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a non-conforming use or
structure.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 28
2. Pre-Existing Towers. Pre-existing towers
shall be allowed to continue their usage
as they presently exist. Routine
maintenance (including replacement with
a new tower of like construction and
height) shall be permitted on such preexisting
towers. New construction other
than routine maintenance on a preexisting
tower shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
3. Rebuilding Damaged or Destroyed Non-
Conforming Towers or Antennas.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this
Ordinance, bona fide non-conforming
towers or antennas that are damaged or
destroyed may be rebuilt without having
to first obtain a special use permit and
without having to meet the separation
requirements specified in, bona fide nonconforming
towers or antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt
without having to first obtain a
conditional use permit and without
having to meet the separation
requirements specified in Section
6.9.G(1) and (2). The type, height, and
location of the tower onsite shall be of the
same type and intensity as the original
facility approval; provided, however, that
any destroyed lattice or guyed tower shall
be replaced with a monopole structure
only. Building permits to rebuild the
facility shall comply with the then
applicable building codes and shall be
obtained within ninety (90) days from the
date the facility is damaged or destroyed.
If no permit is obtained or if said permit
expires, the tower or antenna shall be
deemed abandoned as specified in
Section H.
6.11 Non-Chartered Financial
Institutions
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to
regulate the location and spacing of pawn
shops, precious metals dealers, (We Buy
Gold) and non-chartered financial
institutions (also known as check
cashing/title loans) in the Town of Queen
creek to avoid the overconcentration of
these uses in particular areas of the
community and the potential for adverse
effects for the adjoining neighbors and
adjacent neighborhoods.
B. Conditional Use Permits. Approval of a
Conditional Use Permit as set forth in
Section 4.6-1 Principal uses Allowed in
Non-Residential Districts is required for all
pawn shops and non-chartered financial
institutions.
C. Distance Separation Requirements.
1. Distance Separation Requirements. All
distance separation requirement s
specified by this section shall be
measured in a straight line from the
outside building wall of the proposed use
to the location of the nearest outside wall
of the existing use from which the
proposed use is to be separated, without
regard to any intervening uses, buildings,
streets, property lines or land parcels.
2. A minimum distance separation
requirement of one-thousand, twohundred
feet (1,200’) shall be maintained
between all existing and proposed:
a. Non-chartered financial institutions.
b. Pawn shops.
c. Pawn shops and non-chartered
financial institutions and any existing
public or charter school.
6.10 Medical Marijuana
A. Legislative Findings and Purpose.
1. In many communicates in which so-called
medic al marijuana “dispensaries” have
been established, law enforcement
agencies have documented the serious
and adverse impacts associated with
such dispensaries. These communit ies
and the media have reported increased
crime, including burglaries, robberies,
violence, illegal sales of marijuana to and
use of marijuana by minors and others
without medical need in the areas
immediately surrounding such medical
marijuana dispensaries. Other negative
secondary effects include the smoking of
marijuana in public areas and adverse
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 29
impacts on neighboring businesses
(including odor complaints). Such
negative secondary effects related to
medical marijuana use have been
considered by other government
agencies such as the County of San
Diego. The Town of Queen Creek could
reasonably anticipate experiencing
similar adverse impacts and effects from
any marijuana dispensaries and
cultivation and other marijuana
operations established in the Town.
2. Additionally, a number of sources,
including the United States Department
of Justic e’s California Medic al Marijua na
website [which contains various
documents and reports related to issues
surrounding marijuana use] and the
“White Paper on Marijuana Dispensarie s ”
published by the California Police Chiefs
Assoc iation’s Task Forc e on Marijua na
Dispensaries (April 22, 2009), have
concluded that the establishment of
marijuana dispensaries can lead to an
increase in crime. Among the crimes
cited as typical examples are burglaries,
robberies, sales of illegal drugs in areas
immediately surrounding such
dispensaries, as well as other public
nuisances such as loitering, smoking
marijuana in public places, sales to
minors and driving while under the
influence of marijuana. The Town Council
of Queen Creek finds that these data and
conclusions, experiences in other cities,
towns, and counties justify the
implementation of the regulatory zoning
and safety measures included in this
Ordinance.
3. The provisions of this Ordinance are
intended to acknowledge and protect the
rights of qualifying patients and their
designated caregivers under the
provisions of Title 36, A.R.S. §36-2801 et
seq., while also protecting the health,
safety, and welfare of the public; through
implementation of this Ordinance; and
curtailing to the extent reasonably
possible, the possession, use,
distribution, or cultivation of marijuana
for unlawful purposes by:
a. Requiring that medical marijuana
businesses, operations and facilities be
operated in a manner that minimizes
potential health and safety risks and
mitigates the negative impacts that a
medical marijuana dispensary or
cultivation operation might have on
surrounding properties and persons;
b. Regulating the conduct of persons
owning, operating and using medical
marijuana dispensaries and cultivation
facilities in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare; and,
c. Regulating the location and operation of
medical marijuana dispensaries,
cultivation facilities, and medical
marijuana operations.
4. By adoption of this Ordinance, the Town
Council does not intend to authorize or
make legal any act that is not permitted
under federal or state law.
B. Definitions. The words, terms and phrases,
when used in this Article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in Section 1 of
this Ordinance.
C. Conditional Use Permit, Site Plan, and
Zoning Clearance.
1. Conditional Use Permit and Site Plan. All
medical marijuana operations, including
medical marijuana designated caregiver
cultivation locations, medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation locations,
medical marijuana dispensaries and
medical marijuana infusion facilities shall
require the approval of a Conditional Use
Permit as set forth in Section 4.6-2 and
pursuant to the criteria required in
Sections 3.5 and Section 3.6 of this
Ordinance.
2. Zoning Clearance. All medical marijuana
operations, including medical marijuana
designated caregiver cultivation
locations, medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation locations, medical
marijuana dispensaries, and medical
marijuana infusion facilities shall require
a zoning clearance. Compliance with all
applicable Town Code and Zoning
Ordinance requirements, including but
not limited to, fees, timelines, submittal
requirements, security plans, and site
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 30
plans shall be considered in the zoning
clearance process. An annual zoning
compliance certification signed by the
owner of the premises and responsible
person for medical marijuana operations
shall be required and must be renewed
prior the anniversary date of the issuance
of the original conditional use permit.
3. Compliance with State law and
Department rules and regulations.
Failure to comply Arizona Revised
Statutes, Title 36, A.R.S. §36-2801 et
seq., or Department rules and
regulations or other implementing state
statutes and administrative regulations,
shall be grounds for revocation of a
Conditional Use Permit, Site Plan and
Zoning Clearance.
D. Distance Separation Requirements.
1. All medical marijuana dispensaries,
medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation locations, marijuana
designated caregiver cultivation locations
and medical marijuana infusion facilities
shall meet the following minimum
location requirements:
a. No medical marijuana dispensary,
medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location, marijuana
designated caregiver cultivation
location and medical marijuana infusion
facility shall be operated or maintained
within 1500 feet of another medical
marijuana dispensary, medical
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location, marijuana designated
caregiver cultivation location or medical
marijuana infusion facility.
b. No medical marijuana dispensary,
medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location, marijuana
designated caregiver cultivation
location or medical marijuana infusion
facility shall be operated or maintained
within 1500 feet of any Sensitive Uses,
including, a school; public library;
public or private recreation center;
park; religious institution; massage
establishment; group care home;
sexually oriented business; teen club or
registered pharmacy
c. No medical marijuana dispensary,
medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location, marijuana
designated caregiver cultivation
location or medical marijuana infusion
facility shall be operated or maintained
within 1,500 feet of a boundary of a
residential district defined herein; or
the property line of a lot devoted to a
residential use in any zone.
2. For purposes of this section, the distance
limitations shall be measured as the
shortest horizontal line between the
property lines of the relevant properties
involved. This measurement shall
exclude any public right-of-way that is
adjacent and connected to the recorded
lot lines of the relevant properties
involved in the measurement.
E. Security Plan. A security plan for all
medical marijuana operations shall be
submitted to Town incorporating and
detailing the following elements:
1. Exterior lighting;
2. Security alarm system;
3. Building security measures;
4. Interior floor plan;
5. Exterior site and parking plan; and,
6. A secure storage area.
F. Dispensary Hours of Operation. Medical
marijuana dispensary hours of operation
shall be no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and no
later than 5:00 p.m.
G. Additional Conditions and Standards.
1. The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of conditional use permits and
zoning clearances for medical marijuana
operations, including medical marijuana
designated caregiver cultivation
locations, medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation locations, medical
marijuana dispensaries, and medical
marijuana infusion facilities by the
Planning Administrator and Town
Council:
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 31
a. All activity related to medical marijuana
operations shall be conducted in
compliance with Arizona Revised
Statutes, Title 36, A.R.S. §36-2801 et
seq., Department rules and regulations,
and other implementing state statutes
and administrative regulations;
b. All activity related to medical marijuana
operations including but not limited to
cultivating, growing, processing,
displaying, selling and storage, shall be
conducted indoors and in a permanent
building and may not be located in a
trailer, cargo container or motor
vehicle;
c. Medical marijuana operations shall not
be allowed as home occupations;
d. Medical marijuana operations shall not
have drive-through service;
e. Sufficient measures and means of
preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust,
fluids and other substances from
exiting a dispensary or cultivation
facility must be provided at all times.
In the event that any odors, debris,
dust, fluids or other substance exit a
dispensary or cultivation facility, the
owner of the premises shall be jointly
and severally liable for such conditions
and shall be responsible for immediate,
full clean-up and correction of such
condition;
f. Off-site delivery of medical marijuana is
prohibited;
g. Consumption of marijuana on the
premises is prohibited;
h. Outdoor seating is prohibited;
i. Medical marijuana operations shall
obtain and display current applicable
business licenses, certificates, and
registrations;
j. Facilities shall not be larger than 2,500
square feet for a dispensary and 3,000
square feet for a cultivation location;
k. No retail sales of paraphernalia are
permitted at a dispensary, except as
permitted by law to patients, or
registered designated caregivers;
l. No minor patients shall be permitted
within a medical marijuana operation at
any time; and,
m. Retail sales of medical marijuana are
prohibited.
2. The total number of medical marijuana
dispensaries in the Town of Queen Creek
shall be limited to one (1) per every ten
(10) registered pharmacies located
within the corporate boundaries of the
Town.
H. Supplemental Materials.
1. The minimum requirements of this
subpart requiring supplemental materials
shall apply to all medical marijuana
dispensaries and medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation uses located
in any zoning district.
2. In addition to the other application
requirements, an applicant for any
medical marijuana dispensary or medical
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location conditional use permit shall
provide the following:
a. A notarized authorization executed by
the property owner, acknowledging and
consenting to the proposed use of the
property as a medical marijuana
dispensary or medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location,
as applicable.
b. The legal name of the medical
marijuana dispensary or medical
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location.
c. If the application is for a medical
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location, the name and location of the
medical marijuana dispensary with
which it is associated.
d. The name, address, and birth dates of
each officer and board member of the
nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary.
ARTICLE 6 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 6 - Page 32
e. The name, address, birth date, and
valid registry identification card for
each nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary agent.
f. A copy of the operating procedures
adopted in compliance with Arizona
Revised Statutes, Title 36, A.R.S. §36-
2801 et seq., and Department rules and
regulations.
g. A notarized certification that none of
the nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary officers or board members
has been convicted of any of the
following offenses:
1) A violent crime as defined in A.R.S.
§13-901.03 (B) that were classified
as a felony in the jurisdiction where
the person was convicted.
2) A violation of state of federal
controlled substance law that was
classified as a felony in the
jurisdiction where the person was
convicted except an offense for
which the sentence, including any
term of probation, incarceration of
supervised release, was completed
ten or more years or an offense
involving conduct that would be
immune from arrest, prosecution or
penalty under A.R.S. 36-2811 except
that the conduct occurred before the
effective date of that statute or was
prosecuted by an authority other
than the state of Arizona.
3. A notarized certification that none of the
nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary
officers or board members has served as
an officer or board member for a medical
marijuana dispensary that has had its
registration certificate revoked.
I. Prohibited Activities; Non-Conforming
Uses.
1. Any medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location not associated with a
medical marijuana dispensary is
prohibited, and only one (1) medical
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location shall be permitted for the single
medical marijuana dispensary with which
it is associated.
2. No medical marijuana operation or use
which purports to have cultivated or
dispensed medical marijuana prior to the
enactment of this Ordinance shall be
deemed to have been a legally
established use under the provisions of
this Ordinance and such medical
marijuana operation and use shall not be
entitled to claim legal nonconforming
status.
3. Medical marijuana dispensaries and
cultivation operations may not be colocated
with facilities used to prepare,
produce, or assemble food, whether for
medical or nonmedical purposes.
4. No medical marijuana or paraphernalia
shall be displayed or kept in a dispensary
or cultivation facility so as to be visible
from outside the premises.
5. If the State prohibits medical marijuana
dispensaries or cultivation, any
conditional use permit, site plan and
zoning clearance shall be deemed
immediately revoked by operation of law.
Zoning Ordinance
Article 7.0
Sign Regulations
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 1
7.0 Sign Regulations
Section Content Page
7.1 Purpose and Enforcement 1
7.2 General Regulations 1
7.3 Sign Measurement, Area, and Height 14
7.4 Permits, Approval, and Registration 15
7.5 Temporary Signs 16
7.6 A-frame Signs 23
7.7 Sign Walkers 24
7.8 Sensitive Use Signs 25
7.9 Interpretation of this Article 26
7.1 Purpose and Enforcement
A. The purpose of the sign regulations is to
establish reasonable regulations to
promote economic vitality, a visually
attractive environment, and vehicular and
to protect the public health and safety. The
purpose is addressed through the following
guiding principles:
1. To preserve and protect the public health,
safety and general welfare by ensuring
properly designed and located signs
within the Town of Queen Creek;
2. To promote and aid the public and private
sectors in the identification, location, and
advertisement of goods and services
throughout the Town;
3. To enhance the beauty, unique character,
and quality of the Town of Queen Creek
that will attract commerce, businesses,
residents, and visitors;
4. To promote economic development and
the value of commercial properties, be
sensitive to surrounding land uses and
maintain an attractive community
appearance;
5. To encourage development of private
property in harmony with the desired
character of the town while providing due
regard for the public and private interests
involved;
6. To promote the effectiveness of signs by
encouraging signs that are clear and
legible and by preventing overconcentration,
improper placement, and
excessive size.
B. Enforcement. The Planning Administrator is
hereby authorized and delegated the
authority to commence an action to enforce
the provisions of this Ordinance, pursuant
to A.R.S. §9-462.05.A, §9-462.05.B, and
Section 2.5 of this Ordinance.
C. Removal. The Planning Administrator or
designee may confiscate or cause to be
confiscated any signs in violation of this
article. Such signs shall be deemed a
nuisance and subject to be impounded as
evidence or to be disposed of without prior
notice.
D. Exceptions
1. Sign standards in the Downtown Core (DC)
district shall be in conformance with the DC
Design Guidelines and Chapter 7 of the
Design Standards. Alternative standards
that meet the intent of the Zoning
Ordinance may be considered by the
Planning Administrator. Where a conflict
arises between the applicability of the
Zoning Ordinance and Design Guidelines in
the DC district, the Planning Administrator
shall make the final determination.
7.2 General Regulations
A. Permitted Signs in Each District. Table
8.2.A-1 shows which types of signs are
allowed in each zoning district.
1. Signs Permitted in Residential Zoning
Districts. The following signs are
permitted in Residential Zoning Districts,
excluding R-2, R-3, and R-4:
a. Address Signs. Address signs shall not
exceed two (2) square feet in area.
Address signs which are readily visible
from the street are required on all new
construction prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
b. Temporary Signs. Temporary real
estate and miscellaneous signs as
described in section 7.5.
c. On-Site Directional Signs. On-site
directional signs are allowed pursuant
to subsection 7.2.I
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 2
d. Other Signs Allowed.
1) Institutional and civic uses in a
residential zone are allowed a total
sign area based on the following
street frontages:
Street Frontage
(in feet)
Total Sign Area
(in square feet)
0-50 16
51-100 24
101-250 32
251-500 40
500+ 48
2) Residential Subdivision entry
monument signs/features. Signage
may be wall-mounted or
freestanding, but shall not exceed
ten feet (10’) in height and thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area. If
freestanding, the height is measured
from the top of the adjacent curb or
crown of roadway, whichever is
higher. Entry monument
signs/features shall be decorative
and designed to match the
predominant architectural character
and materials of the neighborhood.
A sign may be displayed on one (1)
or both sides of a street providing
direct access to the subdivision and
serving as a major entry.
3) Residential subdivision entry
monument signs/features taller than
ten feet (10’) in height and up to
Twenty feet (20’) in height may be
considered by the Planning
Administrator if the following
enhanced design features are
provided:
a) Enhanced materials/finishes (i.e.
stone, brick, tile roof, laser cut
metal, etc.)
b) Unique design features (i.e. tower
elements, trellises, ramadas,
archways, fountains/water
features, seating areas, etc.)
c) Increased landscaping and
specialty lighting.
2. Signs Permitted In The R-2, R-3, and R-
4 Residential Zoning Districts:
a. Any sign permitted by subsection A.1 of
this section, subject to all sign
regulations for the aforementioned
districts;
b. Signs for a permitted use or building
shall be limited to one (1) on the
premises, subject to the following
conditions:
1) Maximum Size: Twenty-four (24)
square feet in area;
2) Located in the front yard;
3) If attached to a building, no part of
such sign shall project more than one
foot (1') from the building, nor shall it
extend above the top of a parapet
wall, or the eave line of gable,
gambrel, mansard or similar type
roof;
4) If such sign is ground-mounted, it
shall include a minimum two foot (2’)
architectural planter or base. If an
inorganic base is used, it shall be
designed to match the predominant
architectural character of the main
building. Ground-mounted signs shall
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 3
be loc ated at least ten feet (10’) from
any lot line and it shall not exceed six
feet (6’) in height; and,
5) If such sign is illuminated, the source
of illumination shall not be visible and
no flashing, rolling, scrolling or
intermittent illumination shall be
employed.
3. Signs Permitted In Commercial Centers
or Complexes (NC, AT, DC, C-1, C-2, C-
3, EMP-A and EMP-B) with three (3) or
more businesses:
a. Prior to issuance of Sign Permits for any
business or occupancy in a center or
complex, a Comprehensive Sign Plan
detailing the size, type, location, and
color of all signage within the
center/complex shall be submitted to
the Planning Administrator along with
the Major or Minor site plan for review
and approval;
b. A Comprehensive Sign Plan that
proposes a deviation from any of the
requirements provided in this
subsection shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission in accordance with
subsection 7.2.A.8 of this Section;
c. The following signs are allowed in
centers and complexes in the B-1, AT, ,
C-1, C-2, C-3, EMP-A and EMP-B
districts as part of the Comprehensive
Sign Plan submittal:
1) Building mounted identification
signage for each permitted use or
principal building, subject to the
following conditions:
a) Building front wall signage shall not
exceed one and a half (1 1/2)
square feet of sign area per lineal
foot of building occupancy frontage;
b) Side wall signage shall not exceed
one-half (1/2) square feet of sign
area per lineal foot of side wall;
c) Rear wall signage shall not exceed
one-half (1/2) square feet of sign
area per lineal foot of rear wall.
d) No part of such sign shall project
more than one foot (1') nor extend
above the height of the building;
e) Such sign may be illuminated the
source of illumination shall not be
visible and no flashing, rolling,
scrolling or intermittent illuminat ion
shall be employed; and,
f) Total wall signage shall not exceed
two-hundred fifty (250) square feet.
2) One (1) Identification groundmounted
sign containing the name of
the center and the tenants subject to
the following conditions:
a) Freestanding signs shall be
decorative using a minimum two
foot (2’) arc hitec tural planter or
base. If an inorganic base is used,
it shall be designed to match the
predominant architectural character
of the main building.
b) Such ground sign shall not exceed
forty-eight (48) square feet in sign
area, nor shall it exceed eight feet
(8’) in height above grade nor shall
it extend or project over any street
or alley line;
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 4
c) Parcels with six-hundred feet (600’)
are permitted two (2) groundmounted
signs per street frontage
as determined by the Planning
Administrator; and,
d) One (1) additional sign is permitted
for each additional three-hundred
feet (300’) of street frontage as
determined by the Planning
Administrator.
3) Any directional signs as needed not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area
per sign;
4) One (1) parking lot wall or ground
sign per parking lot entry or exit not
exceeding six (6) square feet in area
and limited to off-street parking
instructions and direction. Such sign
may have interior illumination;
5) Any lighting shall be placed to reflect
the light away from Residential
Districts or Residences; and,
6) Temporary real estate, construction,
and subdivision signs, pursuant to
subsection 7.5.C.2.
4. Signs Permitted in The NC, DC, and C-1
Commercial Districts for Individual
Buildings Not Part of a Center or
Complex:
a. Any sign allowed by this Ordinance in
the Residential Zoning District is
subject to the sign regulations of the
respective district. When any use
allowed in the foregoing residential
districts is established in any
commercial zoning district, the sign
limitations of the district in which the
use is first allowed shall apply,
regardless of the zone in which the use
is located;
b. Address signs which are readily visible
from the street are required on all new
commercial construction regardless of
the zoning district prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy;
c. On-site directional signs pursuant to
Section 7.2.I;
d. One freestanding sign per street
frontage, not exceeding twenty-four
(24) square feet in area and six feet (6’)
in height, subject to the following
conditions:
1) Parcels with six-hundred feet (600’)
of street frontage are permitted two
(2) freestanding signs per street
frontage as determined by the
Planning Administrator; and,
2) One (1) additional sign is permitted
for each additional three-hundred feet
(300’) of street frontage as
determined by the Planning
Administrator.
3) Freestanding signs shall be decorative
using a minimum two foot (2’)
architectural planter or base. If an
inorganic base is used, it shall be
designed to match the predominant
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 5
architectural character of the main
building.
e. Building front wall signage shall not
exceed one and a half (1 1/2) square
foot of sign area per lineal foot of
building occupancy frontage;
f. Side wall signage shall not exceed onehalf
(1/2) square feet of sign area per
lineal foot of side wall;
g. Rear wall signage shall not exceed onehalf
(1/2) square feet of sign area per
lineal foot of rear wall;
h. No part of such sign shall project more
than one foot (1') nor extend above the
height of the building;
i. Such sign may be illuminated provided
the source of illumination shall not be
visible and no flashing, rolling, scrolling
or intermittent illumination shall be
employed;
j. Total wall signage shall not exceed onehundred
fifty (150) square feet; and,
k. Temporary real estate, construction,
and subdivision signs pursuant to
Section subsection 7.5.C.2.
5. Signs Permitted in The AT Agritainment
and C-2, General Commercial District for
Individual Buildings Not Part of a Center
or Complex:
a. One freestanding sign per street
frontage.
b. Ground-mounted signs shall use a
minimum two foot (2’) arc hitec tural
planter or base. If an inorganic base is
used, it shall be designed to match the
predominant architectural character of
the main building. Ground-mounted
signs shall not exc eed eight feet (8’) in
height. Maximum sign area shall not
exceed forty-eight (48) square feet;
c. Parcels with six-hundred feet (600’) of
street frontage are permitted two (2)
freestanding signs per street frontage
as determined by the Planning
Administrator;
d. One (1) additional sign is permitted for
each additional three-hundred feet
(300’) of street frontage as determine d
by the Planning Administrator.
e. Building front wall signage shall not
exceed one and a half (1 1/2) square
foot of sign area per lineal foot of
building occupancy frontage;
f. Side wall signage shall not exceed onehalf
(1/2) square feet of sign area per
lineal foot of side wall;
g. Rear wall signage shall not exceed onehalf
(1/2) square feet of sign area per
lineal foot of rear wall;
h. No part of such sign shall project more
than one foot (1') nor extend above the
height of the building;
i. Such sign may be illuminated provided
the source of illumination shall not be
visible and no flashing, rolling, scrolling
or intermittent illumination shall be
employed; and,
j. Total wall signage shall not exceed onehundred
fifty (150) square feet.
6. Signs Permitted in The EMP-A and EMP-B
Light Industrial District for Individual
Buildings Not Part of a Center or
Complex:
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 6
a. Ground- mounted identification signs
for single tenant sites, subject to the
following conditions:
1) One sign per street frontage; and,
2) Maximum height of a ground sign
shall not exc eed eight feet (8’) and
forty-eight (48) square feet in area.
b. Building wall signage pursuant to
subsection 7.2.A.5.e - j. above.
c. Identification wall-mounted and
freestanding signs for multi-tenant
industrial projects shall comply with the
regulations in subsection 7.3.B.
7. Signs Permitted in the Mixed Use (MU)
and C-3, Regional Commercial Districts:
Sign standards for developments in these
districts shall be established as part of a
Comprehensive Sign Plan as provided in
subsection 7.2.A.8.
8. Comprehensive Sign Plan (CSP): A
Comprehensive Sign Plan is intended to
provide flexibility for standards that may
not meet the specific requirements set
forth in this Article. The purpose of the
Comprehensive Sign Plan is to form
signage criteria for a development that
promotes superior design.
a. Applicability. Comprehensive Sign Plan
applications shall be limited to the
allowances set forth in Table 7.2.A-1.
b. Design Criteria. All proposed signage
shall:
1) Integrate with the proposed
architectural elements of the site and
buildings;
2) Locate and orientate with respect to
the surrounding developed and
undeveloped land;
3) Not be larger than necessary for
sufficient visibility and legibility; and,
4) Not include any sign type otherwise
prohibited by this Article.
c. Approval. A Comprehensive Sign Plan
that proposes a deviation from any of
the requirements provided in this
Article or proposes electronic signage
shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
d. Permit. A building permit shall be
required for a Comprehensive Sign Plan
application as set forth in Section 7.4 of
this Ordinance.
e. Amendments. Amendments to an
approved Comprehensive Sign Plan
shall be processed in accordance with
the following procedures:
1) Minor Amendments. Minor
Amendments shall include any
change up to ten percent (10%)
which does not increase the overall
number of signage within the
originally approved Comprehensive
Sign Plan. All changes processed
under the Minor Amendment
procedures shall comply with all
provisions of this Section. Minor
amendments may be requested in
writing and may be approved
administratively by the Development
Services Director; and,
2) Major Amendments. Major
Amendments shall be defined as
those amendments not meeting the
criteria set forth above to qualify as
a Minor Comprehensive Sign Plan
Amendment. Major Amendment s
shall be requested, processed, and
approved or denied in the same
manner as the initial Comprehensive
Sign Plan submittal.
9. Operational Signs
a. In non-residential zoning districts,
businesses may display one (1)
electronic or neon Open/Closed sign in
window areas only. Such sign shall only
be displayed on the interior of a window
and shall not count towards the
maximum allowed signage, provided
the following conditions are met:
1) Maximum area shall not exceed two
(2) square feet;
2) Sign shall not be placed higher than
six (6) feet from finished grade;
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 7
3) This provision does not pertain to nor
include electronic or static message
or reader boards;
4) A sign permit is not required; and,
5) Architectural accent lighting may be
considered during the Site
Plan/Design Review application
process if the proposed concept is
complimentary to the building
architecture. If related to signage,
such elements may count towards
the maximum allowed signage.
10. Fuel Service Station Electronic Message
Signs.
a. Fuel service stations may use up to
one-half (1/2) of the allowed
freestanding sign area for electronic
display to identify the current price of
fuel being sold. The maximum sign area
used for the electronic display shall be
twenty-four (24) square feet. No
animation or flashing shall be allowed.
All other requirements shall be in
accordance with the freestanding sign
regulations as outlined in the
corresponding zoning district .
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 8
Table 7.2.A-1: Permitted Signs Per Zoning District.
??
Allowed
- - Prohibited
* For Individual Buildings Not Part of a Center or Complex
? Comprehensive Sign Plan Required (Section 7.2.A.8)
@ 6' high for freestanding or 8’ high for wall mounted
% Comprehensive Sign Plan permitted subject to Sec tion 7.2.A.8
^ Temporary signs permitted subject to Section 7.5
** Entry monument signs/features greater than 10 feet in height are only permitted subject to
Article 7, Section 7.2.A.1.d.
Signs
Zoning District
Residential
Zoning except
R-2, R-3
and R-4
R-2, R-3
and R-4
Commercial
Centers or
Complexes:
NC, AT, DC C-1,
C-2, C-3, EMP-A
and EMP-B
NC, DC and
C-1 *
C-2 and AT *
EMP-A and
EMP-B *
PCD,
MU
and
C-3 ?
Zoning Section 7.2.A.1 7.2.A.2 7.2.A.3 7.2.A.4 7.2.A.5 7.2.A.6 7.2.A.
7
Address ? ?
?
?
?
?
?
Name Plate ?
- - - - - - - - - - - -
Menu Board ?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Height 6FT /8 FT @ 6FT /8 FT @ 6FT /8 FT @ 6FT /8 FT @ 6FT /8 FT @ ?
Total SF 12 SF 24 SF 24 SF 24 SF 24 SF ?
Freestanding
- - ? ? ? ? ? ?
Number - - 1 1/frontage 1/frontage 1/frontage 1/frontage ?
Height 10/20 ** 6 FT 8 FT 6 FT 8 FT 8 FT ?
Total SF 24 SF 24 SF 48 SF 24 SF 48 SF 24 SF ?
Wall - - - - ?
?
?
?
?
Building
Front
- - - -
1 1/2 SF / 1 LF 1 1/2 SF / 1 LF 1 1/2 SF / 1 LF 1 1/2 SF / 1 LF ?
Side/Rear
- - - -
1/2 SF / 1 LF 1/2 SF / 1 LF 1/2 SF / 1 LF 1/2 SF / 1 LF ?
Max. Wall
Signage
- - - - 250 SF 150 SF 150 SF 150 SF ?
On-Site
Directory
- -
? ? ? ? ? ?
Tenant
Directory
- - ? ? ? ? ? ?
Comp. Sign
Plan %
- -
- - ? ? ? ? ?
Temporary
Signs ^
- - ? ? ? ? ? ?
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 9
11. Specialty Signage: Awning, Canopy,
Neon, and other similar specialty signage
may be permitted subject to permit and
design review. Such signage shall count
towards the applicable wall or ground
mounted signage allowance.
B. Prohibited Signs. Signs not specifically
authorized are prohibited, including but
not limited to the following:
1. Animated Signs. Animated signs are not
allowed, except for approved pennants,
banner, flags, revolving barber poles and
clocks including those which alternately
display time and temperature having a
maximum face area not exceeding three
(3) square feet;
2. Flashing Signs. Flashing signs other than
those which alternately display time and
temperature, and are a maximum of
three (3) square feet in area;
3. Sound Signs. Signs emitting sound or
any substance are not allowed;
4. Obscene Signs. No person, as principal,
agent or otherwise, shall exhibit, post or
display or cause or permit to be
exhibited, posted or displayed, upon any
advertising structure, any obscene
statements, symbol or sign. A
statement, symbol or sign is obscene
within the meaning of this Section when:
a. The average person, applying
contemporary state standards would
find that the item, taken as a whole,
appeals to the prudent interest;
b. The item depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual activity;
and,
c. The item taken as a whole lacks serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.
5. Signs Affixed to Objects. The tacking,
painting, pasting or otherwise affixing of
signs visible from a public way, to any
trees, fences, utility poles or other
structures, or upon vehicles where such
vehicles are used primarily as support for
such signs, is prohibited;
6. Off-site Sign. Any form of remote
signage, such as off-premises advertising
signs or billboards, are prohibited;
7. Signs with Exposed Raceways. Except
where it is determined by the Planning
Administrator that it is not structurally
feasible to install a sign without using an
exposed raceway;
8. Pole Signs and / or Roof Signs. Pole signs
and / or roof signs except as specifically
approved when it is determined that a
ground or wall sign is not feasible due to
site limitations and / or line of sight
interruptions for vehicular traffic;
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 10
9. Wall-mounted cabinet signs are
prohibited, unless such sign:
a. Utilizes a cabinet that is stylized in
shape, rather than rectangular, to
reflect the shape of the image printed
on the sign face;
b. Utilizes a molded sign face, with
embossed copy or sign copy or sign
copy in relief; or,
c. Utilizes a nationally registered
trademark
10. Projecting Signs. Projecting Signs may be
permitted in the TC and AT Districts or as
part of an approved Comprehensive Sign
Plan. Projecting Sign standards:
a. Maximum sign area of twelve (12)
square feet;
b. Minimum/maximum spacing from
building of six inches/twelve inches
(6”/12”);
c. The bottom of the sign shall not be less
than eight feet (8’) from the base of the
building;
d. No sign shall project into the public
right-of-way, except as follows:
e. Upon administrative approval, wall
signs attached to the front face of
building may extend a maximum of
twelve inc hes (12”) into the public
right-of-way.
11. Signs Facing Residential Districts. Signs
identifying a business in a non-residential
zoning district are not permitted on
building façade adjacent to a shared
zoning district boundary with a
residential zoning district. Not applicable
when the zoning district boundary is a
public right-of-way; and,
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 11
12. Vehicle Signs. Signs attached to a vehicle
primarily for the purposes of advertising,
with such vehicle placed adjacent to a
roadway and not used for the typical
conduct of the business so advertised.
C. Nonconforming Signs.
1. Definition of Legal Nonconforming Signs.
Legal nonconforming signs shall mean a
sign (or signs) which lawfully exist at the
time of the enactment of this Ordinance,
and which does not conform to the
regulations as specified herein for the
zone in which said sign is located. A legal
nonconforming sign may not be altered in
any manner not in conformance with this
Ordinance; however, such sign(s) shall
be maintained as required by this Section
and may be reasonably repaired as
determined by the Planning
Administrator.
2. Not with standing any provisions to the
contrary contained herein, a legal
nonconforming sign may be utilized in
perpetuity as noted herein.
3. Whenever the use of given building or
premises changes to another use allowed
in the respective zoning district, all
nonconforming signs on the building and
/ or premises shall be modified to bring
them into conformance with these
regulations.
4. Removal of Nonconforming Signs. Upon
adoption of this Ordinance, any signs not
enjoying legal nonconforming status shall
be removed from display within six (6)
months.
D. Location and Placement of Signs.
1. Temporary signs, as defined in this
Ordinance, may be permitted in the
public right-of-way provided they are
fifteen feet (15’) from the pavement edge
of any roadway, or two feet (2’) behind
the sidewalk, where a sidewalk is
present.
2. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or
maintained so as to prevent free ingress
to, or egress from, any door, window or
fire escape nor shall any sign be attached
to a standpipe or fire escape.
3. No signs (temporary or permanent) shall
be erected or maintained within the sight
visibility triangle as defined in the Town
of Queen Creek Design Standards and
Procedures Manual, or at any location
where, by reason of its position, shape,
color or illumination, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of, or be confused
with any authorized traffic sign, signal or
device, or with any device mounted on a
police or fire protection vehicle; or which
makes use of suc h words as, “Stop”, or
“Look”, in suc h a manner as to interfere
with, mislead, or confuse drivers.
4. No sign shall be erected or painted upon
or attached to any tree, rock or other
natural feature, or to any fence post, or
utility pole or structure.
5. Every illuminated sign shall be so placed
as to prevent any light or reflection from
being cast directly on any adjoining
Residential district.
6. The lowest portion of any sign, which
extends over an area intended for
pedestrian use, shall not be less than
eight feet (8') above the finished grade
below the sign. The lowest point of any
sign, which extends over an area
intended for vehicular use, shall not be
less than fourteen feet (14') above the
finished grade below the sign.
E. Permanent Sign Design Criteria.
1. Signs are regarded as an integral and
complementary element of the overall
architectural character of the Town and
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 12
shall be integrated with the building and
landscape design.
2. All freestanding signs shall have a
substantial base or planter with a
minimum height of two feet (2’).
3. All signs, except those consisting of
individual letters mounted against a nondifferentiated
surface, shall have edge
treatment or borders.
4. Signs which are designed to be
c ompatible with Queen Creek’s
Western/Southwestern character and
agricultural heritage are encouraged.
F. Non-Commercial Speech. Signs authorized
in this section may contain non-commerc ial
copy in lieu of any other copy.
G. Historic Signs. Signs which have been
accepted and certified as historic by the
Town Council may be utilized in all zoning
districts, subject to the following:
1. All such signs shall be restored or
recreated in the same precise location for
which certification was granted by the
Town Council.
2. The restoration or recreation of certified
historic signs shall be consistent with the
details of color, copy, and artwork
approved by the Town Council.
3. Any such sign may not be utilized to
increase the allowed sign area for a
business product or service which is
located on or sold on the premises for
which the historic sign was approved;
however, the historic sign may be utilized
in place of non-historic signs regardless
of the square footage of the certified
historic sign.
4. The Town Council may grant historic
certification to a sign which is more than
fifty (50) years old, whether or not the
sign has been in continuous use, upon
making the following findings as based on
the evidence presented:
a. That the sign in question is typical of
signs which were utilized during the
time period when the sign was erected
painted or installed.
H. Window Signs. Up to one-hundred- percent
(100%), of aggregate window area,
providing that the following criteria are
complied with:
1. Window signage shall be placed on the
street level of the building;
2. No window signage is permitted above
the first story of the building; and,
3. No sign permit required.
I. On-Site Directional Signs. Directional
signs, as defined herein, are permitted in
any district, subject to the following
requirements:
1. Such signs are limited in area to three (3)
square feet;
2. When freestanding, no such sign shall
exc eed four feet (4’) in height; and,
3. Unless indicated otherwise, directional
signs do not count against the total
allowed sign area for a given site,
building or occupancy.
J. Signs for Religious Institutions.
1. Signs are allowed as follows:
a. Freestanding signs are allowed as
follows:
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 13
1) Maximum of twenty-four (24) square
feet in area and six feet (6’) in
height;
2) Maximum of twelve (12) square feet
in area for display of the date, time
of services, etc.; and,
3) One (1) Freestanding sign per street
frontage.
4) Freestanding signs shall be
decorative using a minimum two foot
(2’) arc hitec tural planter or base. If
an inorganic base is used, it shall be
designed to match the predominant
architectural character of the main
building.
b. Wall-mounted signs are allowed as
listed in subsection 8.2.A.5
K. Menu Boards. Menu boards are permitted,
as described below:
1. For drive-thru and / or drive-up
restaurants;
2. May be freestanding and / or buildingmounted;
3. Each qualified restaurant may have a
maximum of two (2) total menu boards
permitted, one (1) of which may be a
preview menu board;
4. Each shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
square feet in area;
5. Shall not exc eed six feet (6’) in height
when building-mounted or eight feet (8’)
in height when freestanding; and,
6. Freestanding drive-through menu boards
shall have:
a. A monument base with an aggregate
width of at least fifty percent (50%) the
width of the sign of masonry
construction
b. A landscape area at the base of the
sign(s) equal to at least two (2) square
feet for each square foot of sign area.
c. Match the architectural style, material,
and color of the principal structure.
d. Shall not be placed adjacent to a public
right-of-way; and,
e. Shall require a permit prior to
installation.
L. Obsolete Signs. Any obsolete sign and its
supporting structures and frames shall be
removed by the owner of the property, his
agent or person having beneficial use of the
building or structure upon which such sign
structure is erected within six (6) months
of the date of receipt of notification from
the Town that the sign is obsolete.
M. Maintenance of Signs. All signs shall be
maintained in order to prevent and
eliminate any peeling, cracking,
discoloration, covering with dirt, or other
material and other similar problems caused
by common weather conditions. All
cracked or broken sign faces and nonfunctioning
interior lamps shall be repaired
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 14
or replaced within forty-five (45) working
days following receipt of notification from
the Town that the sign requires repair or
maintenance.
7.3 Sign Measurement, Height,
and Area
A. All sign areas shall be measured in
accordance with the following:
1. The area of signs with all copy mounted
on a single geometric plane shall consist
of the entire area within a continuous
exterior perimeter which bounds all
portions of the sign including background
panels except those which are entirely
opaque and have the same color and
texture as the building to which the sign
is attached. Necessary structural
supports are also excluded from the sign
area calculation;
2. Double-faced signs shall be counted as
one (1) sign and the area shall be
calculated as that which is visible from
any single viewing position on or above
the ground;
3. Spherical, free form sculptured and other
non-planar signs are counted as one (1)
sign and the area shall be calculated as
the sum of the two (2) largest of the four
(4) vertical sides of the smallest
polyhedron that will encompass the sign
structure;
4. For a sign having multiple components
(e.g., a service station
identification/price sign combination) and
mounted on the same surface; the sign
area will constitute the area defined by
the smallest continuous exterior
perimeter that will encompass that
several components of the sign;
5. Total sign area for a given site, building
or occupancy shall include the aggregate
area of all permitted signs, except onsite
directional signs and window signs as
allowed by this Section;
6. When calculating the allowed sign area
for a given occupancy the following shall
apply:
a. Allowed sign area ratios are indicated in
those sections of this Ordinance which
set forth the regulations for each
respective zoning district;
b. Interior Occupancies. Allowed sign
area calculations shall be based on the
linear distance of the width of single
occupancy from which the building or
occupancies' address is derived;
c. Corner Occupancies. Each building face
shall be allowed sign area based on the
ratio of respective zoning district for
each individual building face fronting on
a public street, (see Table 7.2.A-1).
However, in no case shall the aggregate
sign area exceed the maximum allowed
sign area for a single frontage or
interior occupancy business as allowed
in the respective zoning district; and,
d. Diagonal Cutoffs. A corner occupancy
which has a diagonal cutoff at the
corner may calculate the allowed sign
area as follows:
1) Project a line along the front and side
exposures to the point of
intersections;
2) Select the resultant distance for
either the front or side exposures
projections;
3) Add the distance of the selected
projection into the linear
measurement of the actual building
exposure for the exposure selected;
4) The result may be utilized in
conjunction with the appropriate
ratio for the respective zoning
district to establish the allowed sign
area for the exposure so measured.
The allowed sign area thereby
calculated may be placed only: a) on
the diagonal cutoff; b) the exposure
for which the calculation was made;
or, c) upon approval by the Planning
Administrator a non-calculated
exposure;
5) The remaining exposure not
calculated with the diagonal cutoff
exposure (street of street side) shall
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 15
be allowed sign area in accordance
with the linear distance of the actual
building exposure (non-projected)
and the ratio allowed by the
respective zoning district;
6) In no case shall the total sign area
exceed that allowed by the
respective zoning district; and,
7) All linear occupancy frontage
distances shall be measured at
sidewalk or grade level immediately
adjacent to that portion of the
structure being utilized for the
occupancy in question.
B. Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured
as follows:
1. Freestanding Sign. The height of
freestanding signs shall be measured as
the vertical distance between the top of
the curb, or crown of the roadway where
no curb exists, to the top of the sign. The
total sign height includes any monument
base or other structure erected to
support or ornaments the sign; and,
2. Wall-Mounted Sign. The height of wallmounted
signs shall be measured as the
vertical distance between the top of the
curb, or crown of the roadway where no
curb exists, to the top of the sign,
including ornamentation.
7.4 Permits, Approval and
Registration
A. Building Permit Required. A building
permit is required for all signs, unless
specifically exempted, which are intended
to be erected, painted, or otherwise
installed in the Town of Queen Creek.
Building permits shall not be required for
home occupation signs, temporary real
estate, construction, or subdivision signs,
or for minor repair or for repainting of any
permitted sign.
B. Application for Building Permit. In addition
to information required in accordance with
the building code, application for building
permit for signs shall include:
1. Site plan indicating the location of the
sign in relation to nearby buildings,
structures, right-of-way, easements and
driveways;
2. A scaled drawing indicating the
dimensions of the sign, sign copy, all
materials and the method of construction
and attachment to the building;
3. Name of person, firm or corporation
erecting signs and any attendant
structures;
4. Written consent of the owner of the
building, structure or premises on which
sign is to be erected; and,
5. Other information as may be required.
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 16
C. Issuance and Effect of Permit.
1. Compliance with Ordinances. If, upon
examination of plans, specifications and
the premises on which erection of the
sign is proposed, the Planning
Administrator finds that the proposed
sign complies with all provisions of this
Ordinance and with all other Ordinances
of the Town, a building permit shall be
issued.
2. Permit Revocable. All rights and
privileges acquired under a building
permit are mere licenses revocable at any
time by the Town of Queen Creek.
3. Liability. The granting of a building permit
shall not be deemed to be a permit for
approval of any violation of this
Ordinance, The provisions of this
Ordinance shall not be constructed as
relieving or limiting in any way the
responsibility or liability of any person,
firm or corporation, erecting or owning
any sign, or resulting from the negligence
or willful act of such person, firm or
corporation, its agents, employees or
workmen, in the construction,
maintenance, repair or removal of any
sign erected in accordance with a permit
issued hereunder. Nor shall issuance of
such permit be constructed as imposing
on the Town or its officers or employees,
any responsibility of liability by reasons of
the approval of any signs, material, or
devices under the provision of this
Ordinance.
D. Registration of Signs. Every sign subject to
the issuance of a building permit shall have
affixed so as to be visible from the adjacent
grade thereto, in letters not less than one
inch (1") in height: the date of installation,
the permit number, and the voltage of any
electrical apparatus.
7.5 Temporary Signs
A. All temporary signs require a Temporary
Sign Permit, unless specifically exempted
herein.
B. All temporary signs shall be properly
anchored or weighted down to avoid being
displaced in windy conditions, or otherwise
be a safety hazard to the public. In
addition, all signs shall be of high quality
professional workmanship and constructed
of durable and weather-resistant materials.
C. Temporary Sign types and regulations:
1. Grand Opening Signs.
a. A grand opening sign is a temporary
sign which calls attention to a new
business or institutional use. These
signs are allowed in any zone in which
the commercial, industrial, or
institutional uses are permitted.
b. The sign(s) shall not be displayed for
more than ninety (90) consecutive days
in a calendar year.
c. The maximum banner size for grand
openings shall be forty-eight (48)
square feet.
d. Sign placement and duration shall be
approved through the Temporary Sign
Permit application.
e. Only one (1) grand opening sign shall
be allowed per use.
f. A Temporary Sign permit is required.
g. For large single-users and/or other
mitigating circumstances, the Planning
Administrator may modify the size,
number and/or placement provisions of
this subsection.
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 17
2. Special Event Signs.
a. A business special event sign(s) is a
temporary sign(s) displayed on
property used or zoned for any use
other than a single-family residence
and which displays any type of event
that is unique or significant to the
business located upon the property.
Such events include, but are not limited
to, an anniversary, special sale, change
in ownership or management, or similar
event.
b. A Temporary Sign permit is required.
c. Special event signs are subject to all of
the following requirements:
1) Use of such sign(s) shall be limited to
no more than fifty-two (52)
cumulative days within each calendar
year;
2) An annual sign permit through the
Temporary Sign Permit process is
required and must be displayed to be
visible to the public during the
allowed time of the permit;
3) The maximum banner size for special
event signage shall be forty-eight
(48) square feet;
4) Sign placement and duration shall be
approved through the Temporary
Sign Permit application; and,
5) Only one (1) special event sign shall
be allowed per event.
6) For large single-users and/or other
mitigating circumstances, the
Planning Administrator may modify
the size, number and/or placement
provisions of this subsection.
7) An application fee established by
Council resolution shall be charged for
each sign permit issued under this
subsection.
3. Open During Construction Signs. An
"open during construction sign" is a
temporary sign displayed on property
used or zoned for any use other than a
single-family residence and which calls
attention to an existing business or
institutional use located on property
adjacent to or otherwise affected by a
Town funded or designated construction
project.
a. No sign permit is required.
b. The Planning Administrator shall verify
a property's eligibility.
c. Open during construction signs are
subject to all of the following
requirements:
1) Only one (1) single or double-faced
open during construction sign shall be
allowed per use;
2) Such sign may include a banner,
pennant, or tear-drop banner;
3) The face area of said sign shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet; and,
4) The sign shall be removed prompt ly
following the completion of the Town
funded or designated construction
project.
4. Contractor/Construction Signs.
Contractor signs designating the
contractor or subcontractor engaged in
the construction or repair of a building or
buildings on each parcel of land shall be
allowed one (1) non-illuminated sign
without a permit if in compliance with the
following requirements:
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 18
a. The area of any single sign shall not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area nor exc eed eight feet (8’) in
height;
b. The sign shall be removed within ten
(10) days of completion of the work by
the contractor or subcontractor on the
property; and,
c. All contractors or subc ontrac tor’s signs
may be consolidated on one (1) sign.
The area of a consolidated sign is
calculated at six (6) square feet per
contractor or subcontractor listed with
a maximum sign area of one-hundred
(100) square feet for six (6) or more
contractors. Said sign shall not exceed
eight feet (8’) in height or be loc ated
c loser than ten feet (10’) to a public
right-of-way.
5. Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs for
properties for sale, rent or lease within
the incorporated boundaries of the Town
of Queen Creek are allowed in any
district, subject to the following
requirements:
a. Real estate signs of six (6) square feet
in area and less than six feet (6’) in
height do not require a permit. Written
permission must be obtained from the
property owner prior to installing such
signs on private property. Except as
provided herein, posting such signs on
public property is prohibited and
subject to immediate removal. These
signs shall be made of solid, nonflexible
material. Off-premises portable
signs or "A-frame" signs are not
allowed.
b. Residential real estate open house
signs are allowed and do not require a
permit, subject to the provisions of
Section 7.5.B.9;
c. Unsubdivided and non-residential
properties are allowed one (1) on-site
sign per street frontage. Said sign shall
be no larger than thirty-two (32)
square feet in area. The highest portion
of the sign shall be no greater than
eight feet (8’) above the finished grade.
A setbac k of ten feet (10’) behind the
right-of-way line is required; and,
d. A Model Home Complex may include
some or all of the following signage
options. All signs must be approved as
part of a home builder sign plan and
shall be removed upon terminat ion of
the Temporary Use Permit:
1) Residential subdivision off-site
directional signs of six (6)
square feet in area and less than six
(6) feet in height do not require
a permit. A total of two (2)
residential subdivision off-site
directional signs are permitted. A
setback of ten (10) feet behind the
right of way line is required. Written
permission must be obtained
from the property owner prior to
installing such signs on
private property. Except as provided
herein, posting such signs on
public property is prohibited and are
subject to immediate removal.
2) Residential subdivisions are allowed
one (1) on-site sign per arterial street
frontage. Said sign shall be no larger
than forty-eight (48) square feet in
area. Sign rider panels are not
permitted. The highest position of the
sign shall be no greater than twelve
feet (12’) above the finished grade. A
setback of ten feet (10’) behind the
right-of-way line is required.
3) Model complex location signs, are
limited to one (1) and shall not
exceed forty-eight (48) total square
feet of sign area or twelve feet (12')
in height above the finished grade.
Sign rider panels are not permitted.
In the event more than one (1) model
home complex is provided within the
subdivision, each model home
complex location shall be allowed one
(1) model complex location sign.
4) Model home complex directional signs
used to identify the location of
parking and the location of another
model home complex within the
project, etc. shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in area or four feet (4’) in
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 19
height above finished grade. A
maximum of two (2) directional signs
are permitted per model home
complex. Two (2) directional signs
may be co-located on the same
structure, provided the structure does
not exc eed eight feet (8’) in height.
5) One (1) flag pole for the flags of the
United States of America and / or the
State of Arizona with a maximum
height of sixty feet (60’) at each
model home complex. A building
permit shall be required for the flag
pole construction. Corporate flags
shall be placed below both flags of the
United States of America and the
state of Arizona.
6) Builder attention flags, at the model
home complex not to exceed fifteen
(15) square feet in area or fifteen feet
(15’) in height. A maximum of six (6)
attention flags shall be permitted per
model home within the model home
complex and shall maintain a
minimum spac ing of twenty feet (20’)
between attention flags. Flagpoles
must have a minimum setback of five
feet (5’) behind the right of way line.
7) One (1) on-site future development
sign per arterial street frontage
providing the name and contract
information for the future home
builder. Said sign shall be no larger
than thirty-two (32) square feet in
area. The highest portion of the sign
shall be no greater than eight feet (8’)
above the finished grade. A setback of
ten feet (10’) behind the right-of-way
line is required. Future development
signs may be approved in advance of
submission of a home builders sign
plan provided sufficient
documentation is presented to
indicate the applicant is the property
owner of record. Future development
signs are permitted for one (1) year,
or until approval of a home builder
sign plan, whichever occurs first.
6. Off-Site Real Estate Signs. Temporary
off-site directional real estate signs may
be placed on an approved kiosk sign
located in the right-of-way.
7. Residential Subdivision Signs. A sign
used in connection with the development
and location of a recorded residential
subdivision for the sale of homes or lots
therein:
a. One (1) single or double-faced
freestanding sign is allowed upon the
parcel of property to be developed
unless it is a corner lot, in which case
one (1) such sign per street front may
be allowed. Such sign(s) shall have a
maximum sign area not to exceed
ninety-six (96) square feet.
b. The sign shall not exceed fifteen feet
(15’) in height or be located closer than
ten feet (10’) from a public right-ofway.
c. The sign shall be located at least one
hundred (100) feet away from any
property line of an existing residence.
d. Signs shall be removed when 90
percent completion of each phase to
which the sign is a part of is developed.
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 20
8. Development Signs. Signs used to
indicate or identify a proposed future
development upon real property.
a. A sign permit shall be required for the
erection of a development sign and is
valid for a period of one (1) year.
b. One (1) single or double-faced
freestanding sign is allowed upon the
parcel of property to be developed
unless it is a corner lot, in which case
one (1) such sign per street front.
c. The face area of said sign shall not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet for
the first acre or portion thereof. When
the proposed parcel for development
exceeds one (1) acre in size, the sign
area may be increased four (4) square
feet for each additional acre or portion
thereof, not to exceed ninety-six (96)
square feet.
d. These signs shall not exceed fifteen feet
(15’) in height or be loc ated c loser than
ten feet (10’) to a public right-of-way.
e. Such sign or signs shall be removed
within ten (10) days after completion of
the announced development of one (1)
year, whichever is first.
9. Open House Signs. An open house sign is
a portable, temporary sign to direct
traffic to a home for sale.
a. The sign must contain the words “open
house” or similar wording.
b. The sign shall not exceed a maximum
height of three feet (3’) and a
maximum area of six (6) square feet
and may be freestanding.
c. The sign may be double-faced but shall
not be illuminated.
d. These signs shall be made of solid, nonflexible
material. Off-premises portable
signs or "A-frame" signs are allowed.
e. Signs shall not be located on public
property, including rights-of-way;
f. Signs may only be displayed during the
hours a real estate agent is at the
residence offered for sale;
g. A maximum of five (5) such signs for
each home or group of homes in the
subdivision shall be allowed;
h. Written authorization for such
installation shall be provided by the
property owner prior to posting such
signs on private property;
i. The Planning Administrator, or
designee may confiscate or cause to be
confiscated any signs in violation of this
article. Such signs shall be deemed a
nuisance and subject to be impounded
as evidence. The Code Enforcement
Officer will make a good faith effort to
contact the owner of the sign prior to
its disposal. The Town retains the right
to dispose of the signage one (1) week
after a good faith effort to reach its
owner;
j. No sign permit is required.
E. Temporary Signs – Other.
1. Political Signs.
a. Political and campaign signs on behalf
of candidates for public office or urging
action on primary, general or special
election ballots are permitted in all
zoning districts.
b. Political/campaign signs do not require
a sign permit.
c. Political signs in the right-of-way are
allowed for a period not to exceed sixty
(60) days IMMEDIATELY preceding any
primary, general, or special elections to
which they refer.
d. The person, party, or parties
responsible for the erection or
distribution of any such signs shall be
jointly and individually liable for their
removal.
e. Political signs in the public right of way
shall be removed no later than fifteen
(15) days following a special or general
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 21
election. Political signs for a candidate
in the Primary Election who does not
advance to the General Election shall be
removed no later than fifteen (15) days
following the primary election.
f. Political signs shall not exceed sixteen
(16) square feet in an area zoned for
residential use and thirty-two (32)
square feet in any other location. The
highest portion of the sign shall not
exc eed six feet (6’) from the finishe d
grade.
g. All political signs placed in the right-ofway
shall include the name and
telephone number or website address
of the candidate or campaign
committee contact person.
h. Political signs may be placed on private
property with the property owner’s
permission.
i. A political sign shall not be placed in a
location that is hazardous to public
safety, obstructs clear vision in the
area, or interferes with the
requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
j. A sign placed so as to violate the
Town’s site distanc e standards may be
considered to be in an unsafe location
and subject to relocation or removal.
Site Distance Standards:
k. If the Town deems the improper
placement of a political sign an
emergency, the Town may immediately
relocate or remove the sign. The Town
shall notify the candidate or campaign
committee who placed the sign within
twenty-four hours after the relocation
that the sign has been relocated or
removed.
l. If a political sign is placed in a location
in violation of this Ordinance, but is not
deemed to constitute an emergency,
the Town may notify the candidate or
campaign committee who placed the
sign of the violation. If the sign remains
in violation at least twenty-four hours
after the notification to the candidate or
campaign committee, the Town may
remove the sign. Town staff shall
contact the candidate or campaign
committee contact and shall retain the
sign for at least ten (10) business days
to allow the candidate or campaign
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 22
committee to retrieve the sign without
penalty.
m. Political signs shall not be placed on or
affixed to any utility pole, fence, tree or
other vegetation, traffic control device,
or safety barrier.
n. The installation of political signs on any
structure owned by the Town is
prohibited.
o. All political signs shall comply with
A.R.S. 16-1019.
2. Temporary Signs for Religious
Institutions. Religious institutions within
the incorporated boundaries of the Town
of Queen Creek are allowed temporary
directional signs, which may be placed in
the right-of-way, subject to the
following:
a. A religious institution may use a total of
five (5) off-site directional signs. Each
sign shall not exceed six (6) square
feet. These signs are subject to the
following:
1) Off-site directional signs shall be
located within a two (2) mile radius of
the subdivision or religious institution
being advertised;
2) Signs shall be installed no earlier than
6 p.m. on Friday of each week, and
shall be removed no later than 5 a.m.
on the following Monday; and,
3) Signs shall also be installed no earlier
than 6:00 p.m. preceding any
commonly recognized holiday and
shall be removed by 5:00 a.m. the
day following the holiday or on
Monday when the holiday falls on the
previous Friday.
b. The content of these signs shall be
directional instructions and may show
the religious institution name, general
description, and directional arrows;
c. Signs shall be constructed of any
heavy-duty, weather-resistant material
including laminated paper, plastic,
metal, or wood;
d. The back of each individual sign must
contain, in clear, legible form, the
owner’s name and telephone number in
characters at least one-half inc h (1/2”)
in size;
e. No sign shall be installed within the
center median of any public roadway or
within the safety triangle of an
intersection;
f. No signs shall be attached to any
roadway or natural features including
light and signal poles, street or
regulatory signs, bridges, trees or other
existing objects;
g. The person responsible for any sign
shall be the owner of the
congregational leader/pastor of the
religious institution being advertised;
and,
h. Written permission must be obtained
from the property owner prior to
installing these signs on private
property.
3. Garage Sale Signs. Garage sale signs
may be allowed without permit provided
they are used only during the hours the
sale is being conducted. Such signs shall
not exceed six (6) square feet in area, or
six feet (6’) in height above the finishe d
grade. No more than three (3) off-site,
temporary signs may be used, and shall
be plac ed a minimum of fifteen feet (15’)
from the pavement edge or two feet (2’)
behind the sidewalk, if a sidewalk exists.
Signs shall only be placed on private
property and shall not be placed on any
sign, tree, light pole, traffic signal or
controller, utility box or other structure
within the right-of-way. The person who
installed the signs shall remove all signs
at the end of the sale. If the person
installing the signs is unknown, the
property owner shall be responsible for
removal.
F. Prohibited Temporary Signs. The
following temporary signs are prohibited
unless expressly authorized within any of
the subsections set out below and for the
limited purposes stated within any such
subsection:
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 23
1. Non-public signs in public rights-of-way
or on public property;
2. Signs mounted on a building roof;
3. Signs having intermittent or flashing
illumination, animated or moving parts,
or that emit sound; wind-driven
spinners, streamers, balloons, flags,
search lights, strobe lights, holographic
projections, laser light displays,
beacons, bandit, and inflatable signs;
4. Signs imitating official traffic control
signs, or any sign or device obscuring
actual municipal or other public traffic
control signs or devices;
5. Signs mounted on, or applied to trees,
utility poles, rocks, or City owned
property;
6. Signs placed upon private property
without the property owner's approval;
and,
7. Business identification/advertising signs
in single-family zoning districts.
7.6 A-frame Signs
A. A-frame signs shall be allowed without
permit for businesses in the Commerc ial,
Industrial, , Office, Employment, and Public
Facility/Institutional zoning districts. For
the purposes of this section, a business is
defined as one (1) entity per building or
suite of ten-thousand (10,000) square feet
or less if located in the Commercial, , and
Office Zoning Districts and up to thirtythousand
(30,000) square feet if located in
the Employment and Public Facility/
Institutional Zoning Districts, subject to the
following regulations:
B. Size. Signs shall be no greater than thirtysix
inc hes (36”) in width and forty-eight
inc hes (48”) in height.
C. Number. Up to two (2) A-Frame Signs shall
be permitted per business. Only one (1)
sign per business shall be permitted to be
placed on any one (1) adjacent street
frontage. In no event shall the combined
number of A-Frame signs exceed two (2).
D. Location. A-Frame Signs shall be located
only:
1. At grade level;
2. Adjacent to the business being
advertised, as follows:
a. Signs shall be placed on the business
property being advertised within twenty
feet (20’) of the primary busines s
entrance.
E. Display. Signs shall be displayed only:
1. During the hours the business is open to
conduct business.
F. Prohibited Locations. A-Frame Signs shall
not be located:
1. In raised or painted medians;
2. Across any street from the business being
advertised;
3. In drive lanes, parking aisles or parking
stalls;
4. On equestrian or multi-use trails;
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 24
5. So that less than a minimum of four feet
(4’) is clear for pedestrian passage on all
sidewalks and walkways, or so as to
cause a hazard to pedestrian traffic; and,
6. On fences, boulders, planters, other
signs, vehicles, utility facilities, or any
structure.
G. Right-of-Way Placement. Signs may not be
placed in the right-of-way, except that such
signs may be placed on the sidewalk within
the DC zoning district provided placement
is in compliance with American with
Disabilities Act.
H. Construction and Maintenance. Signs shall
be:
1. Constructed with a protective, water
resistant coating impervious to weather
conditions;
2. Constructed with cut vinyl or other
weather resistant graphics and may
contain zip tracks or Velcro for changing
of cut vinyl graphics;
3. Of sufficient weight and durability to
withstand wind gusts, storms; and,
4. Maintained in a professional manner free
from chipping paint, cracks, gouges, loss
of letters, and other maintenance issues.
I. Elements Prohibited on A-Frame Signs. The
following shall be prohibited on A-Frame
Signs along street frontages:
1. Any form of illumination, including
flashing, blinking, or rotating lights;
2. Animation;
3. Reflective materials; and,
4. Attachments, including, but not limited
to, balloons, ribbons, speakers, or other
similar devices.
7.7 Sign Walkers
A. Sign walkers shall be permitted in
conjunction with adjacent apartment ,
commercial and industrial areas in the R-3,
R-4, NC, C-1, C-2, C-3, EMP-A and EMP-B
zoning districts, subject to the following
requirements:
B. Location.
1. At least thirty feet (30’) from a street or
driveway intersection measured from the
back of the curb, or edge of pavement if
no curb exists.
2. At least five feet (5’) from the street,
measured from the back of curb or edge
of pavement if no curb exists.
3. At grade level.
4. In front of property on which the
advertised business or use is located.
C. Prohibited Locations.
1. Within a minimum of twenty feet (20’) of
any other sign walker.
2. In any location which interferes with the
right-of-way for pedestrians, bicyclists
and others located on a sidewalk.
3. In a raised or painted median.
4. In driveways, drive lanes, parking aisle or
parking space.
5. On equestrian or multi-use trails.
6. On a fence, vehicle, utility facility, other
sign or any other structure.
7. In a manner that results in sign walkers
physically interacting with motorists,
pedestrians or bicyclists.
D. Number.
1. Be no more than one (1) sign per
business.
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 25
2. Be displayed only during the hours the
business is open to the public.
3. Be held, worn, or balanced at all times.
4. Be no greater than twelve (12) square
feet per sign face, with a maximum of two
(2) sign faces.
5. Not be worn by a sign walker in costume.
E. Prohibited elements.
1. Any form of illumination or animation on
or within the sign.
2. The use of mirrors or other reflective
materials.
3. Attachments to the sign including, but
not limited to, balloons, ribbons, or
speakers.
F. Consistency with State Law.
1. Notwithstanding the foregoing, sign
walkers may use a public sidewalk,
walkway, or pedestrian thoroughfare to
the minimum extent provided by A.R.S.
§4-499.13.
7.8 Sensitive Use Signs
A. Sexually Oriented Businesses. Signs shall
be permitted in accordance with the
following:
1. One (1) free-standing or monument sign
shall be permitted per site in accordance
with the following standards Maximum
height shall be six feet (6’) as measure d
from the adjacent curb or crown of the
roadway. Sign area shall not exceed
twenty-four (24) square feet. Freestanding
signs shall have a substantial
base and planter not to exceed two feet
(2’) in height. If an inorganic base is
used, it shall be designed to match the
predominant architectural character of
the main building.
2. Window signs, permanent and / or
temporary, are permitted up to twentyfive
percent (25%), per window, of the
establishment's window area provided
the following criteria are complied with:
a. All such signs must be mounted, affixed
or painted on the inside face of the
window;
b. No such sign shall be illuminated,
animated or emit sound; and,
c. Signs conforming to the above criteria
shall be allowed in all zoning districts
and shall not be considered a part of the
aggregate allowed sign area.
3. Total sign area for each building or
occupancy frontage shall not exceed one
(1) square foot of sign area for each two
(2) linear feet of street or occupancy
frontage.
4. In no case shall the total sign area exceed
sixty-four (64) square feet of sign area
for each building or occupancy including
all ground and wall mounted signs.
B. Prohibited Signs. Signs not specifically
authorized are prohibited including but not
limited to the following:
1. Animated Signs. No animated sign shall
be allowed;
2. Flashing Signs. Flashing signs, except
those, which alternately display time and
temperature having a maximum sign
area of three (3) square feet;
3. Signs Emitting Sound Substance. Any
signs emitting sound or emitting any
substance;
4. Obscene Signs. No person, as principal
agent or otherwise, shall exhibit post or
display or cause or permit to be
exhibited, posted or displayed, upon any
advertising structure, any obscene
statements, symbol or sign. A
statement, symbol or sign is obscene
within the meaning of this Ordinanc e
when:
a. The average person, applying
contemporary state standards would
find that the item, taken as a whole
appeals to the prurient interest;
ARTICLE 7 – SIGN REGULATIONS
May 2019 TOWN OF QUEEN CREEK Article 7 - Page 26
b. The item depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual activity;
and,
c. The item taken as a whole lacks serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.
5. Miscellaneous Signs and Posters. The
tacking, painting pasting, or otherwise
affixing of signs of posters of a
miscellaneous character, visible from a
public way, on the walls of the building, a
shed, tree, shrub, ground cover, fences,
utility poles or other structures, or upon
vehicles where such vehicles are used
primarily as a support for such signs or
parked on the property;
6. Pole Signs and / or Roof Signs;
7. Projecting Signs. No sign shall project
into the public right-of-way or beyond a
street plan line;
8. Portable Signs.; and,
9. Oversize Signs. Signs which exceed 3
square feet in area and which are
mounted, attached or painted on motor
vehicles, trailers or boats and are parked
on the premises.
7.9 Interpretation of this Article
A. Where there is a conflict between the
provisions of this Ordinance and provisions
of other regulations of the Town of Queen,
the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply.
B. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply
to the erection, construction, alteration,
use, location, and maintenance of all signs
within the Town of Queen Creek except as
specified in Section 7.2
C. Any sign permitted by this Article may
contain a non-commercial message in lieu
of any other message.
D. Any provision of this Sign Code that
imposes a limitation on freedom of speech
shall be construed in a manner that is
viewpoint neutral and treats expressive
speech either the same as or less
restrictive than commercial speech. Any
provision of this Sign Code that is found to
be an unconstitutional limitation on
freedom of speech by any court shall be
severed from this Sign Code in a manner
that preserves the Sign Code and protects
freedom of speech.