
San Luis, AZ Code of Ordinance


CITY OF SAN LUIS, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 380, passed 3-14-2018



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 318



AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN LUIS, ARIZONA,
ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF SAN LUIS, ARIZONA, REVISING,
AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SAN LUIS DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES



WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of San Luis
have, over time, become inadequately organized and classified and are
insufficient in form and substance for the effective conduct of daily
operations of the municipality’s affairs; and,



WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Arizona empower and
authorize the City of San Luis to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and,



WHEREAS, the general ordinances of the City of San Luis as revised, amended
restated, codified and compiled into book and electronic form have been
declared a public record by Resolution No. 990.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of
San Luis, Arizona, as follows:



SECTION 1.   That a certain document in book and/or electronic form, three
(3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
of San Luis, being marked and entitled: Code of Ordinances of the City of San
Luis, Arizona, is hereby adopted by reference as the new San Luis City Code.



SECTION 2.   The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles: General Provisions, Administration, Public Works,
Traffic Code, General Regulations, Business Regulations, General Offenses and
Land Usage.



SECTION 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
the Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code, nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance adopted by the City of San
Luis after January 12, 2011, nor shall any repeal affect Ordinance No. 228
adopted on April 13, 2005 and the provisions regarding encroachment permits
and subdivision regulations adopted therein.



SECTION 4.   General Penalty



      A.   In this section, VIOLATION OF THIS CODE means any of the
following:



         1.   Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared
unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance, or by rule or regulation
authorized by ordinance;



         2.   Failure to perform an act that is required to be
performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or



         3.   Failure to perform an act if the failure is
declared a misdemeanor or an offense, or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or
regulation authorized by this ordinance.



      B.   In this section, VIOLATION OF THIS CODE does not include
the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty,
unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as
provided in this section.



      C.   Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a
violation of this Code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or incarceration for a term not to exceed six
months, or both fine and incarceration. With respect to violations of this
Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.



      D.   Any violation of or failure to do or perform any act
required by Title VII of this Code constitutes a civil traffic violation.
Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S. §§ 28-1551
et seq. and 28-1591 et seq.



      E.   Violations of this Code for which a civil sanction is
imposed shall be treated as a civil offense and hearings and appeal shall be
conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure in civil traffic
violation cases as set forth in the Arizona Revised Statutes, Rules of
Procedure in Civil Traffic Cases. A person who commits a violation of this
Code after previously having been found responsible for committing three or
more civil violations of this Code within an 18-month period, whether by
admission, by payment of the sanction, by default or by judgment after
hearing, shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. For purposes of
calculating the 18-month period under this division the dates of the
commission of the offenses are the determining factor.



      F.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code
which are designated as subject to civil sanction or penalty shall be
punished by imposition of a civil sanction not to exceed $500, unless another
penalty is specified.



         1.   Any person who fails to comply with payment of a
civil sanction shall be guilty of violating A.R.S. § 13-2810, interference
with judicial proceedings. The conviction shall not preclude the imposition
of the assessment of a default fee and/or fees as set forth below in division
F.2., 3. and 4.



         2.   In addition to any civil sanction imposed, the
Municipal Court shall assess a default fee as set by the Mayor and City
Council from time to time for a failure to pay any civil sanction imposed by
the court.



         3.   A judge or hearing officer may waive all or part of
the default fee if the payment of the fee would cause a financial hardship to
the defendant.



         4.   If the court refers any delinquent fines, fees,
sanctions, penalties or restitution for collection any collection or attorney
costs are recoverable from the defendant and may be added to any balance due
from the defendant to the court.



      G.   The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation
or suspension of a license, permit or franchise.



      H.   Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect
to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition
of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief.



SECTION 5.   The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall be
presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the
date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested recorded, and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.



PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE Mayor and City Council of the City of San Luis,
Arizona, this 10th day of October 2012.



                           /s/ Gerardo Sanchez 
               



                           Gerardo Sanchez, Mayor



ATTEST:



/s/ Sonia Cuello                       



Sonia Cuello, City Clerk



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



/s/ Glenn Gimbut                     



Glenn Gimbut, City Attorney



ORDINANCE NO. 333



AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN LUIS, ARIZONA,
ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
SAN LUIS, ARIZONA; REPEALING ANY CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; AND PROVIDING FOR
SEVERABILITY



WHEREAS, pursuant to Ordinance No. 318, the City of San Luis adopted the Code
of Ordinances for the City of San Luis, Arizona; and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of San Luis,
Arizona, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior adoption of the Code of Ordinances;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of San
Luis, Arizona, as follows:



SECTION 1.   That the document entitled "2015 Supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of the City of San Luis, Arizona" as submitted by American Legal
Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, three copies of which are on file
with the Office of the City Clerk, is hereby declared to be a public record,
and said copies are ordered to remain on file with the City Clerk.



SECTION 2.   That certain document known as "2015 Supplement to the Code
of Ordinances of the City of San Luis, Arizona," three copies of which are on
file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of San Luis, Arizona, is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this ordinance.



SECTION 3.   Save and except Ordinance Nos. 331 and 332, the provisions of
which shall govern, in the event of a conflict between the provisions of this
Ordinance and any other ordinance, code, resolution, regulation, or policy of
the City of San Luis, the conflicting provisions are hereby repealed,
superseded, and replaced.



SECTION 4.   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of San Luis, Arizona,
this 25th day of February, 2015.



                           /s/ Gerardo Sanchez 
               



                           Gerardo Sanchez, Mayor



ATTEST:



/s/ Sonia Cornelio                       



Sonia Cornelio, City Clerk



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



/s/ Kay Marian Macuil (asst. city attorney) 



for Glenn Gimbut, City Attorney



ORDINANCE NO. 349



AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN LUIS, ARIZONA,
ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
SAN LUIS, ARIZONA; REPEALING ANY CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; AND PROVIDING FOR
SEVERABILITY.



WHEREAS, pursuant to Ordinance No. 318, the City of San Luis adopted the Code
of Ordinances for the City of San Luis, AZ; and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the second supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of San
Luis, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances; and



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY the Mayor and Council of the City of San
Luis, Arizona as follows:



SECTION 1.   That certain document known as "2015 S-2 Supplement of the
Code of Ordinances of the City of San Luis, Arizona," three copies of which
are on file in the Office of the City Clerk, of the City of San Luis,
Arizona, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 1141 of
the City of San Luis, Arizona is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance.



SECTION 2.   By the adoption of this ordinance, the City Council hereby
reaffirms that Ordinance Nos. 228, 343, 344, 345, 346, and 347 have been, and
continue to be the law of the City of San Luis from the date of their
adoption. Save and except Ordinance Nos. 228, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, and
347 the provisions of which shall continue to govern from and after the date
of the adoption of this ordinance, in the event of a conflict between the
provisions of this Ordinance and any other ordinance, code resolution,
regulation, or policy of the City of San Luis, the conflicting provisions are
hereby repealed, superseded, and replaced.



SECTION 3.   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of San Luis, Arizona,
this 27th day of April, 2016.



                           /s/ Gerardo Sanchez 
               



                           Gerardo Sanchez, Mayor



ATTEST:



/s/ Sonia Cornelio                       
               /s/ Kay Marion Macuil                 



Sonia Cornelio, City Clerk                  Kay Marion
Macuil, City Attorney



ORDINANCE NO. 370



AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN LUIS, ARIZONA,
ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
SAN LUIS, ARIZONA; REPEALING ANY CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; AND PROVIDING FOR
SEVERABILITY.



WHEREAS, pursuant to Ordinance No. 318, the City of San Luis adopted the Code
of Ordinances for the City of San Luis, AZ; and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the third supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of San
Luis, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances; and



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY the Mayor and Council of the City of San
Luis, Arizona as follows:



SECTION 1.   That certain document known as "2017 S-3 Supplement of the
Code of Ordinances of the City of San Luis, Arizona," three copies of which
are on file in the Office of the City Clerk, of the City of San Luis,
Arizona, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 2014 of
the City of San Luis, Arizona is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance.



SECTION 2.   By the adoption of this ordinance, the City Council hereby
reaffirms that Ordinance Nos. 228, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368 and 369
have been, and continue to be the law of the City of San Luis from the date
of their adoption. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this
Ordinance and any other ordinance, code resolution, regulation, or policy of
the City of San Luis (save and except Ordinance Nos. 228, 362, 363, 364, 365,
366, 367, 368 and 369 the provisions of which shall continue to govern from
and after the date of the adoption of this ordinance), the conflicting
provisions are hereby repealed, superseded, and replaced.



SECTION 3.   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of San Luis, Arizona,
this 21 day of November, 2017.



                           /s/ Gerardo Sanchez 
               



                           Gerardo Sanchez, Mayor



ATTEST:                        APPROVED AS TO FORM:



/s/ Sonia Cornelio                       
               /s/ Kay Marion Macuil                 



Sonia Cornelio, City Clerk                  Kay Marion
Macuil, City Attorney



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   How Code designated and cited



   10.02   Construction of ordinances



   10.03   Definitions



   10.04   Additional rules of construction



   10.05   References to this Code



   10.06   Conflicting provisions; different chapters



   10.07   Conflicting provisions; same chapter



   10.08   Section headings



   10.09   Effect of repeal



   10.10   Severability



   10.11   Effective date of repeal



   10.12   Ordinances exempt from appeal



   10.13   Effective date of Code



 



   10.99   Penalty



§ 10.01  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the City of San Luis, Arizona,”
and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the “San Luis City
Code.”



(Prior Code, Art. 1-1)



§ 10.02  CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES.



   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be
observed in the construction of this Code and the ordinances of the city
unless the construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent
of the Council or the context of this Code or the ordinances of the city.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-2)



§ 10.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACTS BY AGENTS.  When an ordinance requires an act to be done
which may by law be done by an agent as well as by the principal, the
requirement shall be construed to include all the acts when done by an
authorized agent.



      CITY.  City of San Luis, Arizona.



      CODE, THE CODE or THIS CODE.  Code of ordinances of the city.



      COUNCIL.  City Council of San Luis, Arizona.



      COUNTY.  Yuma County, Arizona.



      DAY.  Period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.



      DAYTIME.  Period of time between sunrise and sunset.



      DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. 
Department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the city.



      IN THE CITY or WITHIN THE CITY.  All territory over which the
city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of
its police powers or other regulatory powers.



      MAY.  Permissive.



      MONTH.  Calendar month.



      NIGHTTIME.  Period of time between sunset and sunrise.



      OATH.  Affirmation or declaration.



      PERSON.  Firms, corporations or voluntary associations, as well
as individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property, except real
property as defined in this section.



      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING.  Next before and next after,
respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY.  Lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      SHALL.  Mandatory.



      SHALL HAVE BEEN.  Past and future cases.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  A mark when the signer cannot write,
the signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a
witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s
name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can
serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two
witnesses sign their own names thereto.



      STATE.  The State of Arizona.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT.  Any person holding a written or an oral
lease of or who occupies the whole or part of the building or land, either
alone or with others.



      WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



      WRITING.  Any form of recorded message capable of comprehension
by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the
English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year.



   (B)   (1)   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine.



      (2)   Words in the singular number include the plural, and
words in the plural number include the singular.



   (C)   All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or
more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the
authority to a majority of the officers or other persons unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving  the authority.



   (D)   OR may be read AND, and AND may be read OR.



   (E)   The present tense includes the past and future tense, and the
future includes the present.



   (F)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done as
provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, except that if the last day is a Sunday or holiday, it shall be
excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.



      (2)   In all cases where any section of this Code shall
require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be
given, the reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time only as
may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty, or compliance with
the notice.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-3)



§ 10.04  ADDITIONAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In addition to the rules of construction specified in §§ 10.02 and
10.03 above, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of
this Code.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-4-1)



§ 10.05  REFERENCES TO THIS CODE.



   All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections
of this Code unless otherwise specified.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-4-2)



§ 10.06  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; DIFFERENT CHAPTERS.



   If the provisions of different chapters of this Code conflict with or
contravene each other, provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of the chapter.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-4-3)



§ 10.07  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; SAME CHAPTER.



   If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same
chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in chronological order
shall prevail, unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of
the chapter.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-4-4)



§ 10.08  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings of the several sections of this Code are intended as a
convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute
part of the law.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-5)



§ 10.09  EFFECT OF REPEAL.



   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision,
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly provided.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-6)



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council  that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code shall be
severable, and if any provision of this Code is held unconstitutional for any
reason by court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of the Code.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-7)



§ 10.11  EFFECTIVE DATE OF REPEAL.



   All ordinances of the city, contained in the city’s prior Code of
Ordinances,  except those specially exempted in this chapter, now in force
and effect, are hereby repealed on the effective date of the adoption of this
Code of Ordinances, but all rights, duties and obligations created by the
ordinances shall continue and exist in all respects as if this Code had not
been adopted and enacted.



(Prior Code, § 1-9-1)



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES EXEMPT FROM APPEAL.



   The adoption and enactments of this Code shall not be construed to
repeal or in any way to affect or modify:



   (A)   The running of the statutes of limitations in force at the
time this Code becomes effective;



   (B)   The continued existence and operation of any department,
agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held;



   (C)   Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or
imposed;



   (D)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving
or accepting any compact or contract with:



      (1)   Any other municipality;



      (2)   The state or any county or subdivision thereof; and/or



      (3)   The United States or any agency or instrumentality
thereof.



   (E)   The provisions of ordinance numbers 2, 4, 7, 11, 12, 17, 20
and 22.



(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)



§ 10.13  EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.



   Each and every section of this Code as herein contained and hereby
enacted shall take effect and be in force on and after the effective date of
the adoption of this Code of Ordinances, except that where a later effective
date is provided, it shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 1-10)



§ 10.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   In this section, VIOLATION OF THIS CODE means any of the
following:



      (1)   Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared
unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance, or by rule or regulation
authorized by ordinance;



      (2)   Failure to perform an act that is required to be
performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or



      (3)   Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a
misdemeanor or an offense, or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation
authorized by this ordinance.



   (B)   In this section, VIOLATION OF THIS CODE does not include the
failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty,
unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as
provided in this section.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a
violation of this Code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or incarceration for a term not to exceed six
months, or both fine and incarceration. With respect to violations of this
Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.



   (D)   Any violation of or failure to do or perform any act required
by Title VII of this Code constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil
traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S. §§ 28-1551 et
seq. and 28-1591 et seq.



   (E)   Violations of this Code for which a civil sanction is imposed
shall be treated as a civil offense and hearings and appeals shall be
conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure in civil traffic
violation cases as set forth in the Arizona Revised Statutes, Rules of
Procedure in Civil Traffic Cases. A person who commits a violation of this
Code after previously having been found responsible for committing three or
more civil violations of this Code within an 18-month period, whether by
admission, by payment of the sanction, by default or by judgment after
hearing, shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. For purposes of
calculating the 18-month period under this division, the dates of the
commission of the offenses are the determining factor.



   (F)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code which
are designated as subject to civil sanction or penalty shall be punished by
imposition of a civil sanction not to exceed $500, unless another penalty is
specified.



      (1)   Any person who fails to comply with payment of a civil
sanction shall be guilty of violating A.R.S. § 13-2810, interference with
judicial proceedings. The conviction shall not preclude the imposition of the
assessment of a default fee and/or fees as set forth below in division
(F)(2), (3) and (4).



      (2)   In addition to any civil sanction imposed, the Municipal
Court shall assess a default fee as set by City Council from time to time for
a failure to pay any civil sanction imposed by the court.



      (3)   A judge or hearing officer may waive all or part of the
default fee if the payment of the fee would cause a financial hardship to the
defendant.



      (4)   If the court refers any delinquent fines, fees,
sanctions, penalties or restitution for collection, any collection or
attorney costs are recoverable from the defendant and may be added to any
balance due from the defendant to the court.



   (G)   The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or
suspension of a license, permit or franchise.



   (H)   Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to
time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of
a penalty does not prevent equitable relief.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-8)  (Ord. 40, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. 257, passed
1-23-2008)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL



      31.   CITY OFFICERS



      32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



      33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



      34.   MAGISTRATE



      35.   FINANCE DEPARTMENT



      36.   PURCHASING



      37.   CITY POLICIES



      38.   EMERGENCY SERVICES



CHAPTER 30:  MAYOR AND COUNCIL



Section



Mayor



   30.001   Election of Mayor



   30.002   Vice-Mayor



   30.003   Acting Mayor



   30.004   Powers and duties of the Mayor



   30.005   Absence of Mayor



   30.006   Failure to sign documents



Council



   30.020   Elected officers



   30.021   Corporate powers



   30.022   Duties of office



   30.023   Vacancies in Council



   30.024   Compensation



   30.025   Oath of office



   30.026   Bond



   30.027   Financial disclosure statements



Council Election



   30.040   Primary election



   30.041   Non political ballot



   30.042   General election nomination



   30.043   Election to office



   30.044   Candidate financial disclosure



Council Procedure



   30.055   Regular meetings



   30.056   Special meetings



   30.057   Quorum



   30.058   Agenda



   30.059   Order of business



   30.060   Committees and commissions



   30.061   Voting



   30.062   Suspension of rules



Ordinances, Resolutions and Contracts



   30.075   Prior approval



   30.076   Reserved



   30.077   Single reading of ordinance and vote at same meeting



   30.078   Effective date of ordinances, resolutions, franchises and
orders



   30.079   Signatures required



   30.080   Publishing required



   30.081   Posting required



MAYOR



§ 30.001  ELECTION OF MAYOR.



   The qualified electors of the city shall directly elect the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-1)  (Ord. 70, passed 1-25-1989)



§ 30.002  VICE-MAYOR.



   At the first meeting at which the Mayor takes the oath of office, the
Council shall designate one of its members as Vice-Mayor, who shall serve at
the pleasure of the Council. The Vice-Mayor shall perform the duties of the
Mayor during his or her absence or disability.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-2)



§ 30.003  ACTING MAYOR.



   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice-Mayor, the
Council may designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor, who
shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor during
the absence or disability.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-3)



§ 30.004  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:



      (1)   The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the
city;



      (2)   The Mayor shall be the Chairperson of the Council, and
preside over its meetings. He or she may make and second motions, and shall
have a voice and vote in all its proceedings;



      (3)   The Mayor shall execute and authenticate, by his or her
signature, instruments the Council or any statutes, ordinances or this Code,
shall require;



      (4)   The Mayor shall make recommendations and suggestions to
the Council as he or she may consider proper; and



      (5)   The Mayor shall take command of the police force of the
city and govern by proclamation in the event of the threat of, or occurrence
of, acts of natural disaster, riot, rout or affray sufficient to constitute
great danger to the city and its residents.



   (B)   (1)   In areas of the city as designated by the Mayor by
proclamation under the conditions set forth in this section, and within the
area within all or any part of the city so designated by the Mayor, a curfew
shall be in effect the hours of each day designated in the proclamation, and
all persons living or residing within any designated area shall go
immediately to their homes, and remain there until curfew is lifted by order
of the Mayor, and all other persons not residing within the designated area
shall immediately leave.



      (2)   During the imposition of any curfew as set forth in this
section, all business establishments in the designated curfew area, having on
the premises intoxicating beverages, shall be closed during the state of
emergency and until the curfew is lifted.



   (C)   The Mayor shall perform other duties required by state statute
and this Code, as well as those duties required as Chief Executive Officer of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-4)



§ 30.005  ABSENCE OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the city for a
greater period than 15 days without the consent of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-5)



§ 30.006  FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.



   If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring his or
her signature, for five days consecutively, then a majority of the members of
the Council may, at any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice-Mayor,
or in his or her absence, an acting Mayor, to sign the ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument, which when signed,
shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-6)



COUNCIL



§ 30.020  ELECTED OFFICERS.



   Elected officers of the city shall be seven Councilpersons, one of whom
shall be elected directly by the electors as Mayor in accordance with §
30.001. The terms of office for Councilperson shall be staggered terms as set
forth in A.R.S. § 9-272, and by the resolutions Council may adopt, and a
candidate can not run for both Mayor and Councilperson at the same election.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)  (Ord. 70, passed 1-25-1989)



§ 30.021  CORPORATE POWERS.



   The corporate powers of the city shall be vested in the Council and
shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the
Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or motion.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-2)



§ 30.022  DUTIES OF OFFICE.



   Councilpersons shall assume the duties of office at the regularly
scheduled Council meeting next  following the date of the general election
at which, or effective as of the date of which, the Councilpersons were
elected.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-3)



§ 30.023  VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.



   The Council shall fill by appointment for the unexpired term any
vacancy that may occur for whatever reason.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-4)



§ 30.024  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of elective officers of the city shall be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Council; provided, that the compensation
allowed to the Mayor and Councilpersons shall not exceed that allowed by
state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-5)



§ 30.025  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each
Councilperson shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-6)



§ 30.026  BOND.



   (A)   Prior to taking office, every Council member shall execute and
file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her
sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her
official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of
the city or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or
default of the officer in his or her official capacity.



   (B)   A person injured or aggrieved may bring suit on the bond under
provisions identical to those contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be
in the sum as provided by resolution, and the premium for the bonds shall be
paid by the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-7)



§ 30.027  FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS.



   The Mayor and each member of the Council shall file by January 31 of
each year, on a form prescribed by the Clerk, a financial disclosure
statement, setting forth information as determined by resolution of the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-8)



COUNCIL ELECTION



§ 30.040  PRIMARY ELECTION.



   (A)   Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a
majority of all the votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office
for which he or she is a candidate effective as of the date of the general
election, and no further election shall be held as to the candidate;
provided, that if more candidates receive a majority than there are offices
to be filled, those candidates equal in number to the offices to be filled
with the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.



   (B)   In calculating the votes cast in the city primary election for
purposes of determining if a candidate for the office of Mayor or Council has
received a majority of the votes cast, the basis shall be the number of votes
cast for the office of Mayor at that election.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-1)  (Ord. 2, passed 9-20-1979; Ord. 325, passed
2-26-2014)



§ 30.041  NON POLITICAL BALLOT.



   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the
support of the candidate.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-2)  (Ord. 2, passed 9-20-1979)



§ 30.042  GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.



   (A)   If, at any primary election held as above, provided there be
any office for which no candidate is elected, then as to the office, the
primary election shall be considered to be a primary election for nomination
of candidates for the office, and the general municipal election shall be
held to vote for candidates to fill the office. Candidates to be placed on
the ballot at the general municipal election shall be those not elected at
the primary election, and shall be equal in number to twice the number to be
elected to any given office, or less than that number if there be less than
that number names on the primary election ballot. Persons who receive the
highest number of votes for the respective offices at the first election
shall be the only candidates at the second election, provided that if there
be any person who, under the provisions of this section, would have been
entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some
other candidate received an equal number of votes therefor, then all persons
receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for the
office.



   (B)   The number of signatures required on nomination petitions for
a candidate for the office of Mayor or Council shall be 1,000 signatures or
at least 5% but not more than 10% of the vote for Mayor in the last preceding
election at which a mayor was elected, whichever is less.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-3)  (Ord. 2, passed 9-20-1979; Ord. 326, passed
2-26-2014)



§ 30.043  ELECTION TO OFFICE.



   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive
the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-4)  (Ord. 2, passed 9-20-1979)



§ 30.044  CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.



   Each candidate for the office of Mayor or Councilperson shall file a
financial disclosure statement on a form prescribed by the Clerk when the
candidate files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain information
as required by resolution of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-5)



COUNCIL PROCEDURE



§ 30.055  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth
Wednesday of each month at 7:00 p.m., provided that when the day fixed for
any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day designed by law as a
legal holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next
succeeding day not a holiday. All regular meetings of the Council shall be
held at the City Hall, City Council chambers.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-1)  (Ord. 1, passed 9-20-1979; Ord. 14, passed
11-13-1980; Ord. 16, passed 2-11-1981; Ord. 20, passed 12-9-1981; Ord. 36,
passed 8-10-1983; Ord. 39, passed 11-10-1983; Ord. 46, passed 5-23-1984; Ord.
121, passed 5-10-1995)



§ 30.056  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   The Mayor, or the Council upon written request of three members, may
convene the Council at any time after giving at least 24-hours’ notice of
the meeting to members of the Council and the general public. The notice
shall include the date, hour and purpose of the special meeting. In the case
of an actual emergency, a meeting may be held upon notice as is appropriate
to the circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-2)  (Ord. 1, passed 9-20-1979; Ord. 153, passed
8-26-1998)



§ 30.057  QUORUM.



   A majority of the Councilpersons shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and
compel the attendance of absent members.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-3)



§ 30.058  AGENDA.



   Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the
Council for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier,
the Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances,
resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the Council,
and prepare, with the consent and approval of the Mayor, an agenda according
to the order of business, and shall furnish each council member, the Mayor
and the Attorney with a copy of the agenda and any material pertinent
thereto. The Clerk shall also place on the agenda any item requested in
writing by three members of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-4)  (Ord. 153, passed 8-26-1998)



§ 30.059  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   The business of the Council shall be taken up for
consideration and disposition in the following order:



      (1)   Call to order.  The Mayor shall take the chair
precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call
the Council to order. In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice-Mayor shall call
the Council to order. In the absence of both the Mayor and the Vice-Mayor,
the Clerk shall call the Council to order and an acting Mayor shall be
selected to chair the meeting. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or the
Vice-Mayor, the Vice-Mayor or the acting Mayor shall immediately relinquish
the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council.
The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions or order and
conduct the proceedings of the meetings in accordance with the parliamentary
rules contained in Robert’s Rules of Order, unless otherwise specified.



      (2)   Roll call.  Before proceeding with the business of the
Council, the Clerk, or his or her deputy, shall call the roll of the members,
and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a quorum
is not present, the members present may adjourn, pursuant to § 30.057.



      (3)   Minutes.  The Clerk, or his or her deputy, shall read
or present the minutes of the preceding Council meeting, which shall be
approved if correct. Any errors noted shall be corrected.



      (4)   Petitions.  Petitions, remonstrances, communications
and comments or suggestions from citizens present shall be heard by the
Council. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a whole, and not to
any member thereof. Remarks shall be limited to five minutes, unless
additional time is granted by the Council. No person other than the
individual speaking shall enter into the discussion without the permission of
the presiding officer. No questions shall be asked a Councilperson except
through the presiding officer.



      (5)   Reports by officers.  City officials and committees
shall present any reports required by the Council.



      (6)   Unfinished business.  The Council shall consider any
business that has been previously considered and which is still unfinished.



      (7)   New business.  The Council shall consider any business
not heretofore considered, including the introduction of ordinances and
resolutions.



      (8)   Claims.  The Clerk shall present any claims against the
city, which will then be approved or disapproved by the Council.



      (9)   Miscellaneous business:  Prior to adjournment, the
Council shall, as it deems necessary, consider business not specifically
provided for herein.



   (B)   The Council may, by a majority vote of those present, adjourn
from time to a specific date and hour. A motion to adjourn shall always be in
order and decided without debate.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-5)



§ 30.060  COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.



   (A)   The Council may create committees and commissions, standing or
special, as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and
shall perform the duties as the Council may require, and shall exist at the
pleasure of the Council.



   (B)   The commissions are authorized to charge fees as the Council
may approve by resolution from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-6)  (Ord. 72, passed 2-22-1989)



§ 30.061  VOTING.



   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.



   (B)   Upon  the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any
questions shall be taken and entered in the minutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-7)



§ 30.062  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   Any of the provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended
in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of
three-fourths of the members present, except that this section shall not be
construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-8)



ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS



§ 30.075  PRIOR APPROVAL.



   All ordinances, resolutions, orders and contract documents shall,
before presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the
Attorney and shall, when there are substantive matters of administration
involved, be referred to the person who is charged with the administration of
the matters. The person shall have an opportunity to present his or her
comments, suggestions and objections, if any, prior to the passage of the
ordinance, resolution, order or acceptance of the contract.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-1) (Ord. 374, passed 12-27-2017)



§ 30.076  RESERVED.



§ 30.077  SINGLE READING OR ORDINANCE AND VOTE AT SAME MEETING.



   (A)   All proposed ordinances shall have one reading.



   (B)   The reading may be by title only if the written proposed
ordinance is available to Council.



   (C)   By majority vote of Council Members present, the proposed
ordinance may be read in full.



   (D)   The reading of the proposed ordinance and the vote on the
passage of proposed ordinance shall be at the same Council Meeting.



   (F)   Upon completion of the reading by title only or in full and
after the main motion for passage of the proposed ordinance is seconded,
Council shall vote on passage of the proposed ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-3) (Ord. 373, passed 12-27-2017)



§ 30.078  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, FRANCHISES AND ORDERS.



   (A)   No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative
until 30 days after its passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor,
except measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health
or safety of the city; approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of
all the members elected to the Council, taken by ayes and nays.



   (B)   Orders shall become effective upon passage unless Council
provides for a specific effective date in the order.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-4) (Ord. 374, passed 12-27-2017)



§ 30.079  SIGNATURES REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes
effective, be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-5)



§ 30.080  PUBLISHING REQUIRED.



   Only the orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of
the Council shall be published as may be required by state statute or
expressly ordered by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-6)



§ 30.081  POSTING REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other
punishment shall, after passage, be posted by the Clerk in three or more
public places within the city and an affidavit of the person who posted the
ordinances shall be filed in the office of the Clerk as proof of posting.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-7)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICERS



Section



Officers in General



   31.01   Officers



   31.02   Reserved



   31.03   Additional officers



   31.04   Bond



   31.05   Vacancies; holding more than one office



   31.06   Additional powers and duties



City Officers



   31.20   City Manager



   31.21   City Clerk



   31.22   City Marshal



   31.23   City Attorney



   31.24   City Magistrate



   31.25   Removal of officers



   31.26   Contract for services



OFFICERS IN GENERAL



§ 31.01  OFFICERS.



   There is hereby created the offices of City Manager, City Clerk, City
Marshal (Chief of Police), City Attorney and City Magistrate who shall be
appointed by the Council, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council,
but subject to § 31.26.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)



§ 31.02  RESERVED.



§ 31.03  ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.



   The Council may appoint and remove from time to time other officers as
it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this Code or state
statutes.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)



§ 31.04  BOND.



   The Council shall require each officer of the city to give bond for the
due discharge of his or her duties in the sums and with the security as it
may direct and approve as determined by resolution and the city shall pay the
costs of the bond.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-4)



§ 31.05  VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN ONE OFFICE.



   Any vacancy that shall occur in any city office shall be filled by
appointment by the Council, provided that one person may hold more than one
office and that, at the discretion of the Council, the functions of a city
official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another city
official,  or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office but
employed at the pleasure of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-5)



§ 31.06  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this Code, each
officer shall have further powers, perform further duties, and hold other
office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance, resolution or
order.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-6)



CITY OFFICERS



§ 31.20  CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   (1)   Office created.  The office of the City Manager is
hereby created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the
Council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive
ability and qualifications, and shall hold office for, and at the pleasure
of, the Council.



      (2)   Bond.  The City Manager shall furnish a corporate
surety bond to be approved by the Council in the sum as may be determined by
the Council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties imposed upon the Manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for the
bond shall be a proper charge against the city.



      (3)   Compensation.  The City Manager shall receive
compensation as the Council shall fix from time to time.



      (4)   Removal procedure.  The Manager may be removed
according to § 31.25. If requested, the Council shall grant him or her a
public hearing within 30 days following notice of removal. During the
interim, the Council may suspend the Manager from duty, but shall continue
his or her salary and, if the removal becomes final, shall pay his or her
salary for one month following the removal date.



      (5)   Powers and duties.  The City Manager shall be the
administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and
control of the Council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or
she shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all
affairs of the city. In addition to his or her general powers as
administrative head, and not a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her
duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in the following divisions
(A)(5)(a) through (m) below:



         (a)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the
city service, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city not
appointed by the Council. He or she may authorize the head of a department or
office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in the department or office;



         (b)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the
Council together with a message describing  the important features, and be
responsible for its administration after adoption;



         (c)   Prepare and submit to the Council, at the end of
the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the city for the preceding year;



         (d)   Keep the Council advised of the financial
condition and future needs of the city and make recommendations as he or she
may deem desirable;



         (e)   Recommend to the Council a standard schedule of
pay for each appointive office and position in the city service, including
minimum, intermediate and maximum rates, and authorize the payment of
overtime pay for employees as may work in excess of normal work period. The
rates of pay and period of work shall be in conformity with wages and
salaries enacted by the City Council;



         (f)   Recommend to the City Council from time to time
adoption of measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the
health, safety or welfare of the community, or for the improvement of
administrative services;



         (g)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions,
departments or units under his or her jurisdiction, with the approval of the
Council. The Manager may be the head of one or more departments;



         (h)   Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused
therefrom, and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
Council. He or she shall be entitled to give notice of all regular and
special meetings of the Council;



         (i)    Supervise the purchase of all materials,
supplies, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; let
contracts necessary for operation or maintenance of city services in
accordance with the purchasing provisions of the City Code; receive sealed
bids for purchase or contracts in accordance and present them to Council for
approval in accordance with the purchasing provisions of the City Code or
state or federal law, and advise the City Council on the advantages or
disadvantages of contract or bid proposals. The Manager may issue rules
governing purchasing procedures within the administrative organization as
Council shall approve.



         (j)   In the case of accident, disaster or other
circumstances creating a public emergency, the Manager may award contracts
and make purchases for the purpose of meeting the emergency, but he or she
shall file promptly with the Council a certificate showing the emergency and
the necessity for the action, together with an itemized account of all
expenditures;



         (k)   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;



         (l)   Investigate the affairs of the city or any
department or division thereof, investigate all complaints in relation to
matters concerning the administration of the government of the city, and in
regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city and see that
all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully
observed; and



         (m)   Perform other duties as may be required by the
Council, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances.



   (B)   With regard to officers and employees appointed by the
Manager, neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or request
the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal or suspension from,
the office by the Manager or any of his or her subordinates, or in any manner
take part in the appointment or removal of the officers and employees in the
administrative services of the city, except for the purpose of inquiry, the
Council and its members shall deal solely through the Manager.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-1) (Ord. 331, passed 11-12-2014)



§ 31.21  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   Creation of office; appointment; duty and responsibility
generally. The Office of the City Clerk is created and established. All
officers and employees assigned to that office shall perform their duties
subject to the supervision of the City Clerk, who shall report directly to
the City Manager. The City Clerk shall supervise the department in accordance
with applicable personnel ordinances and shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties as are conferred and required by applicable ordinance,
resolution or other lawful directives. The City Clerk shall be appointed and
removed by the City Manager subject to ratification of the Council, and shall
serve and receive such compensation as shall be determined in accordance with
applicable personnel policies. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or his
or her deputy or designee, to attend all meetings of the Council unless by
request he or she is excused therefrom by the Mayor individually or by the
Council. The City Clerk shall be responsible for recording minutes and
presenting them to the Council for approval.



   (B)   Specific duties. The duties of the Clerk shall be as follows:



      (1)   Signatures. The Clerk shall seal and attest all
licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require the formality.



      (2)   Treasurer. The duties of treasurer of the city shall be
delegated to the Finance Director, who shall have the care, control and
custody of the money of the city.



      (3)   Agendas. The Clerk shall prepare the agenda of Council
meetings.



      (4)   Elections. The Clerk shall be in charge of and
responsible for the conduct of all city elections.



      (5)   Records management. The Clerk shall be the custodian of
all city records, as follows:



         (a)   Documents not assigned to other officers. The
Clerk shall be custodian of all documents belonging to the city which are not
assigned to the custody of some other officer.



         (b)   Maintenance of indices. The Clerk shall keep and
maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by him, so that
ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.



         (c)   Maintenance of official documents and records. The
Clerk shall maintain all official documents and records of the city.



      (6)   Additional duties. In addition to the duties provided in
this section, the Clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may
be required by statute, ordinance, or other direction of the Mayor and City
Council.



(Ord. 331, passed 11-12-2014)



§ 31.22  CITY MARSHAL.



   The Marshal shall be the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-3) (Ord. 331, passed 11-12-2014)



§ 31.23  CITY ATTORNEY.



   The Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the
Council and other city officials, and as such, shall give his or her opinion
in writing when requested by the Council. He or she shall draft all deeds,
contracts, conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments
when required by the Council. He or she shall approve as to form, in writing,
all drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval
or acceptance thereof by the Council. He or she shall return, within ten
days, all ordinances and resolutions submitted to him or her for
consideration by the Council, with his or her approval or disapproval as to
form noted thereon. He or she shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions
or causes where the city is a party, and shall report to the Council meetings
at the request of the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)



§ 31.24  CITY MAGISTRATE.



   The City Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the
Magistrate’s court and shall be selected by the Council and shall perform
those functions necessary to the maintenance of a Magistrate’s court as
provided by state statute.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)



§ 31.25  REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.



   Officers as set forth in § 31.01 may be removed from office upon a
majority vote of all the members elected or appointed to the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)  (Ord. 27, passed 8-11-1982)



§ 31.26  CONTRACT FOR SERVICES.



   The Council may, by a two-thirds vote, elect to enter into a contract
for services with any of it’s officers on the terms or conditions as may be
agreed upon.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-7)



CHAPTER 32:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



   32.01   Created; composition



   32.02   Appointment of officers



   32.03   Compensation of officers



   32.04   Departmental rules and regulations



   32.05   Duties of Police Department



   32.06   Answering calls outside the city



§ 32.01  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby established a Police Department. The Police Department
shall be composed of a chief and other personnel as are authorized by the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-1)  (Ord. 9, passed 6-26-1980; Ord. 245, passed
9-13-2006; Ord. 281, passed 12-22-2009)



§ 32.02  APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.



   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager, whose
appointment shall be confirmed by the City Council, and shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Manager on terms and conditions as may be approved by
the City Council. The Chief of Police shall be subject to the direction of
the City Manager. The City Manager shall provide for the appointment of as
many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the
safety and good order of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-2)  (Ord. 9, passed 6-26-1980; Ord. 245, passed
9-13-2006; Ord. 281, passed 12-22-2009)



§ 32.03  COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.



   The Chief of Police and the police officers of the city shall be
compensated as determined by the Council. The Chief of Police shall not
receive any perquisites, commissions or compensations for his or her services
as Chief of Police or City Marshal, except as the Council may prescribe.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-3)  (Ord. 9, passed 6-26-1980; Ord. 331, passed
11-12-2014)



§ 32.04  DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be recommended by
the Chief of Police and approved by the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-4)  (Ord. 9, passed 6-26-1980; Ord. 245, passed
9-13-2006; Ord. 281, passed 12-22-2009)



§ 32.05  DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction
of the Chief of Police, to:



      (1)   Enforce the ordinances and the statutes of the state
within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law, and to arrest and charge
the violators thereof;



      (2)   Take charge of the city jail and all prisoners confined
therein, and all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public
works of the city, and to see that orders and sentences with reference to
such are fully executed and complied with;



      (3)   Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail,
upon conviction of a crime committed under the jurisdiction of the
Magistrate’s court, to any authorized officer of the city who shall at any
time demand the prisoners. Any authorized person so demanding and receiving
the prisoners shall work the prisoners on the streets or alleys of the city,
or on any and all authorized work as may be determined by the Council;



      (4)   Render the account of the Police Department, its duties,
and receipts as may be required by the Council, and keep records of the
office open to inspection by the Council at any time;



      (5)   Direct traffic and ensure the orderly flow thereof, and
investigate and make reports of traffic accidents;



      (6)   Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic control
devices of every description which have been erected within the city on the
authority of the Council and to notify the Council of any defects found
therein; and



      (7)   Perform additional duties as may be required by the
Council.



   (B)   Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the city may
stop and detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual
or suspected violation of Title VII of this Code of ordinances, A.R.S.
Title  28, Ch. 6, Art. 20 and  21, and to serve a copy of the traffic
complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-5)  (Ord. 9, passed 6-26-1980; Ord. 42, passed 2-22-1984)



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in division (B) of this section have been repealed.
Traffic violations are now subject to the provisions of A.R.S. §§ 28-1591
et seq.



§ 32.06  ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY.



   The members of the Police Department of the city are duly authorized to
answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the city
pursuant to mutual aid agreements and state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-6)  (Ord. 9, passed 6-26-1980)



CHAPTER 33:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



   33.01   Created; composition



   33.02   Departmental rules and regulations



   33.03   Compensation



   33.04   Appointment, powers and duties of Chief



   33.05   Appointment and duties of firefighters



   33.06   Entry upon adjacent property



   33.07   Equipment



   33.08   Providing fire protection outside the city



   33.09   Acknowledgment of right-of-way



   33.10   False fire alarms



   33.11   Order of Fire Chief



§ 33.01  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is created a Fire Department for the city which shall consist of
a Fire Chief and as many firefighters as may from time to time be deemed
necessary by the City Manager for the safety and good order of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-1)  (Ord. 245, passed 9-13-2006; Ord. 281, passed
12-22-2009)



§ 33.02  DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Fire Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be recommended by
the Fire Chief and approved by the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-2)  (Ord. 245, passed 9-13-2006; Ord. 281, passed
12-22-2009)



§ 33.03  COMPENSATION.



   The Fire Chief and the firefighters shall be compensated as may be
determined by Council.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-3)  (Ord. 245, passed 9-13-2006; Ord. 281, passed
12-22-2009)



§ 33.04  APPOINTMENT, POWERS AND DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager, whose
appointment shall be confirmed by the City Council, and shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Manager on such terms and conditions as may be approved
by the City Council. The Fire Chief shall be subject to the direction of the
City Manager.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to:



      (1)   Be accountable for the personnel, morale and general
efficiency of the Fire Department;



      (2)   Direct the operations of the Fire Department, subject to
the rules and regulations thereof;



      (3)   Be present at all fires, if possible, and plan and
direct the extinguishment thereof. During the progress of a fire, the
authority of the Fire Chief shall be absolute in all matters directly
concerning the extinguishment of fire and the disposition of property
endangered by it;



      (4)   Conduct suitable drill or instruction in the operation
and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of
buildings in the city, water supplies, and all other matters generally
considered essential to good firefighting and safety of life and property
from fire;



      (5)   Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime
of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and
circumstances of all fires;



      (6)   Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice
upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all
fire hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting the inspection,
the Chief is empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within the
city at any reasonable hour. Any person served with written notice shall
comply and notify the Chief of his or her compliance within a reasonable time;



      (7)   Keep complete records of all fires, inspections,
apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information about the work of
the Department open to inspection by the City Manager, and furnish to the
City Manager the information upon request; and



      (8)   Enforce, or cause to be enforced, all ordinances, laws
and regulations of the city and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and
safety.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-4)  (Ord. 245, passed 9-13-2006; Ord. 281, passed
12-22-2009)



§ 33.05  APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF FIREFIGHTERS.



   The City Manager shall provide for the appointment of as many
firefighters as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and
good order of the city. The firefighters shall be subject to supervision by
the Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-5)  (Ord. 245, passed 9-13-2006; Ord. 281, passed
12-22-2009)



§ 33.06  ENTRY UPON ADJACENT PROPERTY.



   It is lawful for any firefighter, acting under the direction of the
Chief or another officer in command, to enter upon the premises adjacent to,
or in the vicinity of, any building or other property that is on fire for the
purpose of extinguishing the fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or
obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty as herein before
provided.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-6)



§ 33.07  EQUIPMENT.



   The Department shall be equipped with the apparatus and other equipment
as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly
protect life and property from fire. Recommendations concerning apparatus and
equipment needed shall be made by the Chief, and, after approval by the
Council, the apparatus and equipment shall be purchased in the manner as may
be designated by the Council. All equipment of the Department shall be safely
and conveniently housed in the place or places as may be designated by the
Council. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose, nor shall any person willfully take away or conceal any article used
in any way by the Department. No person shall enter any place where the fire
apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the
Department unless accompanied by, or having special permission of, an officer
or authorized member of the Department. No fire apparatus or equipment shall
be hired out or permitted to leave the fire station except in response to a
call for aid at a fire within the corporate limits of the city or in response
to a call for aid at a fire in an area authorized for fire protection service
or mutual aid under § 33.08.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-7)



§ 33.08  PROVIDING FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE THE CITY.



   The Council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire
protection outside the city or enter into mutual aid agreements, and the Fire
Department is authorized to render firefighting services pursuant to the
terms of the agreements or contracts.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-8)



§ 33.09  ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Each member of the Department who drives a private motor vehicle shall
be issued suitable insignia which may be attached to the motor vehicle. All
motor equipment of the Department shall have right-of-way over all other
traffic when responding to an alarm. No unauthorized vehicle shall follow
within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Department nor park any
vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within ten feet of
the entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is
stored, or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. No person shall drive any
vehicle over a fire hose except upon specific orders from the Chief or other
officer in charge where the hose is used.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-9) (Ord. 331, passed 11-12-2014)



§ 33.10  FALSE FIRE ALARMS.



   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or cause to be
turned in a false fire alarm.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-10)  (Ord. 331, passed 11-12-2014)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 33.11  ORDER OF FIRE CHIEF.



   It is unlawful for any firefighter or citizen to refuse to obey an
order issued by the Fire Chief pursuant to his or her authority.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-11)



CHAPTER 34:  MAGISTRATE



Section



General Provisions



   34.01   Magistrate Court established; jurisdiction



   34.02   Proceedings of Court



   34.03   Waiver of costs for indigents



   34.04   Municipal Court Fund



   34.05   Municipal Court fees



   34.06   Court collection service fees



Presiding Officer



   34.20   City Magistrate



   34.21   Assistant City Magistrate



   34.22   Powers and duties of City Magistrate



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01  MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.



   There is hereby established in the city a Magistrate’s court which
shall have jurisdiction of all violations of this Code, and jurisdiction
concurrently with justices of the peace of precincts in which the city is
located of violation of laws of the state committed within the limits of the
city.



(Prior Code, Art. 5-1)  (Ord. 21, passed 12-23-1981)



§ 34.02  PROCEEDINGS OF COURT.



   The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the state
constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the State Supreme
Court pertaining to police courts. The proceedings shall also be conducted in
accordance with the Rules of Criminal Procedure for the Superior Court,
unless otherwise prescribed, and providing this Code and resolutions of the
city are not in conflict therewith.



(Prior Code, Art. 5-3)  (Ord. 21, passed 12-23-1981)



§ 34.03  WAIVER OF COSTS FOR INDIGENTS.



   The City Magistrate may waive all or a portion of the fees when, in the
opinion of the Magistrate, the waiver would be in the interest of justice, or
after finding the person has a substantial financial hardship or is indigent
based on sworn affidavits of the person.



(Ord. 157, passed 5-12-1999)



§ 34.04  MUNICIPAL COURT FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Municipal Court Fund, which
shall be used exclusively to recover legitimate court costs and to enhance
the technological, operational, security and collections capabilities of the
City Municipal Court.



   (B)   The Municipal Court Fund shall be established as a designated
fund account with the City Treasurer. The Municipal Court shall collect
designated Municipal Court fees and deposit them in the Municipal Court Fund
account. The City Treasurer shall invest the monies in the fund in the same
manner as other city funds. Interest earned on fund monies shall be deposited
in the fund.



   (C)   The Municipal Court, with the concurrence of the City Council,
shall administer the fund and may make expenditures from the fund for the
purpose provided in this section.



   (D)   The Municipal Court fees shall be administrative in nature,
separate from and in addition to any sentence imposed by the Municipal Court
in a criminal case, or any civil penalty in cases where a civil penalty is
imposed. The Municipal Court shall set forth the requirements and amounts of
the court fees as separate items in all orders and judgments.



   (E)   If the defendant pays some or all of his or her fine,
surcharges, restitution or other fees over time, the Municipal Court fees
shall be collected in proportion with any fine, surcharge or other fees,
except restitution and time payment fees, which must be collected first.



(Ord. 157, passed 5-12-1999)



§ 34.05  MUNICIPAL COURT FEES.



   (A)   Municipal Court enhancement fee.  Persons convicted of
criminal traffic or misdemeanor offenses, or found responsible for civil
traffic offenses, with an offense date of the effective date of this
ordinance or after, shall pay a Municipal Court enhancement fee plus
surcharges for each offense.



   (B)   Municipal Court default cost recovery fee.  A default cost
recovery fee shall be imposed on each default judgment entered for failure to
appear in a civil traffic case, or for failure to satisfy in full a civil
sanction imposed in a civil traffic case.



   (C)   Municipal Court warrant cost recovery fee.  When a City
Magistrate issues a warrant for noncompliance with court orders, failure to
pay a fine, or failure to pay any other fees, the City Magistrate shall
impose a Municipal Court warrant cost recovery fee upon the person for whom
the arrest warrant is issued, and this fee shall be added to the amount set
forth in the arrest warrant.



   (D)   Municipal Court deferred prosecution cost recovery fee.  A
deferred prosecution fee shall be imposed on each criminal charge for which
the court defers prosecution pursuant to Rule 38 of the State Rules of
Criminal Procedure (or its substitute).



   (E)   Probation fees. The following court fees will be assessed
unless under the procedures of § 34.03 of the San Luis city code, the
magistrate determines a lesser amount based on the person’s inability to
pay.



      (1)   Any person whose sentence or execution of a sentence is
suspended by acceptance of probation and ordered to be screened for probation
qualification shall pay the cost of such screening to be conducted by a court
compliance officer of this Court; the probation qualification fee shall be
$25 once per case.



      (2)   Unsupervised probation. The San Luis Municipal Court
shall assess each defendant whose sentence or execution of a sentence is
suspended by acceptance of unsupervised probation a fee of $50 which will be
assessed once per case. A $20 completion verification fee shall be assessed
at the successful completion of unsupervised probation. A court compliance
officer shall verify compliance for completion for unsupervised probationers.



      (3)   Standard/supervised probation. The San Luis Municipal
Court shall assess each defendant placed on standard probation a monitoring
fee of $65 to be paid for each month that the defendant remains on probation.
Monitoring will include activities designed to verify whether or not the
probationer is successfully complying with sentencing, which may include
alcohol breath tests and drug tests. For those cases which the court has
ordered drug testing as part of the standard probation, the court will assess
a $50 drug test fee, which will be assessed once per case. A $20 completion
verification fee shall be assessed at the successful completion of probation.
A court compliance officer shall conduct monitoring including alcohol breath
tests, and drug tests as appropriate, and shall verify compliance for
completion for standard probationers.



      (4)   Any and all fees collected under this section shall be
deposited into the San Luis Municipal Court’s enhancement fund.



   (F)   Fees. All fees established by divisions (A) through (E) above
shall be as prescribed by City Council as it deems appropriate.



(Ord. 157, § 5-2-6, passed 5-12-1999; Ord. 235, passed 11-9-2005; Ord. 255,
passed 11-28-2007; Ord. 308, passed 9-28-2011; Am. Ord. 345, passed 1-13-2016)



§ 34.06  COURT COLLECTION SERVICE FEES.



   (A)   The City Council, with the consent of the City Magistrate,
establishes a court collection service fee whereby the Municipal Court,
collection agency(s)and/or attorney(s) may assess the fee against persons,
probationers, defendants, businesses or corporations that have defaulted
(minimum of 60-days’ delinquent) on monetary obligations owed to or payable
through the Court. The court collection service fee may also be collected by
a collection agency(s) and/or attorney(s). The fee may be added to costs
assessed after the date of this Code revision but may also be utilized for
fees incurred prior to the revision, but the fees shall be deducted from
amounts due.



   (B)   With the consent of the Magistrate, there is hereby
established a court collection service fee, which shall be paid exclusively
by persons, probationers, defendants, businesses or corporations with
monetary obligations that are in default (minimum of 60-days’ delinquent)
to the Municipal Court and the obligations are collected by a collection
agency and/or attorney.



   (C)   With the consent of the Magistrate, the Municipal Court is
authorized to engage the services of collection agency(s) or attorney(s) in
accordance with any applicable statutes, regulations and procedures governing
the procurement of the services.



   (D)   With the consent of the Magistrate, the Municipal Court is
authorized to impose a court collection service fee to be charged to each
person, defendant, probationer, business or corporation defaulting on a
monetary obligation owed the Court or a department of the Court. The court
collection service fee shall be an amount equal to fees and charges assessed
by a collection agency that is licensed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 32, Chapter
9, Art. 2, or by a duly licensed attorney who is engaged by the court or
collection agency to collect the payment.



   (E)   All persons, defendants, probationers, businesses or
corporations that owe a monetary obligation to the Municipal Court or any
departments of the Court shall be assessed a court collection service fee of
up to 35% of the unpaid balance on any financial obligation(s) in default.
Pursuant to A.R.S. § 22-404, the fee established by this section is to be
exclusively attributable to and defray or cover the expense of the collection
services for which the fee is assessed. The court collection service fee
shall not exceed the actual cost of collection services rendered.



   (F)   If the person, business or corporation pays all or part of a
financial obligation over time, the collection service fee shall be collected
as a percentage of each payment.



(Ord. 168, Art. 5-4, passed 9-13-2000)



PRESIDING OFFICER



§ 34.20  CITY MAGISTRATE.



   The presiding officer of the Magistrate’s court shall be the City
Magistrate, who shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-1)  (Ord. 21, passed 12-23-1981)



§ 34.21  ASSISTANT CITY MAGISTRATE.



   The office of Assistant City Magistrate is hereby created. The
Assistant City Magistrate may be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council for the term and for the salary as the Council may determine.
He or she shall perform the duties of the City Magistrate in the absence of
the City Magistrate in the manner as the Council may direct.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-2)  (Ord. 21, passed 12-23-1981)



§ 34.22  POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MAGISTRATE.



   The powers and duties of the Magistrate shall include:



   (A)   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him or her
under the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this Code and
the ordinances and resolutions of the city;



   (B)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action
and the proceedings of the court therein;



   (C)   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and
bails and receiving all fines, penalties,  fees and other monies as provided
by law;



   (D)   Payment of all fees, fines, penalties and other monies
collected by the Court to the Treasurer;



   (E)   Submitting a monthly report to the Council summarizing court
activities for that month; and



   (F)   Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not involving
the death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-3)  (Ord. 21, passed 12-23-1981; Ord. 157, passed
5-12-1999)



CHAPTER 35:  FINANCE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   35.01   Finance department: creation, composition; Finance Officer



   35.02   Issuance of warrants



City Tax Code



   35.15   Adopted by reference



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  FINANCE DEPARTMENT: CREATION, COMPOSITION; FINANCE OFFICER



   (A)   There is created a Finance Department.



   (B)   The Finance Department shall consist of the Finance Officer,
who shall be the head of the Department and all employees assigned thereto.
All such employees shall perform their duties subject to the supervision of
the Finance Officer, who shall operate under the direction of the Manager and
report to the Manager. The Finance Officer shall supervise the Department in
accordance with the personnel policies of the city and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties as are customarily conferred and required by
this code, applicable ordinances, resolutions or lawful directives. The
Finance Officer shall be appointed by the manager and shall be in the
classified service of the city. It shall be the duty of the Finance Officer
to:



      (1)   Monitor and oversee the city accounting system.



      (2)   Be responsible for implementing the purchasing rules and
regulations of the city in accordance with Chapter 36 of the city code.



      (3)   Exercise general supervision and control over all
inventories of the city.



      (4)   Administer and serve as liaison for assessment
collection of city's privilege taxes.



      (5)   Encumber funds.



      (6)   Oversee the collection of enterprise revenues in
conjunction with the Utilities Department of the city.



      (7)   Oversee grants and intergovernmental agreements and
provide financial liaison and coordinating assistance to participating
agencies and city departments.



      (8)   Coordinate annual audit activities with independent
auditors.



      (9)   Oversee city payroll in conjunction with the Human
Relations Department of the city.



      (10)   Pay lawful bills submitted to the city in accordance
with the budget adopted by the Council and appropriations made by the Council.



      (11)   Oversee and supervise, in a reasonable and prudent
manner, investments of city monies in accordance with city policies and state
law.



   (C)   As the office shall be performing the duties of Treasurer, it
shall be subject to those bonding provisions of state law.



(Ord. 331, passed 11-12-2014)



§ 35.02  ISSUANCE OF WARRANTS.



   Whenever the city is indebted upon an account, upon approval for
payment of the indebtedness by the City Council  by motion noted in the
minutes of a regular or special meeting, the Mayor and City Clerk are
authorized to issue warrants upon the City Treasurer for the amount due. Not
more than one warrant shall be drawn for the amount allowed. The warrant
shall be drawn in favor of the person to whom it is due, and warrant shall be
substantially in the following form:



CITY OF SAN LUIS WARRANT



DATE                  NO.



   The Treasurer of the City of San Luis, Yuma County, Arizona, will pay
to the order of______ $_________DOLLARS.



   This warrant is issued in payment of demand for payment No. _____, as
allowed by the City Council of San Luis, Yuma County, Arizona, on the __ day
of__, 20__, and will bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date
hereof until paid.



Countersigned:



______________                              
___________________



City
Clerk                                    
Mayor



Presented for payment this____ day of______, 20____, and not paid for want of
funds.



_____________



City Treasurer



PAYABLE THROUGH THE CURRENT BANKING ACCOUNT HOLDER OR THE NATIONAL BANK OF
ARIZONA, SAN LUIS, ARIZONA



The payee, in endorsing this warrant, acknowledges full settlement of the
account as shown.



(Ord. 4, passed 9-20-1979; Ord. 331, passed 11-12-2014)



CITY TAX CODE



§ 35.15  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The City Tax Code, copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of ordinances as
fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 63, passed 5-13-1987; Ord. 67, passed 5-25-1988; Ord. 84, passed
5-23-1990; Ord. 118, passed 1-11-1995; Ord. 138, passed 8-28-1996; Ord. 142,
passed 11-13-1996; Ord. 154, passed 9-23-1998; Ord. 161, passed 12-8-1999;
Ord. 182, passed 1-9-2002; Ord. 194, passed 5-28-2003; Ord. 214, passed
7-28-2004; Ord. 215, passed 8-25-2004; Ord. 222, passed 2-9-2005; Ord. 243,
passed 5-31-2006; Ord. 247, passed 11-29-2006; Ord. 253, passed 12-19-2007;
Ord. 260, passed 4-9-2008; Ord. 280, passed 8-19-2009; Ord. 303, passed
4-13-2011; Ord. 307, passed 7-27-2011; Ord. 328, passed 5-28-2014; Ord. 331,
passed 11-12-2014; Ord. 348, passed 3-23-2016; Ord. 357, passed 7-27-2016;
Ord. 371, passed 11-21-2017)



CHAPTER 36:  PURCHASING



Section



   36.01   In general



   36.02   Exclusive services



   36.03   Bidding



   36.04   Determination of lowest responsible bidder



   36.05   Performance bond



   36.06   Emergency purchases



   36.07   Forms



   36.08   Professional services



   36.09   Cooperative purchasing



   36.10   Purchases from Mayor and Councilmembers



   36.11   Building and construction contracts



   36.12   Fingerprinting of prospective contractors and employees of
contractors



§ 36.01  IN GENERAL.



   (A)   Generally. The purchasing agent of the city shall be the
Finance Director or such other person or persons as may be designated by the
City Manager. No purchase or contract for services of any kind or
description, payment for which is to be made from funds of the city, shall be
made by the purchasing agent, or any officer, employee or agent of the city,
except in the manner set forth in §§ 36.01 through 36.12 and unless the
purchase is in accordance with the adopted budget. In determining the cost of
a purchase or contract, capital lease purchase or contract purchase
agreements shall have their value estimated as the cumulative total value of
the contract expense to the town. Operating leases shall be valued at the
cumulative total of lease payments for the anticipated rental period or for
one year from the start of the lease for long-term items, whichever is less.



   (B)   Under $5,000. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract
for service is for the sum of less than $5,000, the purchasing agent may
order the item as needed without further formality.



   (C)   $5,000 to $14,999.99 inclusive. Whenever any contemplated
purchase is for the sum of at least $5,000 but not more than $14,999.99 the
requisitioning department with the assistance of the purchasing department
shall solicit three verbal quotes (inclusive of all cost) from vendors and
submit them to the purchasing department, for awarding to the lowest
responsive quote. Verbal quotes shall be documented and maintained on file in
the purchasing records of the city. If three verbal quotations cannot be
obtained, documentation showing vendors contacted that did not offer price
quotations, or explaining why price quotations were not obtained shall be
maintained with the purchasing documents.



   (D)   $15,000.00 to $34,999.99. Whenever any contemplated purchase
for the sum of at least $15,000 but not more than $35,000 the requisitioning
department with the assistance of the purchasing department shall solicit
three written quotations (inclusive of all cost) from vendors and submit them
to the purchasing department, for awarding to the lowest responsive quote. If
three written quotations cannot be obtained, documentation showing vendors
contacted that did not offer price quotations, or explaining why price
quotations were not obtained shall be maintained with the purchasing
documents.



   (E)   $35,000 and above. Whenever any contemplated purchase except
for professional services as defined in § 36.08, is for the sum of $35,000
or more, the purchasing agent shall cause to be published in two issues of a
newspaper of general circulation, notice inviting sealed bids or requests for
proposals, which notice shall be published at least five days prior to the
date set for the receipt of the bids or proposals. The notice herein required
shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or
services to be performed and the time and place for opening of bids or
proposals. In addition, the purchasing agent shall post a notice inviting
bids or proposals in the city hall. Bids or proposals will be presented to
Mayor and Council for award.



   (F)   Mayor and Council. No service contract of $15,000 and above,
or sealed bid or proposal above $35,000 or more, shall be let except by the
Mayor and Council. The purchasing agent shall present the bids or proposals
to the Mayor and Council for the approval.



   (G)   State or federal contracts. In the event that either state or
federal law or state or federal contract require or provide for a procedure
for acquisition of equipment, supplies, materials, goods, work, or services
different than the procedures provided for in this chapter, the provisions of
the state or federal law or contract will prevail and supersede the
provisions of this chapter.



   (H)   Procedures waived. With the approval of the Council, formal
purchase procedures may be waived.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-01)



§ 36.02 EXCLUSIVE SERVICES.



   In the event that there is only one firm or company or individual
capable of providing a particular service or commodity and those services or
commodities cannot be secured from other persons or companies, § 36.01 shall
not be applicable, and those services or commodities can be secured without
bidding.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-02)



§ 36.03  BIDDING.



   The purchasing agent and all parties contracting with the city, except
those parties contracting for professional services as defined in § 36.08
shall follow the procedure set forth in this section in relation to all bids
or requests for proposals required under § 36.01 or as may be required by
the city charter or state law.



   (A)   All notices and solicitations of bids or proposals shall state
the time and place for opening.



   (B)   All bids or proposals shall be submitted sealed to the
purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids or proposals on the envelope.



   (C)   All bids or proposals shall be opened in public at the time
and place stated in the public notice.



   (D)   A tabulation of all bids or proposals received shall be posted
at city hall for public inspection.



   (E)   The purchasing agent under § 36.01(B), (C) and (D) and the
Mayor and Council under § 36.01(E) above shall have the authority to reject
any and all bids or proposals and parts of all bids or proposals, in their
sole discretion, and re-advertise or re-solicit bids or proposals.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-03)



§ 36.04  DETERMINATION OF LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.



   Unless the Mayor and Council or purchasing agent shall exercise the
right of rejection as provided by § 36.03, the purchase or contract shall be
made from and with the lowest responsible bidder for the entire purchase or
contract or for any part thereof. In determining the lowest responsible
bidder, the Mayor and Council or purchasing agent shall consider.



   (A)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required.



   (B)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
services promptly or within the specified time, without delay or interference.



   (C)   The quality of performance of previous contracts.



   (D)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances of the city.



   (E)   The financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform
the contract.



   (F)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
services.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-04)



§ 36.05  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance
bond, in cash or otherwise, for such amount as he or she deems sufficient to
secure the execution of the contract for the best interest of the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-05)



§ 36.06  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchases of supplies
or services and when time is of the essence, the City Manager shall be
empowered to authorize the purchasing agent to purchase or secure services
without complying with the procedures of this chapter. A full report in
writing of the circumstances of any emergency purchase shall be filed by the
requesting department to the purchasing agent.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-06)



§ 36.07  FORMS.



   The purchasing agent shall prescribe and maintain forms as he or she
shall find necessary for the operation of the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-07)



§ 36.08  PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.



   Unless required by the Mayor and Council, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to professional services. These services include, but
are not limited to, the following: physicians, attorneys, engineers and
similar professions. Contracts for professional services in excess of $15,000
must be approved by the Mayor and Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-08)



§ 36.09  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.



   This chapter shall not apply to purchases made by, through or with the
State of Arizona, its political subdivisions, other states, or their
political subdivisions. The city may make purchases or award contracts for
services without a formal bidding process whenever other governmental units
have done so for the same items or service if, in the opinion of the
purchasing agent, a separate bidding process is not likely to result in a
lower price for such items or services.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-09)



§ 36.10  PURCHASES FROM MAYOR AND COUNCILMEMBERS.



   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 38-503(C), the city, through its common council,
may purchase supplies, materials and equipment not to exceed $300 in costs in
any single transaction or $1,000 annually, from the Mayor or any member of
the Council without using competitive public bidding procedures.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-10)



§ 36.11  BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS.



   All contracts for building or construction projects are exempt from
these bidding requirements and shall comply with A.R.S. Title 34; however, if
public competitive bidding or selection is not required pursuant to A.R.S.
Title 34, then the requirements of this chapter shall apply.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-11)



§ 36.12  FINGERPRINTING OF PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTORS AND EMPLOYEES OF
CONTRACTORS.



   Prior to entering into a contract for services in an area designated as
sensitive by the City Manager, the city shall require that a contractor and
employees of a contractor shall provide to the Police Chief or his or her
designee, fingerprint identification. The Police Chief or his or her designee
shall, pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-184 section 902,
forward those fingerprints accompanied by appropriate fees to the state
department of public safety and the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the
purpose of seeking criminal history information on the contractor and
employees of the contractor. Information obtained shall be used only for the
purpose of evaluating the fitness of prospective contractors and their
employees to provide services to the city and shall otherwise remain
confidential.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-12)



CHAPTER 37:  CITY POLICIES



Section



Criminal Background Checks



   37.01   Criminal background checks mandated



   37.02   Fingerprints




Records Management and Retention Policy




   37.10   Policy



   37.11   Purpose



   37.12   Applicability



   37.13   Reference



   37.14   Roles and responsibilities



   37.15   Records



   37.16   Procedure for retention, disposition and destruction of
records



   37.17   Forms



Public Records Request Policy



   37.20   Purpose of the pubic records request policy



   37.21   Public records request policy narrative



CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS



§ 37.01  CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS MANDATED.



   (A)   All employees and public safety volunteers of the city, either
prior to employment or as a condition of employment, shall be required to
undergo a criminal background check, to be performed by or through the Police
Department of the city as provided herein.



   (B)   All employees and volunteers of service providers to the city
who are performing public safety- related services, including jail and
detention services, shall be required to undergo a criminal background check,
to be performed by or through the Police Department of the city as provided
herein.



   (C)   In addition to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above,
the Police Department is authorized to perform criminal background checks in
the administration of criminal justice for providers of public safety
services, including detention services, provided that the criminal background
checks are fully compliant with state and federal law.



(Ord. 248, passed 2-14-2007)



§ 37.02  FINGERPRINTS.



   Each prospective and current employee of the city, as well as service
providers performing public safety-related services, including jail and
detention services, and each current and prospective public safety volunteer
of the city or the service provider, shall submit a full set of fingerprints
to the City Police Department. These fingerprints shall be used to conduct a
state and federal criminal records check pursuant to the provisions in A.R.S.
41-1750 and Pub. Law  No. 92-544. The State Department of Public Safety is
authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.



(Ord. 248, passed 2-14-2007)



RECORDS MANAGEMENT AND RETENTION POLICY



§ 37.10  POLICY.



   (A)   It is the policy of the City of San Luis (the "city") to
facilitate the prompt and orderly disposition of records no longer possessing
sufficient administrative, legal or fiscal value to warrant their further
retention and to ensure the retention and preservation of records with
continuing value for historical or research purposes. In addition, it is the
policy of the city to administer a records management program to promote the
economic and efficient management of the city's public records.



   (B)   This City Records Management and Retention Policy (this
"Policy") includes Records Retention and Disposition Schedules that have been
approved by the Director of the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public
Records and by the San Luis City Council. These schedules are in compliance
with the City Code, Arizona Revised Statutes and other Federal, State and
local rules and regulations relating to public records. This policy also
includes the procedures for changing or adding to these schedules.



   (C)   Pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes ("A.R.S.") Title 41,
Chapter 1, Article 2.1, the city desires to establish and maintain a records
management program, create and submit any custom records retention schedules
for approval and appoint records managers/coordinators as appropriate. This
policy applies systematic controls and cost reduction principles to the
city's records system through the use of the procedures outlined in this
policy and through the application of the authorized retention and
disposition schedules. These schedules control the utilization, maintenance
and storage of all phases of the life cycle of all records created and
accumulated by the city. Compliance with the procedures and with the
schedules as required by law.



(Ord. 360, passed 12-28-2016)



§ 37.11  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this policy is to: (A) provide guidance to city
staff relating to records disposition and retention responsibilities under
the San Luis City Code, Arizona Revised Statutes and other federal, state and
local rules, regulations and guidelines; (B) ensure the retention and
preservation of records with continuing value for historical or research
purposes; and (C) facilitate the prompt and orderly disposition of records no
longer possessing sufficient administrative, legal or fiscal value to warrant
their further retention.



   (B)   In addition, the purpose of this policy is to: (A) implement a
records management program in order to provide better access to information;
(B) reduce the costs of recordkeeping by implementing effective and efficient
record keeping practices; and (C) inform pertinent department personnel about
their responsibilities as they pertain to records management.



(Ord. 360, passed 12-28-2016)



§ 37.12  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The policies and procedures set forth herein apply to all
records received, created or compiled by officials or employees of the city
(including members of the City Council) in the daily conduct of city business
and to any and all officials or employees of the city receiving, creating or
compiling said records. The records are the property of the State of Arizona
pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-151.15. It is unlawful to remove them from the files
or to destroy them except in accordance with the city records retention and
disposition schedules, as defined in § 37.13(B).



   (B)   City departments should implement their records control and
disposal programs in accordance with the guidelines set forth in this policy.
Each Department Director is responsible for ensuring that his or her
department is maintaining an up-to-date copy of this policy and ensuring that
the policies and directives set forth are closely followed.



   (C)   The cooperation of each department is necessary to keep their
active filing systems closely related to the city records retention and
disposition schedules as applicable to the department.



(Ord. 360, passed 12-28-2016)



§ 37.13  REFERENCE.



   (A)   Authority.



      (1)   A.R.S. §§ 13-2407, 38-421, 39-101, and Title 41,
Chapter 1, Article 2.1.



      (2)   City of San Luis City Code.



      (3)   Rules, regulations, standards and procedures issued by
the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records.



   (B)   Definitions.



      ACTIVE RECORDS. Any data or information that is referred to
frequently for various types of transactions. These records are maintained in
the office files of each department.



      CITY RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULES.  Records
retention and disposition schedules as approved by the Arizona State Library,
Public Records and Archives and as declared as public records by the City
Council.



      CORRESPONDENCE. Any routine type of records generated in the
conduct of daily work such as letters, memoranda, reports, emails and so
forth.



      DEPARTMENT RECORDS CLERK. A city employee who is responsible for
the coordination of records and forms management, needs and operations
between that department and the Records Center. Each Department Director
shall be the Department Records Clerk for his or her corresponding department
unless otherwise designated by the City Clerk.



      DIRECTORY LISTING. All original documents that are assigned a
numerical filing number and that are located in the off-site storage facility.



      DISPOSITION. The action taken at the end of the retention period.



      FORMS MANAGEMENT. The function that establishes standards for the
creation, design, analysis and revision of all forms within an organization
and assures that they are designed, produced, utilized and distributed
economically and efficiently.



      INACTIVE RECORDS. Any data or information that is referred to
less than once a month. Most inactive records may be disposed of after a
specified time period although some records have to be kept permanently for
administrative, legal, historical or archival purposes.



      NON-RECORDS. Items which are outside of the definition of records
which do not require retention, scheduling, authorization to destroy, or the
reporting of destruction.



      NUMERICAL FILING A number assigned to active/archival original
city documents in order to locate them in the off-site storage facility
according to the directory listing.



      RECORDS.   All books, paper, maps, photographs or other
documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
including prints or copies of such items produced or reproduced on file or
electronic media pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-151.16, made or received by any
governmental agency in pursuance of law or in connection with the transaction
of public business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by the city
or its legitimate successor as evidence of the organization, functions,
policies, decisions, procedures, operations or other activities of the
government, or because of the informational and historical value of data
contained in the record and includes records that are made confidential by
statute.



       RECORDS CENTER. An area located in the City Clerk's office which
preserves and retains records.



      RECORDS MANAGER. The individual responsible for the coordination,
implementation and maintenance of the records retention and management
program for the city. The City Clerk is hereby designated as the Records
Manager.



      RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The creation and implementation of systematic
controls for records and information activities from the point where they are
created or received through final disposition or archival retention,
including distribution, use, storage, retrieval, protection and preservation.



      RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULE. A records retention
and disposition schedule is a timetable for the management of specific record
series. It describes the life cycle of each series listed on it by indicating
the retention period of the records and their final disposition (i.e.,
microfilm, archive, or destruction).



      RECORDS SERIES. A group of identical or related records which are
normally used and filed as a unit and which permit evaluation as a unit for
retention scheduling purposes.



      RECORDS WITH HISTORICAL VALUE. Records that are deemed to have
historical value because they document the history of the city. Such records
include, without limitation, 1) minutes of boards, commissions and committees
established by statute, resolution, proclamation or ordinance, 2) council
minutes, 3) original or "official copies" of formal policy directives and 4)
original copy of organization documentation, including charts. Records may
also be deemed to have historical value because they document a controversial
issue or a program, project, event, or issue that results in a significant
change that affects the city, county, or state or that involves prominent
people, places, or events, or that resulted in media attention locally,
statewide or nationally. These records are permanent and cannot be destroyed.



      RETENTION. The cycle of a document from creation through its
active and inactive life to destruction or permanent preservation.



      RETENTION PERIOD. The period of time during which records must be
kept before they may be disposed of, usually stated in terms of months or
years but sometimes expressed as contingencies upon the occurrence of an
event (e.g., employee termination, contract closure, etc.).



(Ord. 360, passed 12-28-2016)



§ 37.14  ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Records Manager. The Records Manager is vested with the
authority and responsibility for the creation and ongoing implementation of
records management.



      (1)   The Records Manager shall:



         (a)   Establish and maintain an active, continuing
program for the economical and efficient management of the public records of
the city.



         (b)   Serve as liaison to the Arizona State Library,
Archives and Public Records and ensure the city's compliance with the rules,
regulations, standards, and procedures established by the Arizona State
Library, Archives and Public Records.



         (c)   Develop the necessary standards and procedures in
the overall field of records management, including the filing and retrieval
of active records, records inventory and appraisal, inactive files management
and retrieval and the management and control of essential records.



         (d)   Educate city officials and employees in all areas
of records management.



         (e)   Assist the departments in the establishment and
updating of the city records retention and disposition schedules in
conformity with legal, administrative and fiscal constraints and as set forth
in § 37.16(A) and (B).



         (f)   Establish a forms creation and control program.



      (2)   The Records Manager or designee shall:



         (a)   Establish and maintain records the city records
retention and disposition schedules on file in the City Clerk's office.



         (b)   Coordinate the inventory of records with each
department.



         (c)   Review the city records retention and disposition
schedules for each department based upon the information obtained from the
Records Inventory Worksheets and amend the city records retention and
disposition schedules accordingly, contingent upon approval by the City
Council and the Arizona State Library, Public Records and Archives, as more
particularly set forth in § 37.16(B).



         (d)   Receive from Department Records Clerk all boxes of
eligible inactive records. Records assigned to the Records Center become the
responsibility of the Records Manager.



         (e)   Keep an accurate record of all original active and
archival records in the fireproof filing cabinets, in the electronic document
system and in the off-site storage facility according to the directory
listing.



         (f)   Dispose of the records located in the Records
Center at the end of the retention period in accordance with the city records
retention and disposition schedules.



         (g)   Assist in the retrieval and re-filling of records
that are stored at the Records Center.



         (h)   Transfer permanent or long term records to the
off-site storage facility and track the transfer of such records with a
spreadsheet listing the boxes' barcode numbers.



         (i)   Assist and monitor the document imaging when other
departments receive approval for document imaging by creating templates,
reviewing scanned records series and keeping track of record series that have
surpassed their retention period as set forth in the city records retention
and disposition schedules for deletion from the system.



   (B)   Department Records Clerk. Each Department Director shall be
the Department Records Clerk for his or her corresponding department unless
otherwise designated by the City Clerk. The Department Records Clerk shall:



      (1)   Coordinate all records management activities within the
department, including emails.



      (2)   Inventory and aid in the appraisal of the department
records.



      (3)   Work closely with the Records Manager in the
administration of requests for document imagining.



      (4)   Review on a regular basis the city records retention and
disposition schedules as applicable to that department to determine which
records are eligible for transfer to the Records Center.



      (5)   Box all inactive records pertaining to the department
and make arrangements for transfer to the Records Center.



(Ord. 360, passed 12-28-2016)



§ 37.15  RECORDS.



   (A)   Inventory. Each Department Records Clerk shall take an
inventory of all of the records stored in the department and shall complete
the Records Inventory Worksheet in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference, as may be amended. The record series should
be as descriptive as possible. Any special requirement of a particular record
series should be noted on the Records Inventory Worksheet. The Department
Records Clerk shall submit the completed Records Inventory Worksheet to the
Records Manager for review. After the initial inventory, supplemental
inventories may be performed as needed or as directed by the Records Manager.



   (B)   Records categories.



      (1)   Records. All documents and documentary material deemed
to be records as defined in § 37.13(B) herein.



      (2)   Non-records. Non-records include, without limitation:



         (a)   Extra copies of documents preserved only for
convenience or reference;



         (b)   Reading, tickler, follow-up, or suspense copies of
correspondence;



         (c)   Identical copies of documents maintained in the
same file;



         (d)   Extra copies of printed or processed materials
(official copies of which are retained by the department of record);



         (e)   Documents received from other departments that
require no action (official copies of which are retained by the originating
department);



         (f)   Superseded copies of published manuals, other
directives and drafts;



         (g)   Materials documenting unofficial employee
activities (blood drives, charitable funds, social and professional meetings,
etc.);



         (h)   Routing slips and standard transmittal sheets;



         (i)   Incidental working papers, notes and emails;



         (j)   Preliminary working drafts;



         (k)   Blank forms;



         (l)   Transcribed stenographic materials;



         (m)   Catalogs, trade journals and other publications or
papers received from government agencies, commercial firms or private
institutions that require no action and are not part of an action case record;



         (n)   Correspondence and other drafts of short-term
importance that, after action has been completed, have no future use.



         (o)   Reproduction materials such as stencils,
mimeograph masters, offset plates, etc.



         (p)   Physical exhibits, artifacts and material objects
lacking documentary value;



         (q)   Library or museum materials made or acquired
solely for reference or exhibition purposes; and



         (r)   Stocks of publications or documents intended for
sale or distribution to interested persons.



      (3)   Non-records may attain the status of records in certain
circumstances as determined by the Records Manager. Examples of this include:
(i) transmittal slips that have acquired record status because they serve to
significantly clarify the document or documents being transmitted; (ii)
multiple copies that have attained the status of records because each is
serving a separate and distinct program purpose or if they are maintained in
different filing systems; or (iii) published codes that have become records
through their adoption by the city. The Department Records Clerk shall
consult with the Records Manager to determine whether a material should be
designated as a record or non-record.



      (4)   Non-records generally shall not be interfiled with
official records.



      (5)   Records with historical or archival value. Certain
records that are created, compiled and maintained in the departments have
long-term research and reference value. These records should be designated as
permanent and should be transferred to the city off-site storage facility or
the Arizona State Library archives, as applicable, for preservation as soon
as their active role is over according to A.R.S. § 39-101. All records
within the departments should be appraised to determine if they have
historical value. Working in close association with City Clerk staff, the
Department Records Clerk shall assess which records have historical
significance and to determine when such records can be classified as inactive
and thus be transferred to the city off-site storage facility or the Arizona
State Library archives, as applicable. The Records Manager or designee
retains the final decision in the city as to whether such records should be
designated as permanent. Records with historical value include, without
limitation:



         (a)   Minutes of boards, commissions and committees
established by statute, resolution, proclamation or ordinance.



         (b)   City Council meeting minutes.



         (c)   Original or "official copies" of formal policy
directives.



         (d)   Original Copy of organizational documentation
including charts.



         (e)   Records documenting a historic or landmark event.



(Ord. 360, passed 12-28-2016)



§ 37.16  PROCEDURE FOR RETENTION, DISPOSITION AND DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS.



   (A)   City records retention and disposition schedules. The city
records retention and disposition schedules are on file with the City Clerk
and may be amended from time to time in accordance with approval from the
Arizona State Library, Public Records and Archives.



   (B)   Amendments to retention and disposition schedule. The Records
Manager shall review the city records retention and disposition schedules at
least annually to determine whether changes need to be made. If the Records
Manager desires to amend the city records retention and disposition
schedules, the City Council shall approve the amended schedules by
resolution, declaring the amended schedules as public record, and the
amended, approved schedules shall be submitted to the Arizona State Library,
Public Records and Archives. Requests for custom amendments to the city
records retention and disposition schedules must be submitted in writing to
the Records Manager and are subject to approval by the Director of the
Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records.



   (C)   Records disposition. Final disposition of records is
prescribed by the city records retention and disposition schedules.



   (D)   Records on approved schedule.



      (1)   Only official records are put on the city records
retention and disposition schedules.



      (2)   Records should be retained in the originating department
in accordance with city records retention and disposition schedules until
they are no longer in active use. Generally, records must be referred to more
than once a month to be considered active records. When records are referred
to so seldom as to make their continued retention by originating department
impractical, they are considered to have become inactive and should be
transferred to the Records Center for appropriate disposition.



      (3)   Usually records retained for three years or less should
be held in the originating department until they are no longer active and
then they should be transferred to the Records Center for appropriate
disposition.



      (4)   Records which have been determined to be of historical
or archival value in accordance with § 37.15(B)(5) shall be transferred to
the city off-site storage facility or the Arizona State Library archives, as
applicable, as soon as administratively advisable per A.R.S. § 39-101.



      (5)   Records which must be retained longer than ten years and
which have no archival value should be microfilmed and the hard copies
destroyed, provided, however, that approval from the Director of the Arizona
State Library, Archives and Public Records, pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-151.16
must be obtained first.



   (E)   Surveillance (security) storage media.



      (1)   Surveillance recordings. Including, but not limited to,
Closed Circuit TV (CCTV) recordings of building exteriors / lobbies / other
areas open to the general public.



      (2)   Law enforcement recordings. Law enforcement recordings
are audio and video records created by law enforcement for investigative
purposes. This definition does not include law enforcement created recordings
addressed by their retention schedules.



      (3)   Evidentiary recordings. These recordings have been
determined to have content relevant to an investigation or prosecution.



      (4)   Non-evidentiary recordings. All other law enforcement
recordings.



   (F)   Indexing; document imaging. The Records Manager or designee
shall be responsible for indexing the minutes, ordinances, resolutions,
contracts, agreements, deeds, pending agenda items, referred items and any
other item concerning the actions of the City Council. Each department shall
ask the Records Manager for assistance in any document imaging requests.
Final approval is necessary from the Arizona State Library, Archives and
Public Records prior to scanning documents in accordance with a document
imaging implementation program pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-151.16. The Records
Manager or designee shall have access to all departments' files for
monitoring purposes of document imaging according to the city records
retention and disposition schedules.



   (G)   Active records filing. The Department Records Clerk shall work
closely with City Clerk staff in setting up an efficient active records
filling system and shall monitor changes made in filling systems to maintain
compliance with the applicable city records retention and disposition
schedules.



   (H)   Preparing records for storage.



      (1)   The Department Records Clerk shall prepare all inactive
records in his or her department for transfer to the Records Center for
appropriate disposition. In preparing the records for transfer, the
Department Records Clerk shall establish that all such records are records,
as opposed to non-records, and are being retained in accordance with this
policy and the rules, regulations, standards and procedures approved by the
Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records.



      (2)   The Department Records Clerks shall pack all inactive
records to be transferred in storage boxes in the same order in which they
were kept in the active records file. All labels, serial numbers, file
dividers and indexes shall be included with the records to maintain the
integrity of the file. Each box shall contain only those records sharing the
same destruction date.



   (I)   Transferring records to the Records Center.



      (1)   The Department Records Clerk shall deliver all completed
storage boxes to the Records Manager. Each box will be stored in the
corresponding location until the expiration of the retention period, at which
time it will be processed for destruction. In no event shall boxes be
delivered to the Records Center without being checked in by the Records
Manager or designee.



      (2)   Only the Magistrate Court and Police Department shall
store inactive records at the department until the Retention Period has
passed. The Police Department Director shall arrange the transfer of the
records to the Records Center at the discretion of the Records Manager when
they are ready for destruction. The Police Department Director shall complete
the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records Certificate of Records
Destruction, in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B and incorporated herein
by reference, as may be amended, and shall transfer for all inactive boxes
with the Certificate of Records Destruction. Once approved by the Records
Manager, the records will be slated for destruction.



   (J)   Retrieving records from the Records Center.



      (1)   If a department needs to retrieve records from boxes
stored at the Records Center or the off-site storage facility, the Department
Records Clerk or designee shall contact the Records Manager or designee. Only
the Records Manager or designee may retrieve records from the Records Center.



      (2)   All architectural/engineering plans and specifications
shall be transferred to the Records Center and shall be kept until their
retention period expires in accordance with the city's records retention and
disposition schedules.



   (K)   Preparing records for disposition.



      (1)   Records retained in the originating department for the
duration of the retention period should be sent to the City Records Center
for destruction at the end of the retention period as prescribed by the city
records retention and disposition schedules.



      (2)   Records stored at the Records Center or at the off-site
storage facility will be pulled for destruction at the expiration of their
scheduled retention period, and if feasible and necessary in the sole
discretion of the Records Manager, the Records Manger or designee will notify
the originating department of the impending destruction. The records will be
held for 15 working days after the records are pulled unless information is
provided to support a change in the retention period of a particular document
or record series, including without limitation the reason set forth in §
37.16(K)(3) below. The originating department is responsible for notifying
the Records Manager if a record should not be destroyed as scheduled or if
the records scheduled for destruction fall under the Federal Privacy of
Information Act and require destruction by shredding or other approved
permanent method of destruction.



      (3)   Scheduled destruction of records will be delayed for
reasons such as court orders, litigation, audits, changes in the prescribed
retention period or when there is a probability of litigation, each involving
the records or requiring their use, or if the records may be required for
legal discovery or ongoing audit purposes.



      (4)   The Department Records Clerk shall report the
destruction of records by completing a Certificate of Records Destruction, in
the form attached hereto as Exhibit B. The Certificate of Records Destruction
shall be approved and signed by the Records Manager or designee and it shall
be mailed to the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records. A copy
will be filed in the City Clerk's office and retained for one year.



      (5)   All records on document imaging system whose retention
periods have expired will be noted on the Arizona State Library, Archives and
Public Records Certificate of Records Destruction, in the form attached
hereto as Exhibit B.



   (L)   Methods of disposition. Disposition may consist of any of the
following:



      (1)   Destruction by shredding, pulping, or other approved
permanent methods.



      (2)   Archival retention in accordance with § 37.15(B)(5).



      (3)   Micrographic reproduction with destruction of originals.



      (4)   Micrographic reproduction with archival retention of
originals.



      (5)   Electronic/digital reproduction with destruction of
originals.



      (6)   Electronic/digital reproduction with archival retention
of originals.



   (M)   In-house records destruction. The Department Records Clerk or
the Records Manager or designee shall screen the documents from the inactive
records boxes for confidential material, such as social security numbers,
bank account numbers, etc. Once approved for destruction by the Records
Manager, all boxes from Human Resources, Legal and Police Department shall be
shredded by the department or via the Records Manager.



   (N)   Outsourced record destruction. For documents not destroyed in
house, the Records Manager shall confirm that those records are to be
destroyed and shall submit these records for destruction to the appropriate
vendor. Upon destruction, the vendor shall provide the Records Manager with
an Affidavit of Destruction.



(Ord. 360, passed 12-28-2016)



§ 37.17  FORMS.



   (A)   Forms management. Forms management is the centralized and
systematic control of forms, including design, utilization, revision and
stocking of the forms.



      (1)   To avoid the pitfalls associated with the utilization of
poorly designed forms, each department shall work in close association with
the Department Records Clerk and City Clerk staff in developing an efficient
and cost-effective forms management program.



      (2)   In developing and maintaining an efficient forms
management program, the Department Records Clerk shall:



         (a)   Analyze the forms currently in use in the
department in relation to their costs;



         (b)   Eliminate the use of forms that have ceased to
serve a useful purpose;



         (c)   Redesign current forms and design new forms in a
manner that will help achieve a maximum efficiency and usefulness;



         (d)   Consolidate forms with substantially the same
informational content or similar uses;



         (e)   Eliminate extra copies of forms that are not
routinely used or are needless; and



         (f)   Identify the most economical and efficient methods
for the printing, storage and distribution of forms.



(Ord. 360, passed 12-28-2016)



PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST POLICY



§ 37.20  PURPOSE OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST POLICY.



   To implement a procedure for the City of San Luis (the “city”) to
provide information to the public in a consistent manner according to state
law.



(Ord. 365, passed 6-28-2017)



§ 37.21  PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST POLICY NARRATIVE.



   All written requests for information and records are processed through
the City Clerk acting as custodian of records (“custodian”) or authorized
designee pursuant to the City Code of the City of San Luis, Arizona, with the
exception of police reports and minute entries or transcripts for victims of
a criminal offense, as set forth in division (H) below. The Public Records
Request Form (the “Request Form”) can be found on the city’s website:
www.cityofsanluis.org under City Departments, City Clerk, and is available by
calling the City Clerk’s office.



   (A)   The public will be asked to submit a request form when seeking
copies of, or when seeking to review, public records to facilitate proper
administration of the request. The requests should provide adequate and
detailed information. The city is not responsible for creating new documents
or generating reports in response to requests. Request forms are processed as
required under A.R.S. Title 39, Chapter 1 and appropriate charges will be
assessed to the requesting party, as per the policy as set forth below under
“Fees.”



   (B)   Only one request form is required. If the public downloads the
request form from the city’s website, prints the form and submits this form
at City Hall, the requester is not required to fill out a duplicate form at
City Hall.



   (C)   A blank request form may be faxed to the requester. The
requester may then complete, sign and fax the completed form back to City
Hall. However, the requested material(s) is NOT to be faxed to the requester,
as the requester must submit payment, as appropriate, prior to the release of
the document(s). The requested material(s) may be faxed after payment is
received.



   (D)   Commercial requests for public information must include a
statement of the commercial purpose and be notarized pursuant to state law.
If the form is notarized at City Hall, the notary fees as allowed by state
statute will be collected. All request forms shall be filed with the
custodian or authorized designee and date-stamped upon receipt.



   (E)   If the request is to inspect documents only, the original
public record(s) must be reviewed in the presence of the custodian or
authorized designee.



   (F)   The custodian or authorized designee will be given the request
on the day the request is submitted to the city for compliance with compiling
the requested information. If a request is delivered to another city
department, the request will be forwarded to the custodian that same day.



   (G)   (1)   All requests will be processed through the office of
the custodian except for:



         (a)   Requests for court documents filed in the San Luis
Municipal Court which will be processed through the San Luis Municipal Court;
or



         (b)   Requests for police reports maintained by the San
Luis Police Department which will be processed through the San Luis Police
Department.



      (2)   Except for requests as set forth above, it is the
responsibility of the custodian or authorized designee to facilitate all
departmental responses to public records requests and to communicate with the
public regarding public records requests.



   (H)   If a public record is maintained by a department other than
the custodian, the custodian will request the information from the department
and the department will forward the public record to the custodian promptly
and in any case within five business days after the request is made. The city
department providing the information to the custodian will provide the
custodian or authorized designee with a total of two paper copies (i.e., one
copy of all materials to be given to the requester and one duplicate copy for
archival purposes) or one electronic copy. If the requested information
cannot be forwarded to the custodian within five days, the custodian must be
informed promptly and in any case within five business days after the request
is made of the reason for the delay and the earliest date the requested
information will be made available.



   (I)   Every effort will be made to provide the information to the
requester by the end of the seventh business day following the date the
request is made. If the requested public records cannot reasonably be
produced within seven business days, the custodian or authorized designee
shall advise the requester within seven business days setting forth the
reason that such records cannot be produced within seven business days and
the earliest date the requested information will be made available. A request
for a commercial purpose may require additional time for processing.



   (J)   Confidential records exempt from disclosure: certain city
records are confidential under Arizona statutes or other laws and cannot be
released to the public. Examples include but are not limited to records
protected by attorney-client privilege and minutes of executive sessions of
City Council.



   (K)   Records involving a privacy interest exempt from disclosure:
certain city records may not be accessible to the public due to the record
involving a privacy interest where the public access would invade privacy and
that invasion outweighs the public’s right to know.



   (L)   The custodian shall refer any questions of the legality of the
documents or disclosures to the City Attorney by sending an e-mail with the
request form as an attachment.



   (M)   If the public records contains material that is exempt from
disclosure as well as material not exempt, the custodian or authorized
designee shall separate the material and make the non-exempt material
available for examination and copying. In general, the following personal
identifying information should be redacted from documents as approved by the
City Attorney: address, phone number, social security number, birth date, and
the like.



   (N)   Public records may be disclosed in the form of a CD, DVD,
cassette, videotape or paper. If the records are not maintained in electronic
format by the city, the city is not required to convert the requested public
records into electronic format. Public records requested to be disclosed
electronically in the form of CD or DVD will be provided in a “read-only”
format to ensure the public record remains intact after disclosure by the
city.



   (O)   The original request form will remain on file with the
Custodian of Records subject to the requirements of the records retention and
disposition schedule for Arizona municipalities.



   (P)   Fees:



      (1)   There will be a per page photocopy charge to the public
as set forth by resolution in addition to the minimum fee per request as set
forth by resolution, other charges as may be applicable pursuant to state
law, including, but not limited to, a reasonable amount for the cost of time,
equipment and personnel used in producing copies of the records, but not for
costs of searching for the records, and applicable sales tax. For requests of
public materials, equipment and personnel used in producing or reproducing
the information, there will be a charge for the value of reproduction on the
commercial market as best determined by the city.



      (2)   There will be a reasonable charge for documents
converted to a read-only electronic format and provided on portable
electronic storage device in addition to the minimum fee for cassettes, CDs,
DVDs and videotapes as set forth by resolution, other charges as may be
applicable pursuant to state law, including, but not limited to, a reasonable
amount for the cost of time, equipment and personnel used in converting the
records into read-only electronic format, but not for costs of searching for
the records, and applicable sales tax.



      (3)   All fees must be paid prior to the release of printed,
CD, DVD, cassette, or videotape documents and/or materials. If a document is
not picked up within two weeks of the request, the requester shall be billed
for the cost of the document(s) and the document(s) may be destroyed.



      (4)   Unless otherwise determined by the city, the city will
not charge the federal government, the State of Arizona or any of their
political subdivisions, the fees set forth above for non-commercial purpose
public records requests.



   (Q)   City Council of the City of San Luis shall from time to time
set the fees for public records request by resolution.



(Ord. 365, passed 6-28-2017)



CHAPTER 38: EMERGENCY SERVICES



Section



Ambulances



   38.01   Public purpose



   38.02   Definitions



   38.03   Ambulance response time



   38.04   Notification of location of responding ambulance



§ 38.01 PUBLIC PURPOSE.



   The City Council of the City of San Luis hereby finds and declares that
the City of San Luis is a fast growing community with a population in excess
of 25,000 residents; that the closest hospital and emergency care and trauma
center is Yuma Regional Medical Center which is located approximately 22
miles from the municipal limits of the City of San Luis; that there are two
providers of ground ambulance services to the residents of San Luis; and that
effective ambulance services with appropriate response times are vital to the
public health and safety of the residents of the City of San Luis. The City
Council specifically finds that the distance that an ambulance must travel,
and the time that an ambulance takes, to respond to an emergency has material
impact on the life and safety of persons in need of transport. By this
subchapter it is the intent of the City Council of the City of San Luis to
establish, as a requirement for minimum health and safety of the residents of
the City of San Luis, provisions for response times for ground ambulance
services in the municipal limits of the City of San Luis, State of Arizona,
and procedures to ensure that response times will meet the health and safety
needs of the public.



(Ord. 275, passed 5-2-2009)



§ 38.02 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMBULANCE. Any publicly or privately owned surface, water or air
vehicle, including a helicopter, that contains a stretcher and necessary
medical equipment and supplies pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2202, and that is
especially designed and constructed or modified and equipped to be used,
maintained or operated primarily for the transportation of individuals who
are sick, injured or wounded or who require medical monitoring or aid.
AMBULANCE does not include a surface vehicle that is owned and operated by a
private sole proprietor, partnership, private corporation or municipal
corporation for the emergency transportation and in-transit care of its
employees or a vehicle that is operated to accommodate an incapacitated or
disabled person who does not require medical monitoring, care or treatment
during transport and that is not advertised as having medical equipment and
supplies or ambulance attendants.



   AMBULANCE SERVICE. A person who owns and operates one or more
ambulances.



   DISPATCH. The direction to a ground ambulance service or vehicle to
respond to a call for EMS or transport.



   EMS. Those services required following an accident or an emergency
medical situation:



      (1)   For on-site emergency medical care.



      (2)   For the transportation of the sick or injured by a
licensed ground or air ambulance.



      (3)   In the use of emergency communications media.



      (4)   In the use of emergency receiving facilities.



      (5)   In administering initial care and preliminary treatment
procedures by certified emergency medical technicians.



   GROUND AMBULANCE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle, defined in A.R.S. § 28-101,
specifically designed to transport ambulance attendants and patients on land.



   RESPONSE TIME. The difference between the, time an ambulance service is
notified that a need exists for immediate dispatch from either the Police
Department or Fire Department of the City of San Luis, or any other county,
state, or federal governmental agency, and the time the ambulance service's
first ground ambulance vehicle arrives at the scene. Response time does not
include the time required to identify the patient's need, the scene, and the
resources necessary to meet the patient's need.



   SCENE. The location of the patient or the closest point to the patient
at which an ambulance vehicle can arrive.



   TRANSPORT. The conveyance of one or more patients in a ground ambulance
vehicle from the point of patient pick-up to the patient's initial
destination.



(Ord. 275, passed 5-2-2009)



§ 38.03 AMBULANCE RESPONSE TIME.



   Any ambulance service operating a ground ambulance vehicle in the
municipal limits of the city shall have response times as follows:



   (A)   Ten minutes on 75% of all ambulance calls;



   (B)   Fifteen minutes on 90% of all ambulance calls; and



   (C)   Thirty minutes on 100% of all ambulance calls.



(Ord. 275, passed 5-2-2009)



§ 38.04 NOTIFICATION OF LOCATION OF RESPONDING AMBULANCE.



   Any ambulance service operating a ground ambulance service in the
municipal limits of the city shall inform the governmental agency, whether
the Police or Fire Department of the city, or any other county, state or
federal agency, dispatching a ground ambulance service of the location of the
ground ambulance vehicle that will be responding to the call for EMS or
transport at the time of the direction to respond to the call.



(Ord. 275, passed 5-2-2009)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   SOLID WASTE



      51.   SEWAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE



      52.   WATER SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION



      53.   BACKFLOW PREVENTION



      54.   WELL REGULATION



CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE



Section




Solid Waste Collection




   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Collection agency



   50.03   Collection hours



   50.04   Rates



   50.05   Discontinuance of services




Preparation of Solid Waste for Collection




   50.20   Preparation of solid waste



   50.21   Location for pick up



   50.22   Lids and covers



   50.23   Use of containers




Other Methods of Solid Waste Removal




   50.35   Hauling solid waste



   50.36   Vehicles and receptacles to be spill-proof



   50.37   Spilled solid waste



   50.38   Dumping solid waste



   50.39   Special event service



SOLID WASTE COLLECTION



§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTAINER.  Container furnished by the city for the purpose of holding
solid waste for the city’s regular solid waste collection service. 
CONTAINER does not include dumpsters.



   GARBAGE.  Organic waste, discarded material that can rot. Examples of
GARBAGE include but are not limited to food waste, animal waste, and grass
clippings. GARBAGE does not include human waste, sewage or “hazardous
waste” as defined in this chapter.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Material to be discarded whether solid, semi solid,
liquid, or contained gases which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics pose a substantial present
or potential hazard to human health or the environment or any other material
deemed to be HAZARDOUS WASTE under Arizona or federal laws.



   SOLID WASTE.  Any discarded solid waste commonly called trash,
rubbish, or refuse including “garbage” as defined in this chapter. SOLID
WASTE does not include human waste, sewage or “hazardous waste” as
defined in this chapter.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 50.02  COLLECTION AGENCY.



   The city, or other collectors authorized by the city, shall collect all
residential solid waste within the city limits. No person, except as provided
in this chapter, shall collect or gather residential solid waste within the
city. The city may collect solid waste from commercial properties within the
city if the commercial property owner, tenant, or authorized occupant opts
for a residential sized container for solid waste and the residential sized
container is appropriate for the volume and character of the solid waste the
commercial property generates. The city shall not provide regular solid waste
collection service for commercial properties and construction activities
which are inappropriate for a residential sized container.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.03  COLLECTION HOURS.



   The hours of collection of solid waste shall be designated by the
Council by resolution or order.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 50.04  RATES.



   City Council shall by resolution, from time to time, fix the rates and
classifications for solid waste collection within the city and shall make
other rules and regulations as may be necessary to properly administer and
enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 50.05  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICES.



   In the event an account shall become one month delinquent in payment of
the fees for solid waste collection, the city, in addition to all legal
remedies, may discontinue solid waste removal. Solid waste service accounts
follow the same delinquency procedures as the city’s water service and
waste water service.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)



PREPARATION OF SOLID WASTE FOR COLLECTION



§ 50.20  PREPARATION OF SOLID WASTE.



   All solid waste shall be prepared for collection or disposed of as
follows:



   (A)   Solid waste containers. The city shall famish containers for
the holding and collection of all solid waste intended for collection by the
city. The city’s customers shall keep the containers in good repair and in
a sanitary condition. The containers are city property. The city will replace
containers which are found to be no longer serviceable through normal wear
and tear free of charge.  The city will replace containers which are found
to be no longer serviceable due to the city’s customer’s negligent care,
maintenance in an unsanitary condition, misuse, or intentional damage for a
fee. The fee will be set by resolution of City Council from time to time. The
city will replace for the same fee any container lost or stolen during a
city’s customer’s care. There is a fee for the container which is set by
resolution of City Council from time to time.



   (B)   Garbage (solid waste which is organic and can rot). Garbage
(as defined in this chapter) shall be placed in a leak-proof plastic bag
before putting it in the container. Examples of garbage include but are not
limited to food waste, animal waste, grass clippings, and the like.



   (C)   Fit inside the container. The city shall only collect solid
waste that fits inside the container. The city shall not collect any material
set outside the container. Discarded boxes shall always be flattened (cut or
folded) so that they fit inside the container.



   (D)   No hot material and no liquids. Hot materials shall not be
placed in the container including but not limited to coals from barbeque
which are still hot. No liquids shall be placed in the container.



   (E)   No overloading with heavy material. Heavy items which will
overload the container shall not be placed in the container.  Example of
such heavy materials include but are not limited to concrete, bricks, stone,
lumber, soil, tree trunks, auto parts, and the like. The city’s customer
may haul such material to a landfill or request a special pick-up service
from the city to collect it for a fee which City Council sets by resolution
from time to time.



   (F)   By-products. Any commercial or manufacturing establishment
which, by the nature of its operations, creates an unusual amount of
by-product solid waste, may be required by the city to dispose of its own
waste as opposed to having the city provide the service.



   (G)   Hazardous waste. Hazardous waste shall not be placed in the
container.  Examples of hazardous waste include but are not limited to
paint, spray cans, gasoline, petroleum oils, and the like.  The city’s
customers shall properly dispose of hazardous waste at a hazardous waste
site.  At the discretion of city staff, the city may from time to time
provide a program of hazardous waste collection.



   (H)   Construction or landscaping debris. Waste soil, concrete,
masonry blocks, sod, rocks and other construction or landscaping debris shall
be hauled to a landfill or disposed of legally and properly by the owner,
tenant or legally authorized occupant of the premises.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 50.21  LOCATION FOR PICK UP.



   All solid waste in a container ready for city collection shall be
placed after 6:00 p.m. of the night before the regular collection day and no
later than 6:00 a.m. the day of collection.  Containers shall be placed at
the edge of the curb with the front of the container facing the street and at
least ten feet away from any object including parked cars. All containers
shall be so located so as to not block the street, sidewalk, gutter, or
otherwise be a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Containers shall be
removed from the curb by 9:00 p.m. of the day of collection.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 50.22  CONTAINER LIDS.



   The lids of all containers shall, at all times, be kept secure so to
prevent animals and insects accessing the contents. The lids shall only be
opened while the container is being filled, emptied or cleaned.



§ 50.23  USE OF CONTAINERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, any
solid waste in any container that the city has not assigned to that person.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OTHER METHODS OF SOLID WASTE REMOVAL



§ 50.35  HAULING SOLID WASTE.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul, or cause to be hauled, any solid
waste on or along any public street, avenue or alley in the city in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.36  VEHICLES AND RECEPTACLES TO BE SPILL-PROOF.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul, or cause to be hauled, on or
along any public street in the city any solid waste, unless the solid waste
is contained in strong watertight vehicles or vehicles with watertight
receptacles, constructed to prevent any solid waste from falling, leaking or
spilling and any odor from escaping.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.37  SPILLED SOLID WASTE.



   Any person hauling any solid waste along the streets of the city shall
immediately replace in the conveyance used for the hauling any solid waste
which may fall upon any street.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 50.38  DUMPING SOLID WASTE.



   It is unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, any
solid waste upon any public or private property within the city, except as
specifically permitted in this chapter.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.39  SPECIAL EVENT SERVICE.



   The city has a special event solid waste removal service within the
city, for a fee to be established from time to time by resolution. At the
location of the event, on the business day before the event, the city will
drop off one or more 95-gallon containers. The city will pick-up the
containers on the business day following the event. This service is available
for events that are no more than five days in duration. The fee will be
charged to the solid waste account if the customer has one. If the customer
does not have a solid waste account, then it will be invoiced through the
Public Works Department of the city.



(Ord. 376, passed 1-24-2018)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Sewer district established



   51.03   Responsibility of officers



   51.04   Classes of sewage disposal service available



   51.05   Requests for service



   51.06   Agreements or contracts for service



   51.07   Continuity of service



   51.08   Extensions



   51.09   Construction of sewers; connections



   51.10   Regulation of discharges



   51.11   Billing procedures



   51.12   Rates and charges



   51.13   Permits



   51.14   Additional regulations



   51.15   Unlawful and prohibited acts



   51.16   Severability



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICATION.  Written instrument by which a DEVELOPER or a CUSTOMER
applies for sewer service of any sort.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  City Council or its designated representative.



   BOARD OF REVIEW.  Members of the City Council or its designated
committee.



   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  Quantity of oxygen utilized in
biochemical oxydation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20ºC, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BRANCH SEWER.  Arbitrary term for a sewer which receives sewage from
lateral sewers from a relatively small area.



   BUILDING.  Any structure containing sanitary facilities use for human
habitation, a place of business, recreation or like purpose.



   C.  Centigrade degrees.



   CITY.  City of San Luis, Arizona.



   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  Measure of the oxygen-consuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater under
standard laboratory procedures expressed in milligrams per liter.



   CONNECTION CHARGE.  Charge for the proposed usage of the city’s
facilities paid by a developer or a customer for utilizing portions of the
city’s sanitary sewer system funded by the city.



   CONSTRUCTION CONNECTION CHARGE.  A charge, payable to the city, for a
developer’s utilization of oversized facilities paid for by other parties,
including the city.



   CONSTRUCTION COST.  The cost to a developer, less the city’s
oversizing costs, if any, described herein, for the design and construction
of all facilities as required to serve the developer’s property and to
connect to the city’s sanitary sewer system.



   CONSULTING ENGINEERS.  The engineer or engineering firm or corporation
responsible for professional engineering services provided for an assignment.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.  Structure that is accessible for the purpose of
maintaining a building sewer. A CONTROL MANHOLE may be used as an inspection
chamber.



   COOLING WATER.  Water discharge from any system of condensation, air
conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources. It shall contain no
pollution substances which would produce BOD or SS in excess of ten parts per
million by weight, or toxic substances as limited in this Code, or other
polluting substances which may be limited in this ordinance.



   COUNTY.  County of Yuma.



   CUSTOMER or CONSUMER.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm
or association furnished sewage disposal service by the city.



   DEVELOPER.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or
association developing a property or properties for self-use, resale, rental
or lease, at or to which sewage disposal service is to be rendered by the
city, and who shall have the legal right to negotiate for the service. Where
applicable, any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or association
applying for the extension of sewers or force mains in order to serve a
certain property.



   DIRECTOR.  The executive officer of the Public Works Department.



   DOMESTIC SEWAGE or SANITARY SEWAGE.  Sewage derived principally from
dwellings, business buildings, industries, institutions and the like,
originating as wastes from kitchens, water closets, lavatories, bathrooms and
showers.



   DOMESTIC USER.  All users of sewage treatment facilities not
classified as industrial users.



   EFFLUENT.  Sewage, water or other liquid after some degree of
treatment, flowing out of any treatment device or facilities.



   FORCE MAIN.  A pressure sewer pipe line for the transmission of
sewage. The pipe cannot receive sewage, except under pressure by pumping.



   FRONTAGE.  The actual width, normally expressed in feet, of a property
in respect to a street or avenue but without relation to the front, side or
rear of any structure located on the property along which the proposed sewer
or force main is installed. In the case of a corner lot, FRONTAGE is
calculated as the longer of the sides involved. For irregular shaped lots, or
acreage, FRONTAGE will be calculated by taking the square root of the number
of square feet of property involved.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   GREASE or FATS.  Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.



   GROUND GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded or cominuted to a degree so that
all particles will be carried freely in suspension in public sewers, with no
particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



   HAULER.  Any person engaged in transportation or conveyance of liquid
wastes to sewage treatment plant or other location in the sewerage system for
disposal.



   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.  Recovery by the sewer district of an amount
allocable to the treatment and/or transmission of wastes from industrial
users of a treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   Any non-governmental, nonresidential user of a
publicly-owned treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of
25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes, and which is identified in
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1982, Office Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions:



         (a)   Division A. Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;



         (b)   Division B. Mining;



         (c)   Division D. Manufacturing;



         (d)   Division E. Transportation, Communications,
Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services; and



         (e)   Division I. Services.



      (2)   Any non-governmental user of a publicly-owned treatment
works which discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic
polutants or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge
of any municipal systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage
treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals,
creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in or has any adverse effect
on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any liquid, solid or gaseous substance of form of
energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any process of industrial,
commercial, governmental and institutional concerns, manufacturing, business,
trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of
natural resources, or from sources identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual of the United States Office of Management and Budget,
as amended.



   INFLUENT.  Sewage, raw or partly treated, flowing into any sewage
treatment devise, pumping station or related facilities.



   INSPECTION CHAMBER.  Accessible structure through which sewage from a
building sewer flows, and from which samples of the sewage may be collected
for the purpose of being tested.



   INTERCEPTOR.  Large size gravity flow sewer or force main for the
transmission of sewage, which has been designed to receive sewage from one or
more collecting sewers or pumping stations.



   LABORATORY DETERMINATION.  Measurements, tests and analysis of the
characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the provisions of 40
C.F.R. Part 136. These methods are contained in the latest edition of three
publications:



      (1)   Standard Methods For Examinations Of Water and
Wastewater, a joint publication of the American Public Health Association,
the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation;



      (2)   ASTM, which means Annual Book Of Standards, Part 23,
Water Atmospheric Analysis, 1972, a publication of the American Society For
Testing Materials;



      (3)   EPA Methods, which means Methods For Chemical Analysis
Of Water and Wastes, a publication of the Environmental Protection Agency; or



      (4)   In accordance with any other equivalent methods
prescribed by the Director.



   LATERAL SEWER LINE.  Branch sewer line connected to the main sewer
line. A LATERAL SEWER is normally eight inches in size or larger.



   MAIN SEWER LINE.  Major gravity line in any specific development, to
which one or more lateral sewers may be tributary.



   METER MEASUREMENT.  Act of or result of determining the quantity of
water supplied or being discharged by a user and determined by an instrument
or device used for the measurements and approved by the Director.



   MUNICIPALITIES.  Any city, town or village, wholly or partly within
Yuma County.



   OFF-SITE SEWERS.  Sewer lines totally outside a development.



   ON-SITE SEWERS.  Sewer lines in streets or rights-of-way, or easements
totally within a development, and those sewer collection lines in peripheral
streets constructed for use by that development.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.  Process and act of keeping all facilities
for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage in normal operation
and in a good state of repair, including the replacement of the facilities
when necessary.



   OVERSIZED SEWER.  Sewer extension in, through or past a development
which, because of future extensions or other reasons, is larger than required
for the immediate development to be served.



   pH.  Logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration in
grams per liter of solution.



   PLANNED EXTENSION.  Future sewer extensions scheduled by the authority
with special provisions for payments therefore.



   PLUMBING.  All pipes, fittings and appurtenances on the property
owners’s side of the property line or outside easement areas. This includes
the property owners’s extension from the sewer lateral up to and including
the house plumbing.



   PPM.  Part per million by weight and/or milligrams per liter.



   PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.  Structures, devices or equipment for the
purpose of removing deleterious wastes from sewage generated from a premises
prior to its discharge into a public sewer.



   PRIVATE SEWER.  Any sewer, or system of sewers, exclusive of building
sewers, which is not owned by the municipality in which it is located, or any
other public authority or private utility.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  Record title holder of premises served or to be
served with a sewer connection by the city.



   PUB. LAW NO. 92-500.  Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1982, as
amended.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  Sewer which is owned and/or controlled by public
authority or private utility.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  City’s Public Works Director, or his or her
authorized representative.



   SAMPLING.  Periodic collection of sewage for testing.



   SCAVENGER WASTE.  Any liquid waste from sources such as septic tanks,
package plants or industrial processes, which are removed from a premises by
means other than a sewer.



   SERVICE LATERAL.  Sewer connection extending from the collecting sewer
in the street to a customer’s property line, or from the collecting sewer
in an easement to the easement line, often referred to as a house connection.



   SEWAGE.  Combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
infiltration as may be present, often referred to as wastewater.



   SEWAGE DISPOSAL PLANT.  The physical facilities for the treatment of
sewage before discharge into a canal, ocean, lake or injection well.



   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE.  The service provided by the city for the
disposal of sewage, including transmission, treatment and effluent disposal.



   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE CHARGE or SEWER CHARGE.  Charge established
for the disposal of sewage.



   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  All facilities required to transport sewage
to a treatment plant for treatment and effluent disposal, including gravity
sanitary sewers, interceptors, force mains, pumping stations, treatment
plants, outfalls and disposal wells.



   SEWAGE FLOW METER.  Device that measures and records the flow of
sewage. It may also measure the rate of flow.



   SEWER or COLLECTION SEWER.  Gravity flow sloping pipe facility
installed in public streets, rights-of-way and easements for the collection
of sewage.



   SEWER DISTRICT.  Portion inside or outside the city now or hereafter
reached by the sewer system.



   SEWER SYSTEM OF THE CITY.  Sanitary sewer collection system within the
corporate limits of the city that is operated by the city.



   SEWER SYSTEM OUTSIDE THE CITY.  Sanitary sewer collection system
outside the corporate limits of the city that is operated by the city.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM.  All facilities for collecting, pumping,
transmission, treatment and disposal of sewage.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the
average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that are in suspension in water, sewage or
other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.



   SYSTEM.  Entire sewerage system (sewer district) of the city, and all
treatment and disposal facilities and interceptor sewers owned and operated
by the city, and all sewerage collection systems connected thereto.



   SURCHARGE.  Part of the sewer service charge which shall be applied to
extra strength wastes to cover added operation and maintenance costs.



   TESTING.  Analysis of samples of sewage.



   TOXIC SUBSTANCE.  Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
which, when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient quantities, may tend
to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or to constitute a hazard to
human beings or animals, or inhibit aquatic life, or create a hazard to
recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage treatment
plant.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water discharged in its original state, or water
discharged which, after use for any purpose, is at least equal chemically,
physically and biologically, to the water from its original source, i.e.,
potable water, ground water, river and stream water.



   USER.  Any person or premises receiving waste disposal services.



   USER CHARGE.  Charges assigned to each user which defray a
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance of the sewerage
system, often referred to as sewage disposal service charge.



   WASTEWATER.  Term interchangeable with sewage as defined herein.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.02  SEWER DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.



   For the better protection of the health and convenience of the
inhabitants, all the portion of the  city now or hereafter embraced within
the district reached by the sewer system is hereby declared to be a  sewer
district. All  persons owning real property adjoining the streets or alleys
in which there are sewer lines or lateral branch, main or trunk sewers of the
sewer system, and all persons owning, leasing or using real property or
buildings or fixtures thereon which can be served by sewers, shall cause to
be connected all privies, cesspools and open or unconnected drains, with the
sewer system, at the time and in the manner as hereinafter provided, and as
the Council by resolution may require. All expenses of the connection shall
be borne by the owner of the real property or building and the person leasing
or using same. It is unlawful to fail to abate all privies, cesspools and
open or unconnected drains, at the time and in the manner herein required and
in the manner required by the Council by resolution.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985; Ord. 132, passed 1-24-1996)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.03  RESPONSIBILITY OF OFFICERS.



   For the convenience, best administration and operation of the sewer
system of the city, it is hereby made the duty of the city officers and
employees to operate, manage and control the sewer system.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.04  CLASSES OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE AVAILABLE.



   (A)   The city renders sewage disposal service of two general
classes:



      (1)   Customers within the city.  A resident or property
owner in the city who is either receiving sewage disposal service or has it
available for connection from his or her property to the sewer system of the
city.



      (2)   Industrial wastes.  Sewage or liquid wastes from any
manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises, not including storm
water, which shall impose a burden upon the sewage disposal system in
addition to the burden imposed by the average sewage entering the sewer
system.



   (B)   Charges for disposal of industrial wastes are fixed by
contract, and by special charge in unusual cases. In lieu of the special
charge, the city has the right to require pre-treatment of industrial wastes.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.05  REQUESTS FOR SERVICE.



   (A)   Connections to the sewer system of the city, except to
interceptors, must be authorized by the Public Works Director in advance of
the connections.



   (B)   Connections of service laterals directly to the interceptor
system shall not be permitted.



   (C)   Where existing service laterals have been provided, the
customer shall pay the entire expense of connection to the facilities within
his or her property. Where service laterals have not been provided, the sewer
district shall be responsible for extending a lateral connection from the
sewer to the edge of the street right-of-way for existing lots accessible to
the sewer main until May 31, 1985. After this date, the customer must pay the
city for the cost of putting in any new lateral connection from the sewer
main to the edge of the street right-of-way. All connections shall be subject
to inspection by authorized personnel of the city. In addition, the customer
shall pay all connection and construction connection charges, if any.



   (D)   Sewer service to any structure upon any given property shall
only be rendered from city-owned sewers in public rights-of-way abutting the
property. The determination as to the availability of service from existing
facilities shall be at the sole discretion of the Public Works Director. The
city shall have  the right to require extensions of its facilities for
proper service, or to require permanent legal agreements which the city deems
necessary in order to carry out the intent of this section.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.06  AGREEMENTS OR CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE.



   (A)   Applications for sewage disposal service can be made at City
Hall. When sewage disposal service is available to the property, connection
to the sewer is mandatory.



   (B)   Agreements or contracts for sewage disposal service are
effective 30 days after the installation of a new sewer abutting the property
within the city. Customers along that installation have 30 days within which
to connect to the sewer. After that period, everyone, even those not actually
connected to the sewer, will be charged the monthly sewer fee.



   (C)   Sewage disposal service on a volume basis may be obtained by
means of cost sharing arrangements outlined in contractual agreements with
the city.



   (D)   Agreements for the provision of sewage disposal service for
properties requiring the construction of sewer facilities shall, upon request
by a developer, be prepared by the Public Works Director. Final zoning
approval of a property must be obtained prior to the city’s preparation of
the agreement.



   (E)   In no case shall a customer extend his or her plumbing across
a street, alley, lane, court, avenue or other highway, or property line
without unity of title, in order to furnish service for adjacent property
through one service lateral, even though the adjacent property is owned by
him or her. In case of unauthorized connection, the customer’s service
shall be subject to discontinuance until the unauthorized connection has been
discontinued and full payment has been made of all bills for service,
calculated under proper classifications and rate schedules, and until
reimbursement in full has been made to the city for all extra expenses
incurred for clerical work, testing and inspections.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.07  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.



   The city will at all times use reasonable diligence to provide
continuous service, and having used reasonable diligence, will not be liable
to the customer for failure or interruption of service. The city will not be
liable for any act or omission caused directly or indirectly by strikes,
labor troubles, accidents, litigation, shutdowns for repairs or adjustments,
interference by governmental agencies, failures of electric power, acts of
God or other causes beyond its control.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.08  EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The city may, from time to time, through the creation by the
county of special taxing districts or by other means, plan sewer extensions
in specific areas of the county. The costs of those extensions and terms of
payment may be set forth individually by county ordinance or resolution.



   (B)   Where properties are to be served by extensions which are not
planned extensions, sewer facilities shall be extended on the following basis:



      (1)   An application shall be required for extension of sewer
service under the provisions hereof, and shall be in writing and signed by
the developer or developers desiring city sewer service. The application
shall be filed with the Public Works Director, and shall include a legal
description of the property and shall indicate the name, street address, lot
and block number, and the street frontage of each site, along with the
proposed usage. Each applicant shall agree to connect to and use the city
sewer service for his or her property. No sewers, or connections to sewers,
will be extended until the charges for sewer service, as further outlined,
have been provided for.



      (2)   Upon receipt by the Public Works Director of a proper
application requesting a sewer main extension, it will be evaluated, and if
not feasible, returned with the proper explanation. If feasible, the cost to
the developer will be estimated and submitted to the developer for
consideration. If the developer decides to proceed further with the project
and final zoning of the project has been approved, at the developer’s
request, the Public Works Director shall prepare and submit an agreement
specifying all terms and conditions for service and related costs to the
developer.



      (3)   The cost to the developer shall be payment of the
connection charges and construction costs as further outlined. The allocation
of costs for oversize sewers and rebates in regard to off-site sewers are
outlined in § 51.09.



      (4)   Each developer may be required to extend one sewer line
to an upstream limit of his or her property, which will terminate at an
upstream manhole determined by the Public Works Director with respect to the
complete system, rather than at the end of the particular extension
requested. At the discretion of the Public Works Director, temporary
cleanouts at the property line may be allowed in lieu of extension to a
proposed manhole location. The charges or costs to the developer will include
the cost of sewer to the upstream property line of the development.



   (C)   The city shall have the right at all times to refuse to extend
service on the basis of a use detrimental to the sewer system, lack of
payment of required fees, or for any reason which, in the opinion of the
Public Works Director, will cause the extension not to be in the public
interest. No payment of any costs, submitting of any petition or any other
act to receive sewer service, shall guarantee sewer service.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.09  CONSTRUCTION OF SEWERS; CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Sewers to be constructed by a developer or his or her
contractor shall be constructed in accordance with the following provisions.



      (1)   In the case of subdivisions, the application shall be
accompanied by two copies of a recorded plat, or, in the case of a new
subdivision, an approved tentative plat, or preferably a master tentative
plat or a large scale development plan, plus a plan showing locations of
proposed sewer extensions.



      (2)   Prior to final acceptance, all sewer extensions shall be
approved by the appropriate state agencies, and the County Department of
Public Health.



      (3)   All materials and labor shall meet the specifications
currently required by the city, and all construction shall be performed under
the inspection of the city and in strict compliance with the standards of the
city and either City or County Public Works Manual, whichever is applicable.



      (4)   The developer will pay all connection charges and
construction costs prior to connecting to the city’s system unless
otherwise specified in an agreement between the developer and the city.
Construction cost will be the cost of sewer lines of sufficient capacity to
collect the sewage in the proposed development and transport it to the
nearest adequately-sized city sewer. Connection charges are defined in §
51.12(B).



      (5)   The city reserves the right to oversize any extension,
and will pay for the oversizing on the basis of additional costs beyond that
necessary to serve only the subject development. The city will pay an
established unit amount based upon the pipe size of a facility multiplied by
the length of that facility. The established unit amount will be determined
by the Public Works Director based on the flow requirements of the developer
and the city’s study of current construction costs. The city will credit
the developer for the cost of the city’s share of oversized sewers, and
this credit will be in the form of a reduction of the connection charge, or a
cash payment if the connection charge is more than offset. The city also
reserves the right to limit the amount of its participation in the cost of
oversizing, depending on current economic conditions or other factors. The
rates of credit related to the difference in diameter between the pipe
required for the developer’s project and the pipe required by the city to
be installed are established by City Council.



      (6)   Maintenance bond sewers installed under this section
shall become part of the city’s system; however, before acceptance,
contract bond, approved by the City Council, equal to the amount of 100% of
the construction cost shall be required to guarantee all work and materials
for a period of one year after acceptance by the city. Terms and conditions
of the bond must meet the city’s standards.



      (7)   A permit for construction must be obtained by the
developer from the appropriate governmental agency.



      (8)   In those cases where a developer does not utilize all of
the capacity of a sewer extension he or she has paid for and which has not
been oversized, others may connect into it. The city will make every effort
to collect applicable construction connection charges from those others and
make repayments to the developer, but shall only be liable for monies
collected. The rate utilized in computing the construction connection charge
is specified in this section. A developer shall not be repaid sums in excess
of his or her original investment, less his or her use, in the sewer
extension. The repayments shall only be made during an eight-year period
commencing with the date of an executed agreement between the developer and
the city for sewer service.



   (B)   No sewer facility will be installed under the provisions
outlined herein and accepted by the city for operation and maintenance unless
it is in a public right-of-way or easement with a minimum width of 12 feet.
Conveyance of all easements shall be by a separate document in recordable
form to be approved by the city and shall be accompanied by a written
certification by an attorney licensed to practice law in the state that the
developer is the owner in fee simple of the property to be conveyed by the
easements, and that upon its execution by the developer, a valid and
enforceable easement in the developer’s property will be vested in the
city. No sewer facilities to be owned and operated by the city shall be
installed under any building or appurtenance thereto.



   (C)   All sewer facilities and appurtenances to be owned by the city
shall be conveyed to the city by proper bill of sale immediately after the
city’s acceptance, in writing, of the construction of the system. The
developer shall also provide copies of paid bills and/or lien waivers,
releases or satisfactions, together with a breakdown of the actual cost of
the facilities. Concurrently with the documents required above, the developer
shall furnish the city with one set of Mylar as-built drawings showing
specific locations, depths, elevations to be on city elevation datum and the
like, of all sewer facilities and appurtenances. When accepted and properly
conveyed to the city for ownership, maintenance and operation, the facilities
shall become and remain the property of the authority, and no person shall by
the payment of any charges provided for herein, or by causing any
construction of facilities accepted by the city, acquire any interest or
right in any of these facilities, or any portion thereof, other than the
privilege to have his or her property connected thereto for sewer service in
accordance with these procedures and regulations.



   (D)   (1)   (a)   The minimum size of plumbing shall be as
regulated by the Building Code.



         (b)   The minimum size of a service lateral shall be
four inches in diameter.



         (c)   The minimum size of all other sewer lines shall be
eight inches in diameter.



         (d)   The maximum infiltration or exfiltration rate
shall not exceed 200 gallons per day per inch diameter per mile of pipe.



         (e)   The minimum design velocity in gravity sewers
shall be two feet per second.



         (f)   The minimum depth of cut to invert shall be three
feet for service laterals, and four feet for main line sewers.



         (g)   The minimum inside diameters of sewer manholes
shall be 23 inches for the cover frame opening and 48 inches at the base.



      (2)   New gravity sewers shall discharge into existing gravity
sewers where possible. In the event that a pumping station is required, the
design of the tributary gravity system shall be to permit the present or
future extension of the system’s gravity service area to the maximum
practical extent. To this end, the depth to invert at the pumping stations
shall be in the range of 12 to 14 feet, and shall permit extension of gravity
lines not less than one-half mile. New force mains shall discharge into
existing force mains.



      (3)   The design and layout of the system shall be subject to
approval by the Public Works Director as to conformance with city standards
and master sewer plan. The developer shall include provisions required by the
city to carry out the intent of the master planning and will be reimbursed
for the additional cost of oversized facilities.



   (E)   No sewer extension will be accepted by the city without the
approvals of the Public Works Director and the appropriate state agency and
county Department of Public Health.



   (F)   No person shall tamper with, work on, uncover, make connection
with, or in any way alter or damage any city sewer or sewer appurtenance
without written permission of the Public Works Director or his or her
appointed representative. Further, no unauthorized person shall cause storm
water, ground water or any other unauthorized water or material to enter the
sanitary sewer system, including sanitary sewage from septic tank trucks.
This shall include the tying of downspouts of air conditioning condensate
lines into the sewer system, raising of manhole lids to allow for drainage,
the dumping of garbage, refuse or other wastes in manholes, the draining of
swimming pools into sewers, or any other means of causing or allowing any
substance not considered sanitary sewage or not legally paid for as sanitary
sewage, to enter the sewer system. The offending person shall pay the total
cost of all charges attributable to the tampering and be subject to all
penalties as may be provided by law.



   (G)   A single connection serving two or more properties will not be
permitted. In no case will common plumbing to two or more lots or parcels be
allowed.



   (H)   The city shall not be responsible for the repair and
maintenance of house connections to the service laterals, nor for privately
owned pumping stations, force mains and sewers. The city shall be responsible
only for the repair and maintenance of all public sewers, pumping stations
and force mains in the city’s system, and shall make a diligent effort to
inspect and keep these facilities in good repair.



   (I)   (1)   The customer shall be responsible for the maintenance
of the plumbing from the connection at the service lateral into and including
the house plumbing, if a common lateral is utilized for two adjacent
properties. If a single lateral is utilized exclusively for one property, the
customer shall be responsible for keeping the service lateral, in addition to
the plumbing, free from obstructions. In either case, the city shall have the
right to inspect the house connection and plumbing and require any customer
or property owner who fails to maintain the plumbing to the extent that it
may or does cause harm to the sewer facilities to remedy the situation.



      (2)   In the case of municipally or privately owned utilities,
the city’s responsibility for the cost of maintenance ends at the point of
connection to the city system. The city retains all rights to insist on
proper maintenance of these facilities and to exclude infiltration and/or
harmful wastes by the owners.



   (J)   For the better protection of the health and convenience of the
inhabitants, all persons owning real property adjoining streets and alleys in
which there are sewer pipes and mains of the sewer system, and persons
owning, leasing or using real property or buildings or fixtures thereon,
which can be served by sewers, shall cause to be connected all privies,
cesspools and open and unconnected drains, with the sewer system within 30
days after receipt of verbal or written notice by the city.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.10  REGULATION OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to establish rules and
regulations concerning discharges to the system, including the determination
of the acceptability or unacceptability of discharges, the pretreatment of
discharges and the establishment of specific limitations on certain
discharges.



   (B)   The Director shall at all times have free access to the
premises of any user of its facilities, and free access to the premises of
any person reasonably believed by the Director to be a user or possible user
of its facilities, for the purpose of inspecting, sampling or testing the
discharge emanating there from, or any discharge which may emanate there from
in order to determine whether the discharge, or potential discharge, is
acceptable or unacceptable to the city. Where necessary, the Director may
require the owner of any premises which discharges to the system to install a
suitable inspection chamber, together with the necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the discharge, or potential discharge. The chambers, when
required, shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Director. The chamber shall be installed at the owner’s expense and shall
be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



   (C)   The Director shall determine the acceptability or
unacceptability of any discharge to the system. The determination shall be
made on the basis of sound engineering and operational evaluations, taking
into consideration the nature and concentration of the discharge, its point
of entry into the system, its compatibility with the treatment facility
receiving it, and all other factors pertinent to the effect of the discharge
on any part of the system or treatment process.



   (D)   Unacceptable discharges shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to those which have been determined by the Director to:



      (1)   Contain materials or substances which would constitute a
hazard to life and limb of personnel engaged in inspection, maintenance and
operation of the system;



      (2)   Contain materials or substances which are toxic as
defined in these regulations;



      (3)   Contain materials or substances which are in any way
deleterious to any part of the system;



      (4)   Contain concentrations of any toxic or deleterious
materials or substances in excess of any limits set thereon in accordance
with these regulations;



      (5)   Cause the city to incur excessive expense in the
handling or treatment thereof;



      (6)   Be incompatible with the treatment process or inhibit
the performance of the treatment process at a city treatment facility;



      (7)   Be of the volume or contain the BOD, suspended solids,
or other material load which could cause the treatment facility to exceed its
design capabilities;



      (8)   Cause a treatment facility of the city to fail to meet
effluent requirements set by state and federal regulatory agencies or cause
the effluent to have a degrading effect on the receiving body of water;



      (9)   Contain viable pathogenic organisms in quantities so as
to be a hazard to public health; and/or



      (10)   Cause a treatment facility of the city to fail to meet
effluent requirements as established under the city’s operation permit for
its sewage treatment plants.



   (E)   The Director may refuse the service of the city’s facilities
to any person whose discharge is determined by the Director to be
unacceptable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (F)   Any person whose discharge has been determined by the Director
to be unacceptable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may
apply to the Director for permission to pretreat the discharge by the use of
a method of pretreatment designed to render the discharge acceptable.



   (G)   The acceptability of a pretreatment method for any given
discharge, an application for which has been made in accordance with these
regulations and the terms for the installation and use thereof, shall be
reviewed by the Director. The review shall be made on the basis of sound
engineering and operational evaluations, taking into consideration all
factors pertinent to the effect of the discharge both before and after
pretreatment on any part of the system, the federal pretreatment regulations,
40 C.F.R. Part 403, shall be enforced as applicable.



   (H)   Pretreatment facilities shall at all times be subject to
inspection by the Director in order to determine if the facilities are
efficiently performing the function for which they are installed.



   (I)   All costs incident to pretreatment and all expenses incident
to the acquisition, installation, operation, maintenance and repair of
pretreatment facilities shall be borne by the user. In addition, any
extraordinary administrative or investigative expenses incurred by the city
as a result of the installation and use of pretreatment facilities shall be
charged to the user.



   (J)   No person shall release or cause to be released or allow to
run, leak or escape into the authority’s sewerage system, any discharge
containing any materials or substances considered by the Public Works
Director to be toxic as defined in these regulations or to be in any way
deleterious to any part of the authority’s sewerage system or treatment
process. Certain materials shall by their nature be considered by the Public
Works Director to be toxic or deleterious except in small quantities or
concentrations. The materials or substances shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to:



      (1)   Construction materials, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch
manure, fur, wax or any solid or viscous substance capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewerage system;



      (2)   Any gasoline, benzene, Naptha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases;



      (3)   Steam or hot water above 150ºF (65ºC);



      (4)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 33º and 150ºF
(1º and 65ºC);



      (5)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 10, or having any other corrosive property apt to cause damage or
hazard to structures, equipment of the sewerage system, or personnel employed
in its operations;



      (6)   Any water or waste containing readily-releasable cyanide
(cyanide released at a temperature of 150ºF (65ºC and pH=2.5) in excess of
two mg/l; any water or waste containing total cyanide in excess of 5 mg/l;



      (7)   Coal tar, its derivatives and waste; and/or



      (8)   Any liquids or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
substances in sufficient quantities or rate of flow as to injure or interfere
with any of the sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to human
beings or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters.



   (K)   (1)   Certain toxic substances and pathogenic bacteria,
admission of which into the system would otherwise be prohibited, shall be
acceptable in a discharge if:



         (a)   Reduced by treatment at the source to a point that
will meet the general purposes of these rules and regulations or come within
any applicable standards set thereon now or hereafter in accordance with
these regulations; or



         (b)   Discharged in such small concentrations so as to
not be injurious to personnel, sewers, any biochemical, biological or other
sewage treatment process, or receiving waters.



      (2)   The substances shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to:



         (a)   Any alcohols, antibiotics, arsenic, arsenicals,
bromine, iodine, chlorine, copper, copper salts, cresols, creosotes,
fluorine, formaldehydes, mercury, mercuricals, phenols, phenol derivatives,
silver, silver compounds, silver-mides, toxic dyes (organic and mineral) or
zinc;



         (b)   Any strong oxidizing agents such as chromates,
dichromates, permanganates or peroxides;



         (c)   Any chemical compounds producing toxic flammable
or explosive gases either upon acidification, alkalization, oxidation or
reduction;



         (d)   Any strong reducing agents such as nitrates,
sulphides, sulfites and thiosulphates; and/or



         (e)   Any waste from industrial processes, hospital
procedures or commercial processes containing viable pathogenic organisms.



   (L)   (1)   Table A lists the maximum allowable values for
certain materials in, or characteristics of, wastewater entering the city’s
sewerage systems. The city reserves the right to establish standards for
substances not contained in this list. In setting additional standards, the
city will generally follow the standards of the Water Pollution Control
Federation. In defining and interpreting the values in Table A, reference
shall be made to Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, American Water Works Association, latest edition.



 

TABLE A


Material or Characteristic
 
Maximum Allowable Value




Boron
 
1.0 ppm


Chromium, total
 
10.0 ppm


Copper
 
10.0 ppm


Cyanides
 
2.0 ppm


Cadmium
 
2.0 ppm


Lead
 
0.1 ppm


Mercury
 
2.0 ppm


Nickel
 
10.0 ppm


Zinc
 
10.0 ppm


Iron
 
25.0 ppm


Phenols
 
0.5 ppm


BOD
 
210.0 ppm


Suspended Solids
 
210.0 ppm


PH
 
5.5-10


Temperature
 
150ºF




 



      (2)   The above limitations are intended to apply generally to
all industrial users within the city’s sewerage system. If and when state
or federal regulatory agency regulations require a specific pretreatment
concentration for a specific industry, whichever is the more stringent
concentration level between these regulations and such regulations will apply.



   (M)   Any discharge to the city’s sewerage system containing
garbage may be made acceptable by means of grinding and dilution, provided,
however, that the installation of and operation of any garbage grinder
equipped with a motor of three-fourth horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater
shall be subject to review and approval by the Public Works Director prior to
the installation and operation and to periodic inspection by the city
thereafter.



   (N)   Any water or wastes which are unacceptable pursuant to these
regulations shall be neutralized, diluted or subjected to some other
acceptable method of pretreatment in order to render it acceptable to the
city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to its discharge
to the system. If necessary, the use of automatically-operating diluting or
neutralization and monitoring equipment shall be required. If, upon
neutralization, the discharge is sufficiently high in ionic strength as to
continue to be unacceptable, further pretreatment shall be required.



   (O)   It shall at all times be the responsibility of the owner to
eliminate or control the emission of offensive odors from building sewers to
the system or the development of offensive odors in the system as the result
of a discharge. Whenever the Director determines that offensive odors
emanating from building sewers or resulting from a discharge are present in
the system, he or she shall require the owner to take whatever steps are
necessary to eliminate the odors from the system. The cost of any devices
which may be necessary to eliminate or control the odors and all attendant
expenses shall be borne by the owner.



   (P)   There shall be no connection to the system from any vessel,
tank, container or receptacle of any kind used to receive, hold, store or in
any other way handle any toxic or deleterious materials or substances, the
discharge of which is prohibited by these regulations through which
quantities of the materials or substances could accidentally or otherwise be
discharged directly or indirectly into the system. Persons who in the course
of their business or otherwise transport, store, receive, ship or in any
other way handle or process any materials or substances shall take
precautions to prevent accidental spillage of the substances to any
connection to the system by way of floor drains, basins, catch basins, down
spouts, gutters, manholes or any other connection. Whenever the Director
determines that accidental spillage has occurred through any connection to
the system as described above, he or she shall require the owner to eliminate
the connection.



   (Q)   In the event of any accidental release to the system of any
unacceptable discharge or of any substances or materials considered by the
Public Works Director to be toxic or deleterious as provided in this chapter,
it shall be the responsibility of the user to notify the Public Works
Director immediately, and in no case later than one hour following the
discharge, so that remedial action can be taken. Costs incurred to correct
any damage resulting from the discharge shall be charged to the user, and
failure to report the discharge shall result in an additional charge of
$1,500 in addition to costs of correction. Each discharge shall be considered
separately, and costs and charges levied accordingly. Each day on which there
is a discharge shall be and is hereby deemed to be a separate discharge, and
charges shall be levied accordingly. The charges shall be collected by the
city in the same manner as all other charges set by the city.



   (R)   Whenever necessary or expedient in  order to carry out the
provisions of these regulations, the  Public Works Director may enter into
special agreements with users of the city facilities, setting forth terms
under which the discharge of the users will be acceptable to the city. The
agreements shall be made only in accordance with the application therefore
made to the Board of Review pursuant to these regulations.



   (S)   Whenever separate storm and sanitary sewers are provided,
required, or in use in any area of the city, all unpolluted water, including
all storm water, surface water, ground water, roof-runoff, uncontaminated
cooling water, subsurface drainage or unpolluted industrial process water,
shall be discharged to the storm sewer. Whenever, any unpolluted water is
found to be discharged to sanitary sewer, the Director shall require the
discharge to be connected to the storm sewer at the expense of the user.



   (T)   Any industrial user whose discharge has been determined by the
Director to be unacceptable in accordance with these regulations, or who
disagrees with any other determination of the Director hereunder, may apply
to the City Council for a review thereof in accordance with these regulations.



   (U)   Any failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall
result in an additional charge against the person or premises so failing to
comply in the amount of $500; in addition, the person or premises shall be
liable for any damages which occur to the system as a result of the failure
to comply with any provision of these regulations, and each failure to comply
shall be and is hereby deemed to be a distinct and separate failure, and
charges shall be applied accordingly. The charges shall be collected by the
city in the same manner as all other charges set by the city.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.11  BILLING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   This section applies only to customers served directly by
sewage disposal plants operated by the city, except where special rates are
provided in acquisition of other utilities. Charges and deposits for other
customers are governed by the special rate schedules in effect in their area.



   (B)   Bills for sewage disposal service will be rendered monthly.



   (C)   Each bill for sewage disposal service rendered to the
customers on the sewer system of the city shall be as determined by § 51.12.



   (D)   (1)   Bills are due when rendered, and if not paid within
20 days after the original bill is mailed by the city, a 10% additional
charge (penalty) shall be added to the bill.



      (2)   Sewer service, as such, will not be discontinued under
any normal circumstances; however, in cases where discontinuance is required
for any reason, including but not limited to nonpayment, the city shall
instead discontinue the sewer service.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.12  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   For the purposes of determining the monthly sewer use charge
and connection charge, users shall be assigned by the Manager to one of the
following classifications:



      (1)   Residential.  Every single-family dwelling, or each
unit in a duplex, triplex or fourplex structure, regardless of the number of
the structures on one given lot;



      (2)   Retail/Wholesale stores.  Businesses retailing or
wholesaling services or materials, but sell no prepared foods, and whose sole
sewerage effluent consists of restroom-type discharge;



      (3)   Restaurants.  Food preparation facilities which may
discharge garbage, grease or fats into the system;



      (4)   Manufacturing.  Business which combines components in
making a product;



      (5)   Grocery stores.  Retail sales of food stuffs and
similar items;



      (6)   Apartments.  A group or cluster of attached or
unattached residences or rooms, where people stay with the intent to be at
least semi-permanent; any residences or rooms where three-fourths of the
residences or rooms are intended for persons staying three months or longer;



      (7)   Trailer parks.  A licensed location providing
electrical, water and sanitary connections for trailers, mobile homes and/or
motor homes, where the intent of the owners and the space renter is to remain
for three months or longer;



      (8)   Motel/hotel.  A group of rooms, either attached or
unattached, designed for non-permanent residence. The maximum length of stay
at a motel/hotel would be less than three months;



      (9)   Laundries.  A business with washing machines and/or
dryers, whether self-serve or service purchase;



      (10)   Car wash.  Business facilities, either automated or
hand operated, for washing and cleaning of automobiles and trucks;



      (11)   Schools.  Regular school facilities established
through a school district;



      (12)   Border station.  Border station.



      (13)   Religious institutions.  Buildings where solely
worship and other related services are held; no permanent residence; and



      (14)   Gas stations/auto repair facilities. Facilities
providing services from gas and oil and/or mechanical repair.



   (B)   Monthly user and connection charges:



      (1)   Residential.  Each single family residence shall pay a
connection charge, regardless of the number of single family residences on
any given lot. The fee for connection shall be as will be set by the City
Council from time to time. In addition, each single family residence shall
pay a monthly user fee as will be set by the City Council from time to time
per month, payable one month in advance, and thereafter on the first day of
each succeeding month.



      (2)   Commercial. Commercial fees will be set by the City
Council from time to time.



      (3)   Increase of rates.  Except for schools, the monthly
user rate will increase yearly in the amount as set by City Council from time
to time for each single-family residence and each commercial designation
provided above. The first increase shall be effective January 1, 1997, the
second shall be effective January 1, 1998 and the third increase shall be
effective January 1, 1999.



      (4)   Absence.  Persons vacating their residence or business
for longer than three months may sign an affidavit of vacancy with the city
in order to abate the monthly user fee during their absence. Failure to
notify the city upon return and resumption of the monthly fee will result in
payment of the abated fees and forfeiture of any future waiver of fees.



      (5)   Exceptions.  A subdivider or property owner in a
subdivision may connect into an approved subdivision sewer without fee,
provided that a previous subdivider has paid the entire connection charges
and construction costs for the sewers in the subdivision.



      (6)   Other charges.  Miscellaneous charges shall be made for
any work done by the city beyond normal maintenance or extension charges as
outlined previously. This work, which will include such items as moving
connections, relocating manholes or any other work done at the property
owner’s request for the benefit of the property owner, shall be charged for
at direct cost plus appropriate overhead. Payment in full for the estimated
cost will be required prior to doing this type of work with appropriate
refunds, if any, when the work is completed. Work will not commence until a
written understanding between the parties has been executed.



   (C)   (1)   Each charge or fee levied by or pursuant to this
chapter is a lien upon the real property of the user to whom service is
supplied, or who is required to connect to the sewer system. The lien shall
attach immediately upon the provision of service, or 60 days subsequent to
the availability of the service to the user who is required to connect to the
system and who fails to do so pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. If
a charge or fee is not paid within 90 days after it becomes due and payable,
the city may issue a notice and claim a lien setting forth:



         (a)   The name of the user owing the charge or fee;



         (b)   The amount owed;



         (c)   The penalty accrued, if any;



         (d)   The period for which it is due; and



         (e)   A statement that the city claims a lien therefore
and a description of the property subject to the lien.



      (2)   When the lien is filed, the cost of preparing,
processing and releasing the lien shall be added to the charges then due.



      (3)   Unpaid charges or fees shall bear interest at the rate
prescribed by A.R.S. § 44-1201.



      (4)   Prior to the filing of a lien for any fee or connection
charge levied pursuant to this chapter, a copy of a statement of the
delinquency shall be delivered by return mail to the person or persons last
known to be the owner of the property, demanding payment of the amount due,
informing the owner of the proposed filing of a lien, and informing the owner
of an opportunity for a hearing before a designated city official. If the
amount declared due is not paid within 20 days after demand, a notice and
claim of lien may be filed by the city. The lien shall be recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, and from the date of the recording shall be a
lien against the lot or tract of land upon which service was rendered until
it is paid.



      (5)   If requested in writing by an owner of the property
subject to the statement of delinquency as provided by division (C)(3) of
this section, a hearing shall be held before a hearing officer designated by
the City Manager to adjudicate any contested fees or charges or to determine
whether good cause exists why a lien against the property should not be
filed. Said request for hearing must be filed with the City Clerk within 20
days of the date of the statement of delinquency, and must provide an address
and phone number where notice of the time and date of hearing can be given.



      (6)   The liens shall be subject to and inferior to all prior
recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to
satisfy a lien obtained under provisions of this section shall be made upon
judgement of foreclosure and order of sale. The City Attorney may institute
any action to enforce the lien in any court of appropriate jurisdiction in
the county at any time after recording of the lien. The city shall be
entitled to recover its costs, including costs for any record search, and
reasonable attorney fees involved in any collection, enforcement action, or
foreclosure involving fees or charges that may be due. Said costs and fees
shall be additionally secured by any lien that has been filed. A prior lien
for the purpose provided in this section shall not be a bar to a subsequent
lien or liens for the purposes, and any number of liens on the same lot or
tract of land may be enforced in the same action. The amount owing may also
be collected by a civil suit instituted in the name of the city by the City
Attorney at any time after the amount becomes delinquent.



      (7)   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary,
the remedies provided by this section shall be cumulative and supplemental to
other remedies provided under this chapter.



   (D)   Despite any provision in any ordinance relating to charges to
be paid before connecting a residence to a sewer line, the connection charges
may be deferred in hardship cases as described in this division as follows:



      (1)   Any person desiring to obtain a connection to a sewer
without first paying the fee required by this chapter for the connection
shall make a written application for deferral of the charge on a form to be
provided by the City Manager. The application shall fully state the resources
and income of the applicant, and each person over 18 years of age proposing
to live in the premises to be connected.



      (2)   If the family income is below the level of poverty,
considering all of the persons in the household and income of each person in
the household, and if there are no other resources available to  pay the
connection charge, payment of the charge shall be deferred. The level of
poverty shall be considered to be $4,980 per year for one person in the
household, and $1,740 per year for each additional person in the household.



      (3)   Deferral of the connection charge as provided herein
shall not excuse the payment of the charge. Before any connection to the
sewer system is made, the owner of the premises to be connected shall execute
a note secured by a mortgage on the real estate involved. The note shall
provide for payment of the charge in installments, with percent interest on
the unpaid principle. The mortgage shall provide that no foreclosure action
shall be brought unless the amount due has not been paid in full by the time
of the death of the original mortgagor or the sale of or transfer of title of
the property, whichever happens first. The foreclosure shall only be taken to
the Council for authorization.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985; Ord. 54, passed 4-24-1985; Ord. 58, passed
6-12-1985; Ord. 132, passed 1-24-1996; Ord. 275, passed 1-10-2018)



§ 51.13  PERMITS.



   (A)   Any person desiring to deposit or discharge, or who is now
depositing or discharging, any industrial waste into the sanitary sewers
shall make application for the disposal of industrial waste to the Public
Works Director. The Public Works Director shall approve the applications only
when evidence is submitted by the applicant that the discharge into the
sanitary sewer will comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Should any person fail to secure a permit, or fails to have
his, her or its application approved, or is subsequently found to be
exceeding the limits set forth in his, her or its permit, the city officer in
charge of the sewer system’s operation, upon 24-hour notice, shall have
that person’s connection with the city sewer system severed. The service
will only be restored at the person’s expense.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.14  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   The Council may from time to time, by resolution, prescribe additional
regulations and requirements governing connections to and the use of the
sewer system as may be proper or expedient.



(Ord. 50, passed 2-27-1985)



§ 51.15  UNLAWFUL AND PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate
any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
interfere with an employee or agent of the city in the discharge of his or
her duties, either in the tapping of any sewer pipe, main or lateral
belonging to the city, or the laying or connecting of any pipe, main or
lateral.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit,
or permit to be deposited, in an unsanitary manner upon public or private
property within the city or any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any
human excrement or other objectionable waste.



   (D)   It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage,
industrial waste or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has
been provided, in accordance with provisions of this chapter.



   (E)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
maliciously or intentionally break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the
municipal sewage works.



   (F)   It is unlawful for any septic tank or scavenger waste hauler
to discharge septic tank or scavenger wastes into any public sanitary sewer
owned or operated by the city.



(Ord. 54, passed 4-24-1985)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.16  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the invalidity
shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this chapter which
can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and to this
end, each invalid provision or invalid application of this chapter is
severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. It is hereby declared
to be the legislative intent of the City Council that this chapter would have
been adopted had the unconstitutional or otherwise invalid provision or
application not been included.



(Ord. 54, passed 4-24-1985)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   It is a violation of this chapter to refuse to connect and pay
a connection charge or user fee to the city when the user is required to
connect to the city sewer system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter to refuse to pay any fees or
charges when due. The refusal shall provide sufficient grounds for the city
to discontinue sewer service to any premises, and the service shall not be
restored until the violations have been discontinued or eliminated and all
outstanding charges paid. The discontinuance of sewer service shall be
accomplished by physically cutting and blocking the building connection. A
charge of $100 shall be paid to the city for reconnecting to the system. The
city shall notify the user of the proposed discontinuance of service by
delivering a notice, return receipt requested, to the user, and by posting a
notice on the property at least ten days prior to the actual discontinuance.



(Ord. 54, passed 4-24-1985)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION



Section



General Provisions



   52.001   Management of water system



   52.002   Definitions



Terms and Conditions



   52.015   Rates



   52.016   Payment of bills



   52.017   Proration of charges



   52.018   Application for service and payment responsibility



Deposit



   52.030   Deposit required



   52.031   Meter charge



Discontinuance of Service by Customer



   52.045   Notice required



Extension Policy



   52.060   Application



   52.061   Cost



   52.062   Requirements



   52.063   Ownership



   52.064   Liability



Meters and Connections



   52.075   Installation and maintenance of meters



   52.076   Alterations of water connections



   52.077   Meter tests



   52.078   Tampering with meters



Unlawful Acts, Liability and Regulations



   52.090   Unlawful acts



   52.091   Liability



   52.092   Regulations part of contract



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  MANAGEMENT OF WATER SYSTEM.



   The Public Works Director shall have the immediate control and
management of all things pertaining to the city waterworks system and shall
cause to be performed all acts that may be necessary for the prudent,
efficient and economical management and protection of the waterworks. The
Council shall have the power to prescribe such other and further rates, rules
and regulations as it may deem necessary.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DOMESTIC WATER.  Water supplied through the pipes of the city water
system.



   UNIT OF SERVICE.  Each separate occupancy, house, store or building so
situated upon any lot within the city that the same might be or is now served
by the city water system, or in the opinion of the Director of Public Works,
should be served separately from any other occupancy, house, residence, store
or building upon the same lot, irrespective of the number of residences,
houses, stores or buildings upon the lot, and even though two or more of the
occupancies, residencies, houses, stores or buildings are held or owned by
the same person. The determination of the Director of Public Works as to
whether any house, occupancy, residence, store or building comes within the
meaning of this chapter so as to require separate service connection, curb or
alley stop box and curb or alley-cock shall be final, except that the owner
or occupants of the premises shall have the right to appeal from the decision
to the City Council at a regular meeting. In event of any appeal being taken,
the determination of Council shall be final.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



TERMS AND CONDITIONS



§ 52.015  RATES.



   (A)   Generally. Rates will be set by the City Council from time to
time.



   (B)   The city shall impose a re-establishment charge equal to the
minimum monthly charge, less the value of water included, for each month of
disconnection or fraction thereof. This re-establishment charge shall be
applicable to the same customer reconnecting the same premises within a
12-month period.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989; Ord. 132, passed 1-24-1996)



§ 52.016  PAYMENT OF BILLS.



   (A)   Charges for flat rate and metered water service, trash
collection and disposal to a consumer or customer shall be payable monthly to
the City Clerk or the person as designated by the City Manager. The charges
may be itemized and totaled on a single bill, and the bill shall be due and
payable when rendered.



   (B)   All or any portion of the bill provided for in division (A) of
this section not paid on due date of the month the bill is mailed or
presented shall be subject to a late charge of 10%. Should all or any portion
of a bill which is outstanding remain unpaid on the 15th day of the following
month, a courtesy disconnect notice will be delivered to the property stating
that the bill is outstanding and payment must be made within five calendar
days from date of the notice. Should all or any portion of a bill which is
outstanding remain unpaid five days after the aforesaid courtesy notice, a
disconnect notice will be delivered to the property and that service will be
discontinued pursuant to procedures set forth in division (D) of this section
unless the City Manager, for good cause, grants an extension of time. Failure
to receive a utility bill or any notice provided hereinabove will not excuse
the account holder or any person otherwise responsible for payment from full
and timely payment for services rendered.



   (C)   The provisions of division (B) above do not apply to public
agencies, corporations or firms with whom the city has water contracts
containing other provisions for payment for services rendered.



   (D)   When water service is to be discontinued for non-payment as
provided for in division (B) of this section, the City Manager shall cause
written notice to that effect to be served by mail, or by leaving a copy of
the notice at the location of utility service, addressed to the customer or
consumer whose service is to be discontinued. Within five calendar days of
service of the notice, the consumer or customer must:



      (1)   Pay the entire amount due;



      (2)   Obtain from the City Manager, or his or her authorized
agent, the extension of time provided above; or



      (3)   File with the City Clerk a written request for a hearing
before a hearing officer designated by the City Manager to show cause why
service should not be discontinued. The hearing officer is hereby authorized
to adjudicate contested bills of not more than $500. Contested bills of more
than $500 may be appealed to Council. Filing of a request for hearing will
stay the action to discontinue service until the hearing has been held and
the findings thereof have been announced. After service of the notice of
proposed termination of service and failure on the part of a customer or
consumer to avail himself or herself of the remedies provided herein, service
may be discontinued forthwith.



   (E)   In the event the water service of a consumer or customer has
been turned off for non-payment of water charges pursuant to this section or
as herein provided, the water service shall be turned on again only upon the
payment of all monies due to the city for water services billed through the
Water Department as provided herein, and the payment of a reasonable fee set
by the Council for restoring water service.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989; Ord. 132, passed 1-24-1996; Ord. 306, passed
7-13-2011; Ord. 314, passed 7-11-2012)



§ 52.017  PRORATION OF CHARGES.



   If the consumer orders the water off or on during the month, the
minimum charge shall be prorated in proportion to the day of the month that
the meter service was in effect.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.018  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE AND PAYMENT RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The city may reject any application for water service for any
good and sufficient reason including the following: service not available
under a standard rate; service which involves excessive service expense;
service which may affect the supply to other consumers; service to the
premises until all charges against the premises then due and payable to the
city shall have been paid, whether on account of water service connection,
meter installation, billing for water previously supplied to the same
premises, whether used by the applicant or against the premises for which
water service is requested.



   (B)   Application for the use of water shall be made in person, at
the City Hall, by the owner or agent of the property to be benefited,
designating the location of the property and stating that the owner or agent
of the property will comply with all applicable rules and regulations.



   (C)   In all cases where water service or wastewater service is used
on any premises, and the payment thereof is guaranteed by the property owner
or his or her agent, such must pay the full amount due for  service to the
property. If a previous occupant or customer failed to pay the charges
incurred in full, and the payment was not guaranteed by the property owner, a
deposit will be required for the re-establishment of service to the property,
unless the property owner has guaranteed payment.



   (D)   The city may elect to assign any and all utility accounts
considered delinquent with unpaid charges, fees, or assessments to a
collection agency or attorney to collect, in addition to the disconnection of
any and all services.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989; Ord. 306, passed 7-13-2011; Ord. 314, passed
7-11-2012)



DEPOSIT



§ 52.030  DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   There shall be a minimum deposit on all new accounts for water
service and all accounts that are being re-established after discontinuance
for non-payment, the amount as may be set by resolution of City Council for
each unit of service. The bill may be guaranteed in writing by the property
owner on behalf of their account or another consumer for rental properties as
a onetime waiver for required deposit. On all rental properties with
deposits, it shall be maintained by the city until the account is closed or
terminated.



   (B)   If a bill is guaranteed in writing by the property owner, or
an account is established, where the customer is the actual owner of the
property, and service has been disconnected due to non-payment, a security
deposit shall be collected upon establishment or re-establishment of service.
Deposits shall be non-interest bearing. On such accounts, the customer may
request that the deposit(s) be refunded when the subject utility account has
been paid in full by the due date for 12 consecutive billing periods. Refunds
of deposits will be applied to said account on the next billing cycle.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989; Ord. 132, passed 1-24-1996; Ord. 306, passed
7-13-2011; Ord. 314, passed 7-11-12)



§ 52.031  METER CHARGE.



   There shall be a minimum meter charge or tap on charge to be paid in
advance, which shall be the estimate of installation, for any new domestic
water connection and cost of meter. This charge is charged for the purpose of
the meter and tap on and is not returnable except on written request for the
actual amount in excess of installation cost, if any, and is to be collected
whether or not the new connection is to be metered or flat rate and is to
include the cost per foot of extending any line from the customer’s
property line to where the customer designates.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY CUSTOMER



§ 52.045  NOTICE REQUIRED.



   Any person, firm or corporation who desires to discontinue the use of
domestic water service shall give notice to the Clerk in advance of intended
termination of service. Responsibility for water service consumed extends to
the time of departure or to the time specified for departure, whichever
occurs last.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



EXTENSION POLICY



§ 52.060  APPLICATION.



   A written application shall be made for water service desired beyond
the existing main upon a form supplied by the City Clerk. The permit shall be
approved by the Mayor and Council at a regular or special meeting.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.061  COST.



   The cost of the pipe extending beyond the existing main and the laying
of the pipe shall be paid for by the applicant. If the city is to order the
pipe for the applicant, payment in full must be made before the order will be
placed by the City Water Department. The city may reimburse the applicant by
an allowance of up to 50% on the monthly water bill charged to the applicant
for a period of five years or until the pipe and the cost of laying the same
has been reimbursed, whichever comes first.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.062  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   An affidavit of size, the cost of the pipe, the cost of laying
the pipe, digging of ditches and other costs shall be filed with the Clerk
and approved by the Council before any agreement with the applicant may be
made.



   (B)   All pipe used shall be of approved materials (AWWA standards)
for water main installation.



   (C)   All pipe laid in the streets or alleys shall be laid by
direction of the Council under the supervision of the Public Works Director.



   (D)   For reimbursement purposes, determination of proper size and
materials to be used for pipe installations shall be made by the Public Works
Director.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.063  OWNERSHIP.



   Any and all pipe laid in the streets or alleys shall be the property of
the city. The City Water Department shall have the right to connect and give
service to any other applicant that may desire service from the water pipe so
laid under the permit as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.064  LIABILITY.



   The city and the Water Department assume no liability for delays or
damages beyond its control.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



METERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 52.075  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF METERS.



   (A)   The city may furnish a meter for each unit of service which
has a separate tap on the city main.



   (B)   All meters shall be installed and water connections with the
mains shall be made by the city. Where possible, meters shall be numbered in
a manner that they will be indicative of the block and lot number. Except as
provided in this chapter, the consumer must maintain all water connections
from the curb or alley stop box and curb or alley-cock to and within his or
her property.



   (C)   All meters, except in the cases where they are carelessly or
willfully injured by the consumer, shall be maintained by the city. It shall
be the consumer’s responsibility and burden of proof that his or her
negligence did not cause the damage.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.076  ALTERATIONS OF WATER CONNECTIONS.



   Any person, firm or corporation, now receiving domestic water from the
city, or who may hereafter receive domestic water, desiring to make any
change or alteration in existing water connections, shall be required to
furnish the Clerk a statement of the change or alteration to be made, and
receive written permission from the Public Works Director before any change
or alteration is made.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.077  METER TESTS.



   (A)   It shall be the privilege of each consumer to insist upon a
meter test when the consumer has deposited with the City Clerk an amount set
by resolution of the Council. When the deposit has been made the meter shall
be tested, and if the meter is found to be registering correctly, the deposit
shall go to the city for the extra service rendered, but if the meter should
be found incorrect, it will be repaired or replaced by the city and the
deposit refunded.



   (B)   When a meter is proved defective, the charge for any month
affected shall be equal to an average based upon the three preceding months,
and the meter may be replaced or immediately repaired.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.078  TAMPERING WITH METERS.



   (A)   Meters shall be sealed by the proper city official in a manner
as to prevent all tampering with or injury to the mechanism without breaking
the seal.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to break or remove a seal, or
willfully injure or destroy a meter or for any person, other than a city
official, to destroy or injure any meter box, or to remove or destroy the lid
or cover belonging thereto or to place refuse or debris therein.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)  Penalty, see § 10.99



UNLAWFUL ACTS, LIABILITY AND REGULATIONS



§ 52.090  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person by false key or otherwise, after
the water has been shut off from the premises, to cause the premises to be
supplied with water.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to knowingly have
and keep in his or her possession or under his or her control any curb or
alley-cock or meter box key, valve key or hydrant wrench to the city water
system. No person shall, without authority from the Public Works Director
make, construct, buy, sell or in any way dispose of, to any person, any curb
or alley-cock key, meter box key, valve key or hydrant wrench for use on the
city water supply system.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, with intent to injure or
defraud, to connect any pipe, tube or other instrument, with any main,
service pipe or conduit flume for conducting water belonging to the city, for
the purpose of taking water without a permit from the proper authorities of
the city and with intention to injure city property or evade payment of
charges.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.091  LIABILITY.



   (A)   The city or its Water Department shall not be held liable for
damage that may result from the shutting or turning off or the turning on of
any supply pipe or main, for any purpose whatsoever, even if no notice has
been given, or for any damage caused by any break or leak inside of the alley
or curb.



   (B)   All supply pipes to buildings shall be properly supplied with
a suitable stop-cock inside the property line, to ensure against the danger
of frost or burst which may cause any damage. The stop-cock should be kept in
good order and under the control of the consumer, with the Water Department
stop cock and box being in charge of the Water Department only.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



§ 52.092  REGULATIONS PART OF CONTRACT.



   All regulations contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of
the contract of every resident of the city taking water service from the
city, and the resident taking water service shall be considered as having
expressly consented to be bound thereby. Consumers outside the city limits
shall, upon application for water service, be required to sign a statement
agreeing to the regulations set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 79, passed 12-13-1989)



CHAPTER 53:  BACKFLOW PREVENTION



Section



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Purpose



   53.03   Backflow prevention required



   53.04   Hazard potential



   53.05   Backflow prevention methods: approved list



   53.06   Backflow prevention method require specified activities



   53.07   Backflow assembly installation requirements; location



   53.08   Installation of backflow prevention assemblies for fire
sprinkler systems



   53.09   Inspections, testing, maintenance and records



   53.10   Retroactive application system retrofit



   53.11   Plan review



   53.12   Fees



   53.13   Enforcement



 



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED.  Accepted by the Department as either meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this chapter, or suitable for the proposed
use.



   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY.  Any water supply on, or available to,
premises other than potable water supplied by the city. These auxiliary
waters may include, but shall not be limited to, water from another
purveyor’s public potable water supply or any natural sources such as a
well, spring, river, stream, harbor or treated effluent, waste waters or
industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or may be
objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the
Department does not have sanitary control.



   BACKFLOW.  The undesirable reversal of flow in the potable water
system caused by either backpressure or backsipphonage.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTER.  An approved assembly or means designed to prevent
the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or
backsiphonage.



   BACKPRESSURE.  Any elevation of pressure in a customer’s water
supply system, above the pressure of the public potable water supply system,
which could cause water or other liquids, mixtures or substances to flow from
a customer’s water supply system into the distribution system of the public
potable water supply system.



   BACKSIPHONAGE.  A reversal of the normal flow of water caused by a
reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system which causes the
flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances to flow from a
customer’s water supply system into the distribution system of the public
potable water supply system.



   CERTIFIED TESTER.  An individual certified and approved by an agency
recognized by the Department to conduct testing on backflow prevention
assemblies.



   CONTAMINATION.  An impairment in the quality of potable water, by
sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other material or
fluids, to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health by
poisoning or the spread of disease.



   CROSS-CONNECTION.  Any actual or potential connection or other
arrangement of piping or fixtures, between a piping system containing potable
water and piping system containing nonpotable water, waste fluids, industrial
fluids or other fluids of questionable safety for human consumption, through
which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the public potable water
system. CROSS-CONNECTIONS include any temporary connections such as swing
connections, removable sections, fourway plug valves, spools, dummy sections
of the pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multi-port tubes, hose
connections or any other temporary or permanent devices, through which, or
because of which, backflow can or may occur.



   CUSTOMER WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.  The water distribution facilities
within a customer’s premises commencing at the discharge point of the
service connection.



   DEPARTMENT.  The City of San Luis, Department of Public Works.



   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.  The network of conduits used to deliver potable
water from the source facilities to the customer’s water supply system.



   HAZARD, DEGREE OF.  Evaluation of the potential risk to the public
health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the public potable water
system.



   INDUSTRIAL FLUID SYSTEM.  Any system containing a fluid or solution
which is chemically, biologically or other wise contaminated or polluted in a
form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollution or
plumbing hazard if introduced into the public potable water system. This may
include, but shall not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all
types of process waters, waste waters and used waters originating from the
public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkaline, circulating cooling
waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are
chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances;
contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers,
bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, or oils, gases, glycerine,
paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes.



   NONPOTABLE WATER.  Water which is not safe for human consumption or
which is of questionable quality for human consumption.



   POLLUTION.  The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic
or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality or impair its
usefulness to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public
health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the water for
domestic use.



   POTABLE WATER.  Any water is safe for human consumption pursuant to
the standards set by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.



   PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.  The source facilities and the
distribution system under control of the city to the point where a
customer’s water supply system commences. A customer’s water supply
system commences at the discharge point of the service connection.



   SERVICE CONNECTION.  The terminal end of a service line from the
public potable water system at its point of delivery to the customer’s
water system where the Department loses jurisdiction and sanitary control
over the water. If a meter is installed between the customer’s water supply
system and the public potable water system, the service connection shall be
the discharge-end of the meter. SERVICE CONNECTIONS shall also include a
water connection from a fire hydrant and any other temporary or emergency
water connections with the public potable water supply system.



   SOURCE FACILITIES.  All components and facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage and delivery of potable water to the
distribution system.



   USED WATER.  Any water supplied by the Department, from the public
potable water system to a customer’s water system, after it has passed
through the service connection and is no longer under the sanitary control of
the Department.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)



§ 53.02  PURPOSE.



   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply of the city from
the possibility of contamination or pollution by preventing the backflow of
contaminants and pollutants into the public potable water supply system;



   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing
cross-connections, actual or potential, within a customer’s internal
potable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and



   (C)   To provide for a continuing program of cross-connection
control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public
potable water supply system.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)



§ 53.03  BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The minimum level of backflow protection which shall be
provided to protect the public water supply system shall be that which is
recommended by the Manual of Cross-Connection Control, Eighth Edition, June
1988 (and no future editions), which is incorporated herein by reference and
on file in the office of the City Manager.



   (B)   An approved backflow prevention method shall be utilized or
installed at every service connection to a customer’s water system when the
Department determines the potable water supplied by the public potable water
system may be subject to contamination, pollution or other deterioration in
sanitary quality by conditions within the customer’s water system.



   (C)   The backflow prevention method to be utilized or installed
shall be determined by the Department. The method required by the Department
shall be sufficient to protect against the potential degree of hazard, as
determined by the Department, to the public potable water supply from the
customer’s water system.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.04  HAZARD POTENTIAL.



   The degree of hazard potential to the public potable water supply and
system from a customer’s water supply system shall be determined using the
following hazard factors.



   (A)   Health.  Any condition, device or practice which, in the
judgment of the Department, may create a danger to the health and well-being
of the potable water consumers.



   (B)   Plumbing.  A plumbing type cross-connection that is not
properly protected by an approved backflow prevention method.



   (C)   Pollution.  An actual or potential threat to the physical
facilities of the public potable water supply system or to the potable water
supply which, although not dangerous to health, would constitute a nuisance
or be esthetically objectionable, or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances.



   (D)   System.  An actual or potential threat which may cause severe
damage to the physical facilities of the public potable water supply system
or which may have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in
the system.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)



§ 53.05  BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS: APPROVED LIST.



   (A)   A backflow prevention method shall be any assembly or other
means designed to prevent backflow. The following are the recognized backflow
prevention methods which the Department may require under §§ 53.03 or 53.04
of this chapter.



      (1)   Air gap.  The unobstructed vertical distance through
the free atmosphere between the lowest opening of any pipe or faucet
supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the
flood level rim of the tank, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved
air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe or faucet
and in no case less than one inch.



      (2)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (hereinafter RP). 
An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves
together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure
differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same
time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located
test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of assembly.



      (3)   Double check valve assembly (hereinafter DC).  An
assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves,
including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly
and fitted with a properly located test cocks.



      (4)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (hereinafter PVB).  An
assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded check valve
and an independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the
discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with
properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at
each end of the assembly.



   (B)   A backflow prevention method may be approved by the Department
if it has received the approval of the Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California.



   (C)   The Department shall maintain a list of approved backflow
prevention assemblies, by type and manufacturer. The list shall be furnished
to any customer required to install a backflow prevention assembly.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)



§ 53.06  BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHOD REQUIRE SPECIFIED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   When any of the following activities are conducted on premises
served by the public potable water system, a potential hazard to the public
potable water supply shall be presumed and a backflow prevention method, of
the type specified for that activity herein, must be utilized or installed at
the service connection for that premise.



 


Activity

 

Backflow Prevention Method





Aircraft and missile plant
 

RP



Animal clinics and animal grooming shops
 

RP



Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained
 

RP



Automotive repair with steam cleaner, acid cleaning equipment or solvent
facilities
 

RP



Auxiliary water systems
 

RP



Bottling plants, beverage or chemical
 

RP



Breweries
 

RP



Multi-storied buildings
 

DC



Buildings with house pumps and/or potable water storage tank
 

DC



Buildings with landscape fountains, ponds or baptismal tanks
 

RP or Air Gap



Buildings with sewage ejectors
 

RP or Air Gap



Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants
 

RP



Car wash facilities
 

RP



Cooling towers, boilers, chillers and other heating and cooling systems
utilizing potable water
 

RP



Chemical plants
 

RP



Chemically treated potable or nonpotable water systems
 

RP



Civil works (government-owned or operated facilities not open for inspection
by the Department)
 

RP



Commercial laundries
 

RP



Dairies and cold storage plants
 

DC



Dye works
 

RP



Film processing laboratories, facilities or equipment
 

RP



Fire systems, as classified by the American Water Works Association (AWWA)
Manual 14:
 




   Class 1, Class 2
 

DC




      This requirement may be waived for fire protection systems
constructed of approved potable water materials per the Uniform Plumbing Code
as adopted by the city.

 




   Class 3, all systems
 

DC



   Classes 4, 5 and 6, all systems
 

RP



Fire systems, where backflow protection is required on the
industrial/domestic service connection that is located on the same premises,
both service connections will have adequate backflow protection for the
highest degree of hazard effecting either system.


Food processing plants
 

RP



High schools and colleges
 

RP



Holding tank disposal stations
 

RP



Hospitals and mortuaries (major complexes)
 

RP



Medical and dental buildings, sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes
engaged in the diagnosis, care or treatment of human illness
 

DC



Irrigation systems (not to include single-family residences used solely for
residential purposes unless otherwise identified as having a cross-connection
or back flow problem):
 




   Premises where nonpotable water is used for irrigation
 

RP



   Premises using potable water with nonpotable water piping
 

RP



   Premises having a system served by more than one service connection
(looped system)
 

RP



   Premises where chemigation is practiced
 

RP



Laboratories using toxic materials
 

RP



Manufacturing, processing and fabricating plants
 

RP



Mobile home parks served by master meter
 

DC



Motion picture studios
 

RP



Multiple services - interconnected
 

DC



Oil and gas production facilities
 

RP



Paper and paper production facilities
 

RP



Plating plants
 

RP



Portable insecticide and herbicide spray tanks
 

RP or Air Gap



Power plants
 

RP



Radioactive materials processing facilities
 

RP



Restricted, classified or other closed facilities
 

RP



Rubber plants
 

RP



Sand and gravel plants
 

RP



Sewage and storm drainage facilities
 

RP



Shopping centers served by master meters
 

RP



Public swimming pools with self-levelers or automatic fillers
 

PVB



Street sweepers, steel wheeled rollers
 

RP or Air Gap



Water trucks, water tanks or hydraulic sewer cleaning equipment
 

RP or Air Gap



Hydrant meters connected to system to be used for irrigation or any use not
included in No. 48
 

RP or Air Gap



Buildings used for commercial mini-warehouses or industrial uses where one
service connection supplies more than one tenant or occupant of the building
 

RP





 



   (B)   When two or more of the activities listed above are conducted
on the same premises and served by the same service connection, the most
restrictive backflow prevention method required for any of the activities
conducted on the premises shall be required to be utilized or installed at
the service connection. The order of most restrictive to least restrictive
backflow prevention methods shall be as follows:



      (1)   Air gap (most restrictive);



      (2)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RP);



      (3)   Double check valve assembly (DC); and



      (4)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB) (least
restrictive).



   (C)   If the Department determines, after inspection of the
customer’s system, that a backflow prevention method less restrictive than
that required in § 53.03 of this chapter will provide adequate protection of
the public potable water system, the Department may, in its sole discretion,
modify the requirements of this section.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.07  BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS; LOCATION.



   (A)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the
customer, at the customer’s expense and in compliance with the standards
and specifications adopted by the city, at the service connection.



   (B)   The assembly shall be in an accessible location approved by
the Department. A reduced pressure principle assembly and pressure vacuum
breaker assembly shall be installed above ground. A double check valve
assembly may be installed, at the customer’s option, below ground in a
vault which meets standard specifications established by city.



   (C)   When customer desires a continuous water supply, two or more
backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed parallel to one another at
the service connection to allow a continuous water supply during testing of
the backflow prevention assemblies. When backflow prevention assemblies are
installed parallel to one another, the sum of the diameters of the assemblies
shall be at least equal to the diameter of the service connection. Fire
system assemblies are addressed in § 53.08.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to fire sprinkler systems.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.08  INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES FOR FIRE SPRINKLER
SYSTEMS.



   (A)   All control valves on the backflow device shall be locked in
the open position or be tamper switch protected in accordance with NFPA.



   (B)   When a backflow prevention assembly is required for a water
service connection supplying only to a fire sprinkler system, assembly shall
be installed at the user connection for the fire sprinkler system in
compliance with standard specifications adopted by the city.



   (C)   If the authority enforcing the Uniform Fire Code determines
that a fire sprinkler system shall have a continuous water supply which may
not be interrupted during testing of the backflow prevention assembly, the
customer shall install, at his or her expense, two backflow prevention
assemblies parallel to one another at the service connection. The diameter of
each assembly shall be at least equal to the diameter of the service
connection.



   (D)   When a backflow prevention assembly is required for a building
which already contains a fire sprinkler system, the sprinkler system shall be
tested and certified by a licensed registrant in the state that it will
perform within the specification of the National Fire Protection Association
and the city fire codes, after installation of the required assembly.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.09  INSPECTIONS, TESTING, MAINTENANCE AND RECORDS.



   (A)   A customer’s water system shall be available at all times
during business hours for inspection by authorized personnel of the
Department. The inspection shall be conducted to determine compliance with
this chapter.



   (B)   The customer shall test and service backflow prevention
assemblies at least once a year. If the testing reveals the assembly to be
defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall
perform any necessary repairs, including replacement or overhaul of the
assembly, if necessary, which will return the assembly to satisfactory
operating condition.



   (C)   If the Department or customer learns or discovers, during the
interim period between tests, that an assembly is defective or in
unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall perform any necessary
repairs, including replacement or overhaul of the assembly if necessary,
which will return the assembly to satisfactory operating condition.



   (D)   The annual testing shall be performed by an individual
certified and approved to conduct the testing by an agency recognized by the
Department. A list of certified, approved and recognized individuals will be
maintained by the Department and will be available upon request to all
persons required to install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly. A
tester may be suspended or removed from the list for improper testing,
maintenance, reporting or other improper practices as determined by the
Department.



   (E)   The customer shall maintain records, on forms approved by the
Department, of the results of all tests and all servicing, repairs, overhauls
or replacements of the backflow prevention assembly. A copy of the records
shall be submitted to the Department within 14 days after completion of the
activity for which the record is made.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.10  RETROACTIVE APPLICATION SYSTEM RETROFIT.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new water
customers and all water customers existing prior to the enactment date of
this chapter.



   (B)   Backflow prevention assemblies installed prior to enactment of
this chapter, and which do not comply with the requirements set forth herein,
shall be replaced with assemblies which comply with the standards set forth
herein.



   (C)   All water customers existing prior to the enactment of this
chapter shall comply with the standards set forth herein within a period of
time as determined by the Department. The maximum time allowed for compliance
shall be July 1, 1994.



   (D)   A change of ownership or name change or type of use change
shall require a new survey of use. If the survey determines an assembly is
required, installation needs to be completed before granting the change.



   (E)   Fire sprinkler systems which will require retrofit prior to
July, 1994:



      (1)   A fire sprinkler system designed by pipe schedule which
is modified, expanded or augmented under issuance of a building permit; or



      (2)   A fire sprinkler system designed by hydraulic
calculation which is modified in an area equal to the size of the design area
or effecting ten sprinkler heads.



   (F)   The quarterly flow and valve confidence test.



      (1)   Class 1 and Class 2 fire sprinkler systems constructed
with nonpotable BPA immediately, replacing the single check valve or to have
the fire sprinkler system single check (or alarm check) inspected at least
quarterly to verity the existing single check (and/or alarm check) valves are
properly installed and functioning.



      (2)   Quarterly flow and valve confidence test reports shall
be provided to the Department and the Fire Chief within 14 days following the
inspection, submitted on forms approved by the Department.



      (3)   Any fire sprinkler system which fails two consecutive
quarterly inspections shall be re-engineered with the single check valve
replaced by the appropriate backflow prevention assembly.



      (4)   The water customer or property owner shall pay for this
quarterly flow and valve confidence test.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.11  PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies which will be installed
shall be shown and specified on all required building and engineering plans.
City approval of the intended assembly installation is required prior to
issuance of any building or engineering permit.



   (B)   Plumbing permits for the installation of all backflow
prevention assemblies required by the city shall be obtained from the city
prior to installation.



   (C)   Replacement of existing backflow prevention assemblies shall
require a plumbing permit.



   (D)   Backflow prevention assemblies must be installed as to meet
the standard specifications of the city and be tested by a certified tester
and shown to be operating correctly. A copy of all testing records shall be
submitted to the Department within 14 days.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)



§ 53.12  FEES.



   (A)   A monthly service fee may be established by City Council
resolution to cover the costs if implementing and enforcing this regulation
and if established shall be charged to every customer who is required to
install a backflow prevention assembly. The fee shall be included in the
customer’s monthly water bill.



   (B)   A fee may be established by the city for any permits issued
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)



§ 53.13  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
bypass or remove a backflow prevention method without the approval of the
Department.



   (B)   If the Department discovers that a customer has not installed
a required backflow prevention method or that a backflow prevention method
has been improperly tested or maintained, bypassed or removed, or that an
unprotected cross-connection exists in the customer’s water system, the
water service to that service connection shall be disconnected if the
situation is not remedied within the time specified in the notice sent to the
customer as required by this section. The service shall not be restored until
the condition is remedied.



   (C)   Water service to a fire sprinkler system shall not be subject
to disconnection under this section.



   (D)   Prior to disconnecting any water service because a condition
set forth in division (A) above exists, the Department shall send a notice to
the customer describing the condition and notifying the customer the
condition must be remedied within 45 days after mailing of the notice by the
Department. If the condition is not remedied within the 45-day period, the
Department shall send a second notice, by certified mail, to the customer
modifying the customer notifying the customer that water service will be
disconnected in 15 days in the condition is not remedied within the time
period.



   (E)   The Department may disconnect, without notice, water service
to any customer when the Department discovers that the customer’s water
system is contaminating the public potable water supply.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
53.13(A)shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished in accordance with the Arizona Revised Statutes. Each
separate day or part thereof during which any violation of § 53.13(A) occurs
or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.



   (C)   If a situation, which could otherwise result in discontinuance
of water service in § 53.13(B), is not remedied within the time provided in
the notice sent to the customer, the customer shall be guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor. Each separate day or part thereof during which any violation of
§ 53.13 occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.



(Ord. 125, passed 9-11-1995)



CHAPTER 54:  WELL REGULATION



Section



   54.01   Purpose



   54.02   Prohibitions; exceptions



 



   54.99   Penalty



§ 54.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the
establishment of new wells drawing upon the aquifer within five miles of the
Arizona-Sonora Boundary as described in Minute 242 of the Mexican Water
Treaty of 1944, the “Five Mile Zone”, in order to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by managing the water
supply to ensure the availability of a safe and secure source of potable
water within its water utility service area to distribute to its residents,
and secure the future needs and growth of the city.



   (B)   In making this policy, the city is committed to protecting its
exclusive right to engage in a water utility business or enterprise within
its service area, and to provide potable water and fire protection service to
all residents and customers in sufficient quantities to meet public need and
demand.



   (C)   In providing water service for the purposes of public health,
safety, and welfare, the city further commits to providing safe water in
effective quantities in accordance with its Assured Water Supply designation
as granted by the Arizona Department of Water Resources on February 16, 2011
(DWR No. 40-700671.0000).



   (D)   In making this policy the City Council hereby refers to and
adopts the findings and conclusions of the Hydrological Study on the
Availability of Water for Assured Water Supply Designation, City of San Luis,
Arizona dated November 30, 2010.



(Ord. 316, passed 78-25-2012; Ord. 319, passed 9-26-2012)



§ 54.02  PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   It is unlawful to drill, establish, construct, maintain or operate a
well in the municipal limits of the City within five miles of the
Arizona-Sonora Boundary as described in Minute 242 of the Mexican Water
Treaty of 1944, the “Five Mile Zone”, except as follows:



   (A)   Wells drilled, established, and operational prior to July 25,
2012;



   (B)   An exempt well established pursuant to the provisions of
A.R.S. § 45-454;



   (C)   A well for irrigation purposes for Desert View Elementary
School located at 1508 N. 10th Ave., San Luis, Arizona;



   (D)   A well serving property located more than 5,000 feet from an
existing water main; and



   (E)   A well of the City of San Luis.



(Ord. 316, passed 78-25-2012; Ord. 319, passed 9-26-2012)  Penalty, see §
54.99



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate,
or cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter. Any person, firm,
or corporation violating any of the provisions of the requirements of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable pursuant to §
10.99. With respect to violations of this chapter that are continuous with
respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense.



(Ord. 316, passed 78-25-2012; Ord. 319, passed 9-26-2012)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL



      72.   PARKING



      73.   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE REGULATIONS



      74.   TOWING



      75.   BICYCLES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Administration



   70.01   Duty of Police Chief



   70.02   Records of traffic violations



   70.03   Police Chief to investigate accidents



   70.04   Traffic accident studies



   70.05   Traffic accident reports



   70.99   Traffic Code penalty



ADMINISTRATION



§ 70.01  DUTY OF POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to provide for the
enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the
state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city to make arrests
for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to assist in developing
ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out all duties
specially imposed upon the Police Chief by this chapter.



   (B)   Any peace officer of the city may be authorized by the Police
Chief to perform any of the duties of the Police Chief included in this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 10-1)



§ 70.02  RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall keep a record of all violations of the
traffic laws of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has
been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all alleged
offenses. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and
from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the
most recent five-year period.



   (B)   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all forms.



   (C)   All records and reports shall be public records.



(Prior Code, § 10-2)



§ 70.03  POLICE CHIEF TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to investigate traffic
accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to the accidents.



(Prior Code, § 10-3)



§ 70.04  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever the accidents at any particular locations becomes numerous the
Police Chief shall conduct studies of the accidents and determine remedial
measures.



(Prior Code, § 10-4)



§ 70.05  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall maintain suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall
be filed alphabetically by location.



   (B)   The Police Chief shall receive and properly file all accident
reports made to him or her under state law or under any law of the city, but
all accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the
city and no report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding
other than upon request of any person making the report or upon request of
the court having jurisdiction, to prove a compliance with the law requiring
the making of any report.



(Prior Code, § 10-5)



§ 70.99  TRAFFIC CODE PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of or failure to do or refusal to do or perform
any act required by this Title, for which no penalty is otherwise
specifically provided, constitutes a civil traffic violation punishable
pursuant to the provisions of § 10.99.  Each day a violation continues
shall be a separate offense.



   (B)   In addition to any civil sanction imposed, the municipal court
shall assess a default fee of not less than $75 for a failure to pay any
civil sanction imposed by the court.



   (C)   A judge or hearing officer may waive all or part of the
default fee if the payment of the fee would cause a financial hardship to the
defendant.



   (D)   If the court refers any delinquent fines, fees, sanctions,
penalties or restitution for collection, any collection or attorney costs are
recoverable from the defendant and may be added to any balance due from the
defendant to the court.



   (E)   The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or
suspension of a license, permit or franchise.



   (F)   Violations that are continuous with respect to time may be
abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty
does not prevent injunctive or equitable relief.



(Ord. 44, passed 2-22-1984; Am. Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed. Civil traffic
violations are now subject to A.R.S. §§ 28-1591 et seq.



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC CONTROL



Section



   71.01   Directing traffic



   71.02   Obedience to traffic regulations



   71.03   Use of coaster, roller skates and similar devices restricted



   71.04   Authority to install traffic control devices, signs,
signals, crosswalks, safety zones and mark traffic lanes



   71.05   Uniform traffic control devices



   71.06   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers



   71.07   Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs



   71.08   Limitations on turning around



   71.09   One-way streets and alleys



   71.10   Obedience to official traffic control devices



   71.11   Unauthorized painting of curbs, sidewalks, or streets,
highways and freeways



§ 71.01  DIRECTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal.



   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the Police Chief in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



(Prior Code, § 11-1)



§ 71.02  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required by this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to
willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the
Police Chief or of any Fire Department official.



(Prior Code, § 11-2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  USE OF COASTER, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding any coaster,
toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk and, when crossing, the person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians.



(Prior Code, § 11-3)  (Ord. 41, passed 2-22-1984)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNS, SIGNALS,
CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES AND MARK TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Chief of Police, with the concurrence of the City Engineer, the
Public Works Director, and the Fire Chief shall have the power and duty to
place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic
control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic
ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances,
and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices, designate
crosswalks, establish safety zones, or mark traffic lanes as he or she may
deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic
ordinances of this city or under State law.



(Prior Code, § 11-4) (Am. Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.05  UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   All traffic control devices, signs, signals, crosswalks,
safety zones, lanes, or markings shall conform to the manual and
specifications prescribed in A.R.S. § 28-641.



   (B)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any traffic
control device(s), signs, signals, crosswalks, safety zones, lanes, or
markings have been placed by the official act or direction of lawful
authority unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.



   (C)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any traffic
control device(s), signs, signals, crosswalks, safety zones, lanes, or
markings comply with the requirements of this chapter and A.R.S. § 28-643
unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.



(Prior Code, § 11-5)  (Am. Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)



§ 71.06  AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.



   (A)   The Police Chief is authorized to place markers, buttons,
signs, cones, or other traffic control devices on any street, highway, or
public right of way indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles, and the
course to be traveled may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.



   (B)   Unless authorized by a police officer, it shall be unlawful
for any person to intentionally move, remove, injure, obstruct, deface, alter
or tamper with any traffic control device.



   (C)   When authorized traffic control devices have been placed in a
street, highway, or public right of way, indicating the course of travel, no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of travel or otherwise drive
in disobedience of the traffic control device.



   (D)   Members of the police department and persons authorized by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance
with the provisions of this Title, or in emergencies as public safety or
convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or
refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of a policeman
or other person authorized to direct traffic.



   (E)   When a line of vehicles forms on any street, highway, or
public right of way, it is unlawful for the driver of the vehicle to merge
into said line except at the end of the line or as may be directed by a
police officer or other person authorized to direct traffic.



   (F)   It is unlawful to stop, stand, or otherwise interfere in
passage of persons or vehicles at an intersection unless directed to do so by
a police officer or other person authorized to direct traffic.



(Prior Code, § 11-6) (Ord. 320, passed 12-12-2012)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.07  AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, with the concurrence of the City
Engineer, the Public Works Director, and the Fire Chief is hereby authorized
to determine those intersections in which drivers of vehicles shall not make
a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections.
The making of turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted in other hours.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any sign.



(Prior Code, § 11-7)  (Am. Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 71.08  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn a vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not
upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Prior Code, § 11-8)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.09  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   The Council shall by resolution designate any streets or alleys which
are to be limited to one-way traffic.



(Prior Code, § 11-9)



§ 71.10 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   No person shall intentionally disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device, sign, signal, crosswalk, safety zone, lane, marking,
turning marker, button, or other indication placed or established in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by
a police officer or other authorized person, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle.



(Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)



§ 71.11  UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS, SIDEWALKS, OR STREETS, HIGHWAYS
AND FREEWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the Chief of
Police and the Public Works Director to paint or deface any curb, sidewalk,
street, highway or freeway within the jurisdiction of this city, provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a
curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any
resolution or ordinances of this city pertaining thereto.



(Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Method of parking



   72.02   Blocking traffic



   72.03   Parking adjacent to schools



   72.04   Parking upon public property



   72.05   Parking vehicles on sidewalks



   72.06   Abandoned vehicles



   72.07   Buses, taxes and livery



   72.08   Definitions



   72.09   Acquisition of equipment



   72.10   Establishment of rates for parking control devices or
parking meters



   72.11   Designation of transit enforcement officers



Parking Regulations



   72.20   Purpose



   72.21   Presumption in reference to illegal parking



   72.22   Unattended motor vehicles



   72.23   Impounding of vehicles



   72.24   Towing; notice to police



   72.25   Parking as to impede traffic



   72.26   Parking in, on or adjacent to median dividers



   72.27   Parking in alleys



   72.28   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places



   72.29   Stopping, standing or parking outside a residence or
business district



   72.30   Parking of commercial vehicles in residential areas



   72.31   Parking in residential or business districts



   72.32   Parking at roadside



   72.33   Parallel parking



   72.34   Angle parking



   72.35   Parking in driveway or private property



   72.36   Time limit and operation of parking meters



   72.37   Fuel trucks in residential area



   72.38   Parking on property of another



   72.39   Parking in space reserved for handicapped persons



 



   72.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  METHOD OF PARKING.



   Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the Council, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall
be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to
and within 18 inches of the right hand curb.



(Prior Code, § 12-1)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  BLOCKING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor
vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in the city in a manner or under
conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may
stop temporarily in the actual loading or unloading of passengers or, when
necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals of the Police Chief.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, or
other vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a private driveway except for
when the loading or unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley
to the free movement of vehicular traffic.



(Prior Code, § 12-2)  (Ord. 43, passed 2-22-1984)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any
designated place for one hour before school opens until one hour after school
closes on any school day.



(Prior Code, § 12-3)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  PARKING UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, with the concurrence of the City
Engineer, the Public Works Director, and the Fire Chief is hereby authorized
to determine and designate No Stopping, No Standing, and No Parking areas on
publicly owned property. In addition, the Chief of Police, with the
concurrence of the City Engineer, the Public Works Director, and the Fire
Chief is hereby authorized to restrict parking, stopping or standing in zones
on publicly owned property for the public welfare. The above authority shall
include, but not be limited to, creating the following zones:



      (1)   No parking zones which prohibit parking and standing
altogether;



      (2)   Zones where parking or standing is prohibited or allowed
only during specified hours and/or during specified days;



      (3)   Zones where parking is prohibited for longer than the
maximum time period specified at any time;



      (4)   Reserved parking zones where a person is only allowed to
park or stand a vehicle where such person is a member of a designated group
of persons;



      (5)   Permit parking zones where a person may only park or
stand a vehicle which displays a clearly visible permit issued by the city;



      (6)   Motorcycle only zones which allow only motorcycles to
park or stand therein;



      (7)   Compact vehicle only zones which only allow compact
vehicles to park or stand therein (for purposes of this subsection, a
"compact vehicle" is any vehicle not exceeding 180 inches in length);



      (8)   Zones in front of any driveway or entrance-way or within
ten feet of any driveway or entrance area to any publicly owned property
where parking or standing is prohibited;



      (9)   Zones controlling parking through the use of parking
meters; and



      (10)   Handicapped parking zones on publicly owned property in
accordance with state law and as more specifically described in this Code.



   (B)   The Chief of Police, with the concurrence of the City
Engineer, the Public Works Director, and the Fire Chief shall place and
maintain appropriate signs, parking control devices, parking meters, and/or
markings indicating such zones. No person shall park a vehicle in violation
of the restrictions of such a zone. Any person parking his vehicle in a
parking zone in violation of restrictions of such zone shall be subject to
the penalties specified in § 10.99 of this Code. Such a vehicle shall be
subject to tow away and impoundment by order of the Chief of Police or his
designee.



   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle on publicly owned property
marked for parking, except as designated by lines or markings upon the
pavement or ground, or in conformance with a parking control device or
parking meter. No person shall park a vehicle in diagonal or at an angle
parking on publicly owned property except with the front of the vehicle
headed into the curb, cement block, wall, etc., which indicates the front of
the parking area.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, "publicly owned property" shall
mean any lands which the city owns either in fee simple or in which it has
acquired a beneficial interest by virtue of an agreement of sale or
conveyance and it shall include specifically parks and other recreation
property including those parks and recreation properties which are leased to
private parties and all publicly owned rights-of-way for streets and alleys.
For purposes of this section, "parking" shall include stopping, standing
and/or parking as such terms are defined in Title 28 of the Arizona Revised
Statutes.



(Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)



§ 72.05  PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, whether in usable
condition or not, or for an owner to permit his or her vehicle to be parked
upon any sidewalk in the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-5)  (Ord. 45, passed 2-22-1984)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.06  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   Any vehicle remaining parked upon any sidewalk of the city for more
that three days, or any disabled vehicle remaining parked upon any street of
the city for more than seven days, is declared to be an abandoned vehicle and
the police shall forthwith remove the same from the sidewalks or streets of
the city at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 12-6)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.07  BUSES, TAXIS AND LIVERY.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BUS. A motor vehicle designed to carry 11 or more passengers and
used in the commercial business of transporting persons for hire by a
business duly licensed as a commercial business by the city which is properly
registered/licensed with the State Department of Revenue.



      TAXI. A motor vehicle designed to carry ten or less passengers
and used in the commercial business of transporting persons for hire by a
business duly licensed as a commercial business by the city which is properly
registered/licensed with the State Department of Revenue, and properly
approved as a taxi by the State of Arizona.



      LIVERY. A motor vehicle designed to carry ten or less passengers
and used in the commercial business of transporting persons for hire by a
business duly licensed as a commercial business by the city which is properly
registered/licensed with the State Department of Revenue and properly
approved as a livery by the State of Arizona.



   (B)   Establishment of stands. The Chief of Police, with the
concurrence of the City Engineer, the Public Works Director, and the Fire
Chief shall establish bus stands, taxi stands, and taxi waiting stands within
publicly owned property as defined by § 72.04(C). All taxis, liveries, and
buses shall park in the same direction as the flow of traffic with their
wheels no more than eight inches from the curb. No vehicle shall stop, stand,
or park in a bus stand other than a bus, and no vehicle shall stop, stand, or
park in a taxi stand or taxi waiting stand other than a taxi or livery.



   (C)   Parking in right-of-way.  All buses, except school buses, are
prohibited from parking at any time on public right-of-way within city limits
except in an area designated as a bus stand.



   (D)   Business license records.  All commercial buses and all taxis
shall keep on file with the city as part of city business license records
proof of proper licensing and/or registration with the State Department of
Revenue together with proof of current liability insurance as required by the
laws of the state. Proof of insurance shall be a receipt or other written
proof showing payment of insurance premium(s) for the period that the city
business license is issued together with the certificate(s) of insurance as
required by the laws of the state.



(Ord. 35, passed 5-11-1983; Ord. 37, passed 10-8-1983; Ord. 51, passed
3-27-1985; Ord. 59, passed 7-15-1985; Ord. 149, passed 1-14-1998; Am. Ord.
346, passed 12-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.08  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who shall operate, drive or be in control of
any vehicle upon any street.



   PARK or PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or
signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond
the control of the operator of the vehicle.



   PARKING CONTROL DEVICE.  Any device, mechanical or computerized used
to aid the control of parking spaces.



   PARKING METER.  Any mechanical device or computerized device or meter
not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected for the regulation of
parking by authority of this chapter.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, co-partnership or corporation.



   STREET.  Any public street, avenue, road, boulevard, highway or other
public place located in the city and established for the use of vehicles.



   TRANSIT ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  A person designated or appointed to
enforce the city ordinances and state laws regulating the parking, standing
or stopping of vehicles within the city of San Luis.



   VEHICLE.  Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.



(Ord. 309, passed 10-26-2011)



§ 72.09  ACQUISITION OF EQUIPMENT.



   The City Administrator or his/her designee is hereby authorized to make
purchase of parking control devices in the quantity and of such type or
manufacture as to meet the needs of the city of San Luis. The City
Administrator is further authorized to make purchases of any equipment
necessary to maintain parking control devices or any other equipment
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. All purchases shall be
made in accordance to the rules and regulations governed by Chapter 36,
Purchasing.



(Ord. 309, passed 10-26-2011)



§ 72.10  ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES FOR PARKING CONTROL DEVICES OR PARKING
METERS.



   For any parking control device or parking meter which charges a fee,
the fee for parking in a space controlled by such device or meter shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 309, passed 10-26-2011; Am. Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)



§ 72.11  DESIGNATION OF TRANSIT ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.



   The position of Transit Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The City
Administrator is authorized to designate or appoint such Transit Enforcement
Officers as may be necessary to meet the needs of parking enforcement within
the city.



(Ord. 309, passed 10-26-2011)



PARKING REGULATIONS



§ 72.20  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the safety and welfare of
the visitors and residents of the city by regulating the parking of vehicles
in both residential and commercial areas.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)



§ 72.21  PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



   In any civil proceeding alleging or in any prosecution charging a
violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was
parked in violation of any law or regulation, together with proof that the
defendant named in the complaint was at the time of parking the registered
owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence prima facie presumption
that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed
the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during the violation
occurred.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)



§ 72.22  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the
ignition and removing the key, or when standing upon any perceptible grade
without effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle
standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of
this section, the police officer is authorized to remove the key from the
vehicle and to deliver the key to the Police Department.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.23  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES.



   The Police Department may take charge, remove and keep in custody,
under the direction of the Chief of Police, any unoccupied vehicle of any
kind or description found violating any of the provisions of this Code, or of
any of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state regulating the
standing or parking of vehicles.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.24  TOWING; NOTICE TO POLICE.



   No person shall tow or transport any vehicle without the express
permission of the owner, unless he or she shall first have notified the
Police Department of his or her intent to do so, and provide the following
information:



   (A)   Name and address of the owner of the vehicle, if known;



   (B)   The vehicle license number and description;



   (C)   The reason the vehicle is being moved without the permission
of the owner;



   (D)   The location where the vehicle is being taken; and



   (E)   The name and address of the tow company who is to tow the
vehicle.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.25  PARKING AS TO IMPEDE TRAFFIC.



   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in a
manner or under conditions as to impede the free movement of vehicular
traffic.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.26  PARKING IN, ON OR ADJACENT TO MEDIAN DIVIDERS.



   In the event a highway is divided into two or more separate roadways,
and traffic is restricted to one direction upon each roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle other than on the right-hand side of a one-way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit standing or parking elsewhere.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.27  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a manner or
under conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.



   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle in any alley, except
commercial cars, trucks or wagons for the purpose of loading and unloading,
then not for a period longer than is actually necessary to load or unload.
Vehicle displaying state disabled parking identifying insignia may stand or
park in an alley while loading or unloading persons for a period not to
exceed five minutes.



   (C)   At no time shall a vehicle parked in an alley be left
unattended during the time of loading and unloading.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.28  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk;



   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway or the entrance to an
alley;



   (C)   Within an intersection;



   (D)   Where prohibited by official signs or where the curb is
painted red;



   (E)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



   (F)   On a crosswalk;



   (G)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;



   (I)   Within a designated bus stop;



   (J)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing or
within eight feet, six inches of the center of any railroad track, except
while a motor vehicle with motive power attached is loading or unloading
railroad cars;



   (K)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of the entrance when properly posted;



   (L)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would impede traffic;



   (M)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;



   (N)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or
within a street tunnel;



   (O)   In that area between the curb and sidewalk, on those roadways
without curbs no person shall park a vehicle so as to force a pedestrian to
walk in the traveled portion of the roadway; and



   (P)   Upon any lot or area prohibiting parking.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.29  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OUTSIDE A RESIDENCE OR BUSINESS
DISTRICT.



   Upon any street outside of a business or residence district, no person
shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the roadway when it is
practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle off that part of the
roadway.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.30  PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle with a rated chassis capacity
in excess of three-fourths of a ton or a tractor, semitrailer, trailer or bus
on a local street in a residential area except during the process of loading
or unloading the vehicle.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.31  PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL OR BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In any residential area or business district, all required
parking spaces shall be set back from adjoining street right-of-way lines to
conform with required front and side street setback lines of the residential
area or business district.



   (B)   The parking of any commercial vehicle of more than one and
one-half-tons’ capacity on any lot in any residential area shall be
considered a commercial use and is prohibited.



   (C)   The parking of any vehicle on any lot in any residential or
business district which is inoperable and is characterized by dents, breaks,
cracking, peeling, rusting or lack of maintenance is prohibited.



   (D)   The parking and/or storage of boats, campers, travel trailers
and motor homes are permitted in any residential or business areas, provided
that the vehicle does not extend beyond the property line into the street
right-of-way, and that the vehicle shall not be used for living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes. In addition, the site clearance requirements of this
Code shall be applicable.



   (E)   No person shall stop, stand, park or store a disabled vehicle
or vehicles, or a trailer or a trailer loaded with a vehicle on any street,
alley or right-of-way in any residential or commercial area of the city for a
period of more than two hours. Each vehicle or trailer shall be considered a
separate violation.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004; Ord. 226, passed 3-23-2005)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.32  PARKING AT ROADSIDE.



   No person shall park any vehicle at any time in that area between the
curb and the sidewalk. On those roadways without curbs no person shall park a
vehicle so as to force a pedestrian to walk in the traveled portion of the
roadway.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.33  PARALLEL PARKING.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle on a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway
headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the curbside
wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.34  ANGLE PARKING.



   No person shall park or stand a vehicle upon those streets which have
been signed or marked by the city for angle parking, other than at the angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by signs or markings.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.35  PARKING IN DRIVEWAY OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle in any private driveway or on
private property or private parking area without the express or implied
consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the property.



   (B)   The owner or person in lawful possession of any private
parking area shall be deemed to have given consent to unrestricted parking by
the general public in a parking area unless the parking area is posted with
signs as prescribed by this section which are clearly visible and readable
from any point within the parking area and at each entrance thereto. The
signs shall contain, as a minimum, the following information:



      (1)   Restrictions on parking;



      (2)   Disposition of vehicles found in violation of parking
restrictions;



      (3)   Maximum cost to the violator, including storage fees and
any other charges that could result from the disposition of a vehicle parked
in violation of parking restrictions;



      (4)   Telephone number and address where the violator can
locate his or her vehicle; and



      (5)   Each sign shall state “San Luis City Code § 72.35.”



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.36  TIME LIMIT AND OPERATION OF PARKING METERS.



   (A)   No person may park a vehicle upon any roadway for a
consecutive period of time longer than indicated by official signs installed
to limit the parking.



   (B)   Except during the periods hereafter fixed and except in a
period of emergency determined by an officer of the Police Department, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or
signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space regulated by a
parking meter, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking
meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the appropriate
parking meter the proper coin of the United States or deposit appropriate fee
by use of an authorized credit or debit card as is required for the parking
meter and as is designated by proper directions on the parking meter or an
adjacent official city sign, and when required by the directions on the
parking meter or an adjacent official city sign, the operator of such
vehicle, after the deposit of the proper coin or coins, shall also set in
operation the timing mechanism on such parking meter in accordance with
directions properly appearing on the parking meter or an adjacent official
city sign. Failure to make the proper deposit or to properly set the timing
mechanism shall constitute a violation of this section. Upon the deposit of
appropriate fee (and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so
required) the parking space may be lawfully occupied by a vehicle during the
period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which
the parking space is located. If a vehicle remains parked in any such parking
space beyond the parking time limit set for the parking space, and if the
parking meter indicates such illegal parking, then the vehicle shall be
considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time,
and shall be deemed a violation of this section.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004; Ord. 309, passed 10-26-2011)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.37  FUEL TRUCKS IN RESIDENTIAL AREA.



   No person shall park or allow a fuel truck to remain parked in a
residential area unless involved in a retail or wholesale delivery to the
particular property involved.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.38  PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.



   No person shall operate, drive or leave any motor vehicle, motorcycle,
minibike, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep or any other form of
transportation propelled by an internal combustion engine, upon the property
of another, without the written permission of the owner thereof or the person
entitled to immediate possession thereof, or the authorized agent of either.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.39  PARKING IN SPACE RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle
in a parking space reserved for use by physically disabled persons, whether
on public property or private property available for public use, when the
space is designated as described in division (C) below of this section,
unless:



      (1)   The motor vehicle displays one of the following:



         (a)   A distinguishing insignia placard issued under
state law for this purpose;



         (b)   License plates bearing the international
wheelchair symbol; or



         (c)   Any other distinguishing insignia for physically
disabled persons recognized under the laws of the state.



      (2)   The motor vehicle is transporting a person eligible for
the placard, license plates or permit.



   (B)   Any person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person
shall be allowed, without a distinguishing placard, license plate or permit
to park momentarily in any parking space for the purpose of loading or
unloading a disabled person. The momentary parking shall not constitute a
violation of division (A) above of this section.



   (C)   All parking spaces reserved for use by physically disabled
persons pursuant to the City Code, A.R.S. § 28-883A or B, or any successor
of the foregoing, shall be designated as reserved for the disabled by a sign
showing the symbol of accessibility. Signing which meets the requirements of
this section includes:



      (1)   Permanent signs bearing the internationally accepted
symbol of access located at least three feet but not more than six feet above
the grade; and



      (2)   Signing which complies with A.R.S. § 28-882C or any
successor thereto.



   (D)   The posting of a sign or signs shall authorize police and
police volunteers to enforce the provisions of this section and shall
constitute a waiver of any objection by the owner of the property to
enforcement by the Police Department.



   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON.  As defined by A.R.S. Title 28, or
any successor thereto.



(Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the civil traffic
violation provisions of § 70.99.



   (B)   Buses, taxis and livery. Any person found guilty of violating
any provision of § 72.07 shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. Each
time a person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, and/or each day that a
violation continues, shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove
described.



   (C)   Parking regulations.



      (1)   A person who violates any section of §§ 72.20 through
72.39 is guilty of a civil traffic infraction. Violations of §§ 72.20
through 72.39 or code for which a civil sanction is imposed shall be treated
as a civil offense and hearings and appeals shall be conducted in accordance
with the rules of procedure in civil traffic violation cases as set forth in
the A.R.S. Rules Volume 17B.



      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 72.20
through 72.39 or code which are designated as subject to civil sanction or
penalty shall be punished by imposition of a civil sanction not to exceed
$500, unless another penalty is specified.



         (a)   Any person who fails to comply with payment of a
civil sanction shall be guilty of violating A.R.S. § 13-2810, interference
with judicial proceedings. A conviction shall not preclude the imposition of
the assessment of a default fee and/or other fees as set forth below.



         (b)   In addition to any civil sanction imposed, the
municipal court shall assess a default fee of not less than $75 for a failure
to pay any civil sanction imposed by the court.



         (c)   A judge or hearing officer may waive all or part
of the default fee if the payment of the fee would cause a financial hardship
to the defendant.



         (d)   If the court refers any delinquent fines, fees,
sanctions, penalties or restitution for collection, any collection or
attorney costs are recoverable from the defendant and may be added to any
balance due from the defendant to the court.



         (e)   The imposition of a penalty does not prevent
revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise.



         (f)   Violations of §§ 72.20 through 72.39 or code
that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other
equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive or
equitable relief.



(Ord. 149, passed 1-14-1998; Ord. 189, passed 8-11-2004; Am. Ord. 346, passed
12-9-2015)



CHAPTER 73:  OFF-ROAD VEHICLE REGULATIONS



Section



   73.01   Purpose



   73.02   Definitions



   73.03   Violations



 



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure and promote the safety and
welfare of the residents and visitors of the city who whish to drive or ride
off-road vehicles, four-wheel drive vehicles and any other vehicle on
undeveloped land within this city’s limits.



(Ord. 223, passed 2-23-2005)



§ 73.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVER.  A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   FOUR-WHEEL DRIVE VEHICLE.  A device in, on or by which a person or
property is or may be transported and is equipped with a drive system in
which mechanical power is transmitted from the drive shaft to all four wheels.



   OFF-ROAD DRIVING.  Driving that takes place off paved or public roads
or in rugged terrain for the purpose of recreation or otherwise and that
usually causes excessive noise, dust or other nuisances.



   OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is designed
primarily for recreational non-highway all-terrain travel and that is not
operated on a public highway. This includes vehicles usually known as sand
rails, dune buggies, modified golf carts, go-karts, quads, three-wheelers,
dirt bikes and other factory and homemade self-propelled vehicles. OFF-ROAD
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE does not mean a motor vehicle used for
construction, building trade, mining or agricultural purposes.



   OPERATOR.  A person who drives a motor vehicle on a highway, who is in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle on a highway or who is exercising
control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district if the property on the highway for
a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way if a part of the way is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.



   VEHICLE.  A device in, on or by which a person or property is or may
be transported or drawn on a public highway, excluding devices moved by human
power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.



(Ord. 223, passed 2-23-2005)



§ 73.03  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No off-road vehicle shall be operated or allowed to be
operated on any street or highway within the city limits.



   (B)   No off-road vehicle, four wheel drive vehicle or any other
vehicle shall be driven in the manner defined in § 73.02, within 500 feet of
a residence district.



   (C)   No person under the age of 18 shall drive an off-road vehicle
unless he or she is wearing a protective helmet in an appropriate manner;
protective glasses or goggles or a transparent face shield as described in
A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 9.



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in division (C) of this section are incorrect.
Provisions addressing head gear are set forth at A.R.S. § 28-964.



   (D)   All vehicles other than quads, three wheelers, dirt bikes and
other motorcycles, shall be properly equipped with seatbelts and shall be
worn by persons under the age of 18 while the vehicle is operated in the
manner defined in § 73.02 of this chapter.



   (E)   No person under the age of 18 shall ride as a passenger of an
off-road vehicle without wearing the safety equipment as described in
divisions (C) and (D) above of this section.



   (F)   No parent, legal guardian or any other adult shall allow any
person under 18 to drive an off-road vehicle in violation of divisions (C),
(D) or (E) above of this section.



   (G)   No person shall drive any vehicle off-road as defined in §
73.02 of this chapter, with reckless disregard for the safety of persons or
property as described in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 6.



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in division (G) of this section are no longer
applicable. Provisions addressing reckless driving are set forth at A.R.S. §
28-693.



(Ord. 223, passed 2-23-2005)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any section of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties described in § 10.99 of the City Code.



(Ord. 223, passed 2-23-2005)



CHAPTER 74:  TOWING



Section



   74.01   Definition



   74.02   Non-consensual towing from private property; notice of
violation from property owners



   74.03   Allowable fees for permitted towing companies; release of
vehicles



   74.04   Private towing/storage facility business practices



 



   74.99   Penalty



§ 74.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PRIVATE TOWING AND RECOVERY SERVICE.  Any person who commercially
offers services to tow, transport or impound motor vehicles from private
property without the prior permission of the owner or operator of the vehicle
by means or use of a truck or other vehicle designed for or adapted to that
purpose.



(Ord. 202, passed 12-23-2003)



§ 74.02  NON-CONSENSUAL TOWING FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY; NOTICE OF VIOLATION
FROM PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   The owner or agent of the owner of the private property shall
be deemed to have given consent to unrestricted parking by the general public
in any parking area of the private property unless the parking area is posted
with signs no smaller than 15 inches by 30 inches with letters at least one
inch in height, readable from any point within the parking area and at each
entrance, in both English and Spanish. The signs shall contain, at a minimum,
the following:



      (1)   Restrictions on parking;



      (2)   Disposition of vehicles found in violation of the
parking restrictions;



      (3)   Maximum cost to the violator, including storage fees and
any other charges that could result from the disposition of a vehicle parked
in violation of parking restrictions; and



      (4)   Telephone numbers and addresses where the violator can
locate the violator’s vehicle.



   (B)   It is unlawful for a private towing and recovery service to
tow or transport a motor vehicle from private property without the permission
of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle unless the private towing and
recovery service receives a request from a law enforcement agency or the
express written permission from the owner or the agent of the owner of the
property that has complied with the requirements of this division (B). The
owner or owner’s agent shall either sign each towing order or authorize the
tow by a written contract which is valid for a specific length of time and
has filed the contract at the City Police Department. The private towing and
recovery service may not act as the agent of the owner.



   (C)   This chapter shall apply only to services performed while
parties are actually engaged in the activities of a private towing and
recovery service.



   (D)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to abandoned or
junk vehicles disposed of pursuant to A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 11.



(Ord. 202, passed 12-23-2003)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.03  ALLOWABLE FEES FOR PERMITTED TOWING COMPANIES; RELEASE OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No private towing and recovery service shall hold or attempt
to hold any vehicle towed from any location within the city without the
consent of the owner or operator thereof as security for accrued towing and
storage charges. Any such vehicle shall be immediately released, regardless
of impound location, to the owner or operator thereof upon the production of
proof of ownership or agency, as hereinafter defined.



   (B)   For the purposes of division (A), proof of ownership or agency
shall be deemed proven should any one or more of the following obtain:



      (1)   The claimant of the vehicle is in possession of a key or
keys which operate the door locks or ignition switch of the vehicle;



      (2)   The claimant of the vehicle displays a driver’s
license, whether current or not, issued by any state or other sovereign
empowered to issue a license, the license indicating the same last name as
that in which the vehicle is registered;



      (3)   The claimant displays any piece of photographic
identification showing the claimant’s last name to be the same as that in
which the vehicle is registered; and/or



      (4)   The claimant displays a vehicle registration, whether
current or not, to the impounded vehicle.



   (C)   A private towing and recovery service may require a claimant
to provide a current address to assist private towing and recovery
service’s billing and collection process. No private towing and recovery
service may require as a condition precedent to the release of any vehicle
documentation or proof in excess of, or different than that described in
division (B) above of this section.



   (D)   A private towing and recovery service may require any claimant
to sign a receipt for the vehicle claimed; however, the receipt shall contain
no language other than the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the claimant;



      (2)   The date and time at which the vehicle was claimed;



      (3)   A description, including the license number, of the
claimed vehicle; and



      (4)   A statement of the unpaid balance, if any.



   (E)   Any private towing and recovery service that requires the
claimant of a vehicle to execute a receipt shall provide claimant with a copy
of the receipt, regardless of whether or not the receipt has been executed by
that claimant.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, no private
towing and recovery service shall release any vehicle after having been
advised by any law enforcement agency that the vehicle has been reported as
stolen.



   (G)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions herein, no private
towing and recovery service shall tow any vehicle which has displayed a valid
placard or license plate showing the international symbol of access for
disabled persons, as described in A.R.S. § 28-884, or any successor thereto.



   (H)   (1)   Private towing and recovery services permitted by the
city may charge for non-consensual towing and recovery services only those
amounts authorized in the most recent tariff approved by the city. This shall
include all no-preference and impounded vehicle calls originated through the
City Police Department or other authorized city agency.



      (2)   A private towing and recovery service shall be deemed
permitted by the city if it has a current city business license.



         (a)   The tariff shall be approved and enacted by
resolution of the City Council and shall be made available by the City
Administrator to all towing and recovery companies operating within city
limits.



         (b)   The maximum fees shall be as set by City Council
from time to time for towing and as set by City Council from time to time per
24-hour day for storage. The 24-hour period is to begin upon the towing of
the vehicle. As an example, for illustrative purposes only, if a vehicle is
towed on a Wednesday at 1:30 p.m., the maximum charge for storage shall be
limited as set by City Council from time to time until 1:30 p.m. on Thursday.
The fees may be changed by subsequent resolution of the City Council.



   (I)   No private towing and recovery service or its representatives
shall charge more than the established tariff for non-consensual towing and
recovery or no-preference towing originated by the City Police Department.



(Ord. 202, passed 12-23-2003; Ord. 273, passed 3-11-2009)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.04  PRIVATE TOWING/STORAGE FACILITY BUSINESS PRACTICES.



   (A)   For the purpose of inspecting records, the business hours of
the owner’s place of business shall be 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excluding
weekends and holidays.



   (B)   The operator shall post a clearly visible sign at the place of
business and the storage facility bearing the following:



      (1)   The trade name of the company;



      (2)   The telephone number of the company; and



      (3)   A listing of the services charges and storage rates:



         (a)   All billing invoices shall be consecutively
numbered and shall be of a type specified by the City Administrator, and
shall contain all information required by state law;



         (b)   A copy of the invoice shall be filed by invoice
number at the business location and a copy of any voided invoices shall be
retained;



         (c)   The address of the towing service listed on the
initial application shall be the location where its business records are
retained. The application shall also list the location of all storage areas
for vehicle inspection and retrieval;



         (d)   The owner of a storage facility is required to
maintain a suitable place of business within the city to transact business
and accommodate the public. It shall be staffed from at least 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except holidays, throughout the year. The
storage facility is subject to inspection by the Chief of Police or his or
her designee; and



         (e)   The private towing and recovery service must make
business records and facilities available for inspection upon request by law
enforcement officers.



(Ord. 202, passed 12-23-2003)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any section of this chapter is guilty of a class
2 misdemeanor.



(Ord. 202, passed 12-23-2003)



CHAPTER 75:  BICYCLES



Section



   75.01   Requirement for helmet use



 



   75.99   Penalty



§ 75.01  REQUIREMENT FOR HELMET USE.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall ride a bicycle or be a
passenger on a bicycle, ride in a restraining seat attached to a bicycle, or
ride in a trailer towed by a bicycle unless that person is wearing a properly
fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the current standards of the
American National Standards Institution for protective headgear.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or lease any
bicycle to or for the use of a person under the age of 18 years unless;



      (1)   The person is in possession of a protective helmet
meeting the standards set out above in division (A) of this section at the
time of the rental or lease; or



      (2)   The rental or lease includes protective bicycle helmet
meeting the standards set out above in division (A) above of this section and
the person agrees to wear the helmet at all times while operating or riding
as a passenger on the bicycle.



   (C)   A person regularly engaged in the business of selling bicycles
shall provide any purchaser of a bicycle with a written explanation, either
on the receipt of sale or on a separate form indicating receipt of a written
explanation of the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above of this section.



(Ord. 259, passed 1-23-2008)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person in violation of § 75.01 shall be found guilty of a
civil infraction and be required to pay a minimum fine of $50, which cannot
be suspended except pursuant to division (B) below of this section.



   (B)   The penalty provided in this section for a violation of §
75.01 may be waived if any offender presents suitable proof that an approved
helmet has been purchased or otherwise obtained since the time of the
violation and that the minor uses or intends to use a helmet whenever
required to do so by this section.



(Ord. 259, passed 1-23-2008)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      91.   NUISANCES



      92.   MINORS



      93.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN MOTOR VEHICLES



      94.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      95.   ANIMALS



      96.   DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING



CHAPTER 90:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   90.01   Interference



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  INTERFERENCE.



   It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner, manager or his or
her authorized representative, to interfere individually or collectively with
free enjoyment of property by the owners thereof; or interfere with the
conduct of any lawful business by obstructing entrance to a business or by
obstructing free passage of persons or merchandise or commodities within a
place of business or by obstructing service rendered by the business to its
customers.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-3)  (Ord. 15, passed 2-11-1981)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Upon conviction for violation of § 90.01 contained within this
chapter, the sentence to be imposed shall be a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.



(Ord. 15, passed 2-11-1981)



CHAPTER 91:  NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Burning



Removal of Litter



   91.15   Definitions



   91.16   Litter on private property



   91.17   Owner to maintain premises



   91.18   Procedure to compel removal of litter



   91.19   Notice to remove



   91.20   Service of notice



   91.21   Appeal to Council



   91.22   Removal by city



   91.23   Lien for removal



   91.24   Placement of debris



Graffiti



   91.35   Purpose and intent



   91.36   Definitions



   91.37   Possession of graffiti implements prohibited



   91.38   Limiting access to graffiti implements



   91.39   Storage and display of graffiti implements



   91.40   Graffiti prohibition and removal



Portable Toilets



   91.50   Definitions



   91.51   [Reserved]



   91.52   [Reserved]



   91.53   [Reserved]



   91.54   [Reserved]



   91.55   Prohibition



   91.56   Exception, authorized job sites



   91.57   Exception, agricultural worker transportation



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  BURNING.



   It is unlawful for any person to start or maintain any open fire for
the purpose of burning trash or rubbish in any of the streets, alleys or
vacant lots in the city, or to start or maintain any fire in the yards or
enclosures surrounding any dwelling house or business property situated
therein.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-2)  (Ord. 15, passed 2-11-1981)  Penalty, see § 91.99



REMOVAL OF LITTER



§ 91.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LITTER.  Any rubbish, trash, weeds, filth and debris which shall
constitute a hazard to public health and safety and shall include all
putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes including garbage, trash, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and
industrial waste; any deposit, accumulation, pile or heap of brush, grass
debris, weeds, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish or other unsightly or
unsanitary matter of any kind whatsoever; and any growth of weeds, brush,
grass or other vegetable growth to a height of over six inches.



   PRIVATE PREMISES.  Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibules
belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other structures.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-1)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)



§ 91.16  LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied
private property within the city whether owned by the person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public
place.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-2)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.17  OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.



   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-3)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.18  PROCEDURE TO COMPEL REMOVAL OF LITTER.



   The Manager shall enforce the provisions of §§ 91.16 and 91.17 hereby
prosecuting violators of the section in the Magistrate’s Court pursuant to
the criminal provisions of this Code. If the prosecution fails to secure
compliance with the provisions of the sections or in the event of inability
to prosecute violators by reason of failure to secure jurisdiction over their
persons, the Manager shall compel the removal of litter by the procedure
outlined in §§ 91.19 through 91.23 hereof.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-4)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)



§ 91.19  NOTICE TO REMOVE.



   To compel the removal of litter through the provisions of this section
and of §§ 91.20, 91.22 and 91.23 hereof, if a person owning or controlling
any property fails, neglects or refuses to remove or properly dispose of
litter located on property owned or controlled by the person, he or she shall
be given written notice by the Manager to remove all litter from the property
within 30 days from the date the notice was received by him or her, and prior
to the date of compliance on the notice. The notice shall be received not
less than 30 days before the date set thereon for compliance, and shall
contain an estimate of the cost of removal by the city a statement that
unless the person owning or controlling the property complies therewith
within 30 days from the date the written notice is received that the city
will, at the expense of the person owning or controlling the property,
perform the necessary work at a cost not to exceed the estimate given in the
notice, and that the person may appeal in writing to the Council within 30
days from the date the notice is received by him or her and prior to the date
of compliance.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-5)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.20  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   Notice shall be personally served on the owner person controlling the
property, by a police officer of the city in the manner provided in Rule 4(d)
of the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, or mailed to the owner or person
controlling the property at his or her last known address by certified or
registered mail, or the address to which the tax bill for the property was
last mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, a duplicate notice
shall also be sent to him or her by certified or registered mail at his or
her last known address.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-6)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.21  APPEAL TO COUNCIL.



   Prior to the date set for compliance on the notice, the owner or person
controlling the property may appeal in writing to the Council from the demand
of the Manager. The Council shall, at its next regular meeting after
receiving the appeal, hear and determine the same and the decision of the
Council shall be final. The Council may either affirm or reverse the decision
of the Manager or modify the scope of the work as required in the notice.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-7)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)



§ 91.22  REMOVAL BY CITY.



   When any person to whom notice, as aforesaid, has been given and on or
before the date of compliance on the notice, or within further time as may
have been granted by the Council on appeal, fails, neglects or refuses to
move from the property any or all litter, the Manager is authorized and
directed to cause same to be removed and disposed of at the expense of the
owner or person controlling the property. Upon completion of the work, the
Manager shall prepare a verified statement of account of the actual costs of
the removal or abatement, the date the work was completed and the street
address and the legal description of the property on which the work was done,
including 10% for additional inspection and other incidental costs in
connection therewith, and shall serve a duplicate copy of the verified
statement upon the person owning or controlling the property in the manner
prescribed in § 91.20 hereof. The owner or person controlling the property
shall have 30 days from the date of service upon him or her to appeal in
writing to the Council from the amount of assessment as contained in the
verified statement. If an appeal is not filed with the Manager within the
30-day period, then the amount of the assessment as determined by the Manager
shall become final and binding. If an appeal is taken, the Council shall, at
its next regular meeting, hear and determine the appeal and may affirm the
amount of the assessment, modify the amount thereof, or determine that no
assessment at all shall be made. The decision of the Council shall be final
and binding on all persons.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-8)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.23  LIEN FOR REMOVAL.



   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an
appeal is taken and the Council has affirmed or modified the amount of the
assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder and from the date of its
recording, shall be a lien on the lot or track of land until paid. Liens
shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior
recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to
satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of this section shall be made
upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The city shall have the right
to bring an action to enforce the lien in the superior court at any time
after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by the
action shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment shall be prima
facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein, and in the
regularity of all proceeding prior to the recording thereof. A prior
assessment for the purpose provided in this section shall not be a bar to a
subsequent assessment or assessments for the purposes, and any number of
liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-9)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.24  PLACEMENT OF DEBRIS.



   It is unlawful for any person to place any rubbish, trash, filth or
debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of
the person. In addition to any fine which my be imposed for violation of any
provision of this section, the person shall be liable for all costs which may
be assessed pursuant to this subchapter for the removal of rubbish, trash,
filth or debris.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-10)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-10-1980)  Penalty, see § 91.99



GRAFFITI



§ 91.35  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a program for
abatement of graffiti from public and private property to reduce blight and
deterioration within the city, protect public safety and to expedite removal
of graffiti from structures on both public and private property.



   (B)   The City Council finds and determines as follows:



      (1)   The increase of graffiti, on both public and private
property, is creating a condition within the city which results in blight and
deterioration of property values and of the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property for adjacent and surrounding residents and owners and contributes to
the overall detriment of the city;



      (2)   Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to
public safety which must be abated to alleviate the detrimental impact of the
graffiti on the city, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti; and



      (3)   Certain categories of graffiti which incite violence,
are especially harmful and must be removed as quickly as possible to avoid or
minimize harm to persons and the whole community.



(Ord. 220, passed 1-26-2005)



§ 91.36  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER.  Any aerosol container which is adapted or
made for the purpose of spraying paint.



   BROAD TIP MARKER.  Any marker or similar implement which has a writing
surface which is one-half of an inch or greater and containing anything other
than a solution which can be removed with water after the solution dries.



   GRAFFITI.  A drawing or inscribing a message, slogan, sign or symbol
or mark of any type that is made on any public or private building, structure
or surface, and that is made without permission of the owner.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.  An aerosol paint container, broad tip marker,
paint stick, graffiti stick or bleeder.



   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.  Any organization which has registered or
filed as a nonprofit corporation or organization with a state or federal
agency.



   PAINT STICK, GRAFFITI STICK or BLEEDER.  An implement containing
paint, wax, epoxy or other similar substance.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  An owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager,
licensee or other person having the right to control the property.



(Ord. 220, passed 1-26-2005)



§ 91.37  POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any graffiti implement with
the intent to use the implement for the purpose of committing criminal damage.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years
of age to possess a graffiti implement unless:



      (1)   The person is under the direct supervision of a parent,
legal guardian or teacher; or



      (2)   The person is within the scope and course of the
person’s employment or involvement with an activity sanctioned by a school,
church or nonprofit organization.



Ord. 220, passed 1-26-2005)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.38  LIMITING ACCESS TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS.



   (A)   The sale, purchase, manufacture, possession, exchange or use
of any graffiti implement, except as provided by this subchapter, is unlawful.



   (B)   No person other than a parent or legal guardian shall sell,
exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be
exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to
any person under the age of 18 years. For sales of graffiti implements to
persons 18 years or older, the sales must only be to persons who have
provided identification and proof of compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter



   (C)   Every merchant shall maintain a record of every sale,
exchange, or transfer of every graffiti implement. The record shall include
the following information:



      (1)   Name, address, and age of the person or persons
purchasing or otherwise taking possession of the graffiti implement;



      (2)   Driver's license number or number of other record of
photo identification, such as a passport card number, identifying the person
or persons purchasing or otherwise taking possession of the graffiti
implement; and



      (3)   Date of purchase and a description of the type, brand,
quantity, and color of the graffiti implement.



   (D)   Records of sale as required by division (C) above shall be
maintained for a period of three years from date of sale. The records along
with records of purchase and delivery of graffiti implements to the merchant
for purposes of resale shall be made available for inspection by the city
upon request.



   (E)   Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent demanded
and was shown government issued identification bearing a photograph and birth
date of the person or persons purchasing or otherwise taking possession of
the graffiti implement and reasonably acted upon the identification in a
transaction or sale shall be a defense to any prosecution under this section.



   (F)   This section does not apply to the transfer of graffiti
implements from parent to child, guardian to ward, employer to employee,
teacher to student or in any other similar relationship when the transfer is
for a lawful purpose.



   (G)   A violation of this section is a class one misdemeanor
punishable pursuant to the City Code. A first offense shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $500. A second offense within any 24-month period shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000. A third and subsequent offense
within any 24-month period shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,500.



(Ord. 220, passed 1-26-2005; Ord. 287, passed 9-8-2010)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.39  STORAGE AND DISPLAY OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS.



   (A)   No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a business,
where aerosol paint containers or broad tip markers are sold, nor any person
who sells or offers for sale aerosol paint containers or broad-tipped
markers, shall store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, the
aerosol spray paint containers and broad tip markers in an unlocked area that
is accessible to the public without employee assistance in the regular course
of business pending legal sale or other disposition. Storage in a locked
cabinet or display case shall be considered compliant with these requirements.



   (B)   Nothing herein shall preclude the storage or display of
aerosol paint containers and broad tip markers in an area viewable by the
public so long as the items are not accessible to the public without employee
assistance.



(Ord. 220, passed 1-26-2005; Ord. 287, passed 9-8-2010)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.40  GRAFFITI PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   Graffiti prohibited.  All sidewalks, walls, buildings,
fences, signs and other structures or surfaces shall be kept free from
graffiti when the graffiti is visible from the street, right-of-way or other
public or private property.



   (B)   Notice of violation.  If it is determined by the city that
graffiti exists on property in violation of this subchapter, the city may, in
writing, notify the responsible party with a notice of violation. The notice
may be served by certified mail, personal service or by posting the subject
property and publishing the notice in the official city newspaper.



   (C)   Contents of notice of violation.  The notice of violation
shall identify the property in violation, shall generally describe the
location of the graffiti, and shall direct that the graffiti be abated within
seven calendar days of receipt of the notice. The notice shall state that in
the event the responsible party fails to abate the graffiti within the time
period specified in the notice of violation, the city may abate the graffiti
and bill the responsible party for the costs. The notice shall state that the
responsible party may appeal the notice by filing a written notice of appeal
with the City Manager before the time period for abating the graffiti
expires. The receipt date of the notice of violation shall be the date
received if delivered in person or sent by certified mail, or the date of
first publication, if the alternate method of service is used.



   (D)   City’s authority to abate.  If the responsible party fails
to abate the graffiti as required by the notice of violation, the city may
proceed to abate the graffiti and bill the responsible party for the costs
thereof. The city or its authorized private contractor is expressly
authorized to enter private property and abate graffiti thereon in accordance
with this section. The City Police Department shall assist in the enforcement
of this section.



(Ord. 220, passed 1-26-2005)  Penalty, see § 91.99



PORTABLE TOILETS



§ 91.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of the provisions regulating portable toilets the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The same as Building Official as defined in the San
Luis City Code zoning regulations at § 152.013.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. All the zoning districts not
designated as residential under the San Luis City Code zoning regulations at
§ 152.061.



   PORTABLE TOILET. A portable enclosure containing a self-contained
toilet.



   TRANSPORTATION FOR AGRICULTURAL WORKERS. Any means of collective
transportation for agricultural workers as directed by an agricultural
employer, an agricultural labor contractor, or similar entity. This includes
but not limited to buses and vans.



(Ord. 343, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 91.51  [RESERVED].



§ 91.52  [RESERVED].



§ 91.53  [RESERVED].



§ 91.54  [RESERVED].



§ 91.55  PROHIBITION.



   Portable toilets shall not be parked, stored or allowed to remain
within the city limits of the city, except as provided in §§ 91.56 and
91.57.



(Ord. 137, passed 8-28-1996; Am. Ord. 343, passed 11-10-2015)  Penalty, see
§ 91.99



§ 91.56  EXCEPTION, AUTHORIZED JOB SITES.



   Portable toilets shall be allowed at job sites if authorization is
first obtained from the City Building Official. Authorized toilets must be
cleaned and serviced daily, must be in good working condition, must be
without any leaks, must be without seepage and must be left at the authorized
job site until a certificate of occupancy is obtained or work ends at the job
site.



(Ord. 137, passed 8-28-1996; Am. Ord. 343, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 91.57  EXCEPTION, AGRICULTURAL WORKER TRANSPORTATION.



   (A)   Portable toilets shall be allowed to be hitched to
transportation for agricultural workers in any non-residential zoning
district of the city if all of the following requirements are met:



      (1)   Portable toilets must be cleaned and serviced daily or
more often as necessary to maintain sanitation and odor control;



      (2)   Portable toilets must be in good working condition, must
be without any leaks and must be without seepage;



      (3)   Portable toilets hitched to transportation for
agricultural workers shall not be left parked in unfenced areas after
transportation for agricultural workers is no longer in the service of
recruitment or transportation of agricultural workers for the work-day; and



      (4)   The fenced area where the hitched portable toilets are
parked must be in a non-residential zoning district and must be approved by
the Building Official.



   (B)   Portable toilets which are used by agricultural worker
transportation may be stored as follows:



      (1)   For less than 12 months in a year;



      (2)   In non-residential zoning districts in the city;



      (3)   In a fenced area approved by the Building Official;



      (4)   The portable toilets must be in good condition and be
maintained clean and sanitary; and



      (5)   While the portable toilets are stored, they are not to
be used nor accessible for use.



(Ord. 343, passed 11-10-2015)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Burning.  Upon conviction for violation of § 91.01, the
sentence to be imposed shall be a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or both.



   (C)   Graffiti.



      (1)   Possession of graffiti implements prohibited. 
Violation of § 91.37 by an adult is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a
term of not less than 48 hours in jail and not less than 80 hours of
community service. Violation of this section by a juvenile is a class 1
misdemeanor, punishable as provided for in A.R.S. Title 8.



      (2)   Limiting access to graffiti implements.  A violation of
§ 91.38 is a civil offense punishable pursuant to the provisions of § 10.99
of the City Code. A first offense shall be subject to a fine of $100 and 20
hours of community service. A second offense within any 24-month period shall
be subject to a fine of $300 and 40 hours of community service. A third and
subsequent offense within any 24-month period shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $500 and 60 hours of community service.



      (3)   Storage and display of graffiti implements.  A
violation of § 91.39 is a class 1 misdemeanor punishable pursuant to the
provisions of the City Code. A first offense shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $500. A second offense within any 24-month period shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $1,000. A third and subsequent offense
within any 24-month period shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,500.



      (4)   Judge’s action.  A judge shall not suspend any part
or all of the imposition of any jail time, community service or fine required
by this penalty.



   (D)   Portable toilet.  Violations of §§ 91.55  through 91.57
shall be a class 1 misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the applicable
sections of the Arizona Revised Statutes.



(Ord. 15, passed 2-11-1981; Ord. 137, passed 8-28-1996; Ord. 220, passed
1-26-2005; Ord. 287, passed 9-8-2010; Am. Ord. 343, passed 11-10-2015)



CHAPTER 92:  MINORS



Section



Curfew



   92.01   Prohibition



   92.02   Parent or guardian responsibility



   92.03   Exception



Spirituous Liquor Regulations Involving Persons Under the Legal Drinking Age



   92.15   Purpose



   92.16   Definitions



   92.17   Violations



   92.18   Consent



   92.19   Exceptions



 



   92.99   Penalty



CURFEW



§ 92.01  PROHIBITION.



   It is unlawful for a minor person under the age of 18 years to be
permitted, caused or allowed to be upon the public streets or in any public
place in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-1)  (Ord. 8, passed 5-22-1980)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.02  PARENT OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY.



   It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having legal care
or custody of a minor to allow or permit the minor to go or be in or upon any
of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city within the
times provided in § 92.01.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-1)  (Ord. 8, passed 5-22-1980)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  EXCEPTION.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply when the minors are
accompanied by a parent or guardian having care or custody of the minor.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-1)  (Ord. 8, passed 5-22-1980)



SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR REGULATIONS INVOLVING PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL DRINKING AGE



§ 92.15  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure the safety and welfare of
the residents and visitors of the city by promoting a spiritous liquor-free
environment for persons under the legal drinking age.



(Ord. 166, passed 5-10-2000)



§ 92.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LEGAL DRINKING AGE.  The age of 21 years or older.



   OFF-SALE RETAILER.  Any person operating a bona fide business
regularly established retail liquor store selling alcoholic beverages and any
established retail store selling commodities other than alcoholic beverages
and engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the original unbroken
package, to be taken away from the premise of the retailer and to be consumed
off the premise.



   ON-SALE RETAILER.  Any person operating an establishment where
alcoholic beverages are sold in the original container for consumption on or
off the premises or in individual portions for consumption on the premises.



   PERSON.  Includes a partnership, limited liability company,
association, company or corporation, as well as a natural person.



   POSSESS A SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR.  Actual or in constructive control,
custody or detention of the spirituous liquor by a person under the legal
drinking age. It also includes a person under the legal drinking age having
spirituous liquor in one’s body, or a concentration thereof in one’s
breath, urine, blood or other bodily substance, regardless of the geographic
location the spirituous liquor was ingested.



   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR.  Alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal,
bacanora, gin, wine, porter ale, beer, any malt liquor or malt beverage,
absinthe, a compound or mixture of any of them or of any of them with any
vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing alcohol,
any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which
produces intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits and beverages
containing more than one-half of 1% of alcoholic volume.



(Ord. 166, passed 5-10-2000)



§ 92.17  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person under the legal drinking age shall consume or be
under the influence of a spirituous liquor.



   (B)   No person shall sell, furnish, dispose of, or give, or cause
to be sold, furnished, disposed of or given to a person under the legal
drinking age, a spirituous liquor.



   (C)   No person under the legal drinking age shall drive or be in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle while there is any spirituous
liquor in the person’s body.



   (D)   No person under the legal drinking age shall have any
spirituous liquor in the person’s body.



   (E)   No person may refuse to submit to a test or tests of the
person’s blood, breath, urine or other substance for the purpose of
determining if there is spirituous liquor in the person’s body or
concentration thereof, if arrested for any acts alleged to have been
committed in violation of a law of the state or an ordinance of the city,
involving the regulation of a spirituous liquor. The test or tests chosen by
the law enforcement officer shall be administered at the direction of a law
enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe that the person was:



      (1)   Under the legal drinking age and has or possesses
spirituous liquor in the person’s body; or



      (2)   Has violated a law of the state or an ordinance of the
city, involving the regulation of spirituous liquor.



(Ord. 166, passed 5-10-2000)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.18  CONSENT.



   A person under the legal drinking age or operating a motor vehicle
gives consent to a test or tests of the person’s blood, breath, urine or
other bodily substance for the purpose of determining if there is spirituous
liquor in the person’s body or to determine spirituous liquor concentration.



(Ord. 166, passed 5-10-2000)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.19  EXCEPTIONS.



   No part of this subchapter shall apply to any person in the following
situations:



   (A)   A person who is at least 16 years of age and is employed by an
off-sale retailer, to check out, if supervised by a person on the premises
who is at least 19 years of age, package or carry merchandise, including
spirituous liquor in unbroken packages, for the convenience of the customer
of the employer, if the employer sells primarily merchandise other than
spirituous liquor;



   (B)   A person who is at least 19 years of age to sell and be in
possession of a spirituous liquor in unbroken packages who is employed by an
off-sale retailer;



   (C)   A person under the legal drinking age who is employed by an
on-sale retailer for the sole purpose of cleaning tables, removing dirty
dishes, keeping a ready supply of needed items and helps clean up the
premises; or



   (D)   A person who dispenses a spirituous liquor in the performance
of a religious service or ceremony or a person who receives or consumes a
spirituous liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony.



(Ord. 166, passed 5-10-2000)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Curfew.  Any person violating §§ 92.01 through 92.03 is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor as provided for
by the statutes or laws of the state.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-1)



   (B)   Spirituous liquor regulations involving persons under the
legal drinking age.



      (1)   Any person who violates any part of §§ 92.15 through
92.19 is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor unless another classification is
prescribed.



      (2)   Any person who violates § 92.17(A), (C) or (D) is
guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.



      (3)   Any person who violates § 92.17(E) who is charged with
violating A.R.S. § 28-1321, shall be punished as provided therein, and not
otherwise.



(Ord. 8, passed 5-22-1980; Ord. 166, passed 5-10-2000)



CHAPTER 93:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   93.01   Prohibition



   93.02   Open container



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  PROHIBITION.



   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage while in a motor vehicle
upon a street or highway within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-4)  (Ord. 15, passed 2-11-1981)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  OPEN CONTAINER.



   (A)   No person shall have in his or her possession on his or her
person while driving a motor vehicle upon a street or highway, within the
city limits, any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic
beverage which has been opened, or seal broken, or the contents of which have
been partially removed.



   (B)   No person shall have in his or her possession, while in a
motor vehicle upon a street or a highway, within the city limits, any bottle,
can or other receptacle, containing any alcoholic beverage which has been
opened, or seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.



   (C)   It is unlawful for the registered owner of any motor vehicle,
or the driver if the registered owner is not then present in the vehicle, to
keep in a motor vehicle, when the vehicle is upon a street or highway, within
the city limits, any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any
alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents
of which have been partially removed, unless the container is kept in the
truck of the vehicle, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally
occupied by the driver or passengers, if the vehicle is not equipped with a
trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be
within the area occupied by the driver and passengers.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-4)  (Ord. 15, passed 2-11-1981)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Upon conviction for violation of any section contained within this
chapter, the sentence to be imposed shall be a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.



(Ord. 15, passed 2-11-1981)



CHAPTER 94:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Closing of city parks



   94.02   Fees



   94.03   Glass containers prohibited




Alcoholic Beverages




   94.10   Definitions



   94.11   Alcoholic beverages prohibited



   94.12   Exceptions



   94.13   Alcohol permit



   94.14   Kegs prohibited except with special alcohol permit




Tobacco Products




   94.20   Designated areas for use of tobacco products at city parks



 



   94.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  CLOSING OF CITY PARKS.



   (A)   For the promotion and protection of the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare, of the citizens and residents of the city,
the City Council hereby adopts an ordinance to close Friendship Park, and
other city parks, as the aforementioned considerations may warrant and apply,
in order to provide for the safekeeping of Friendship Park and other city
parks.



   (B)   This section is hereby adopted in order to give full legal
force and effect to Ordinance 18, passed and adopted by the City Council on
September 23, 1981.



(Ord. 22, passed 2-10-1982)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Editor’s note:



   Ordinance 18 is codified in § 94.99.



§ 94.02  FEES.



   The City Council may establish by resolution or by order fees for the
use of city parks, fields, facilities, and for alcohol permits and special
alcohol permits.



(Ord. 378, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 94.03  GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a glass container in any
city park.



(Ord. 378, passed 1-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 94.99



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 94.10  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL OR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Beer, distilled spirits, spirituous
liquor and wine as those terms are defined in A.R.S. § 4-101.



   APPLICANT.  The person applying for an alcohol permit or special
alcohol permit.



   BEER.  As beer is defined in A.R.S. § 4-101.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Parks and Recreation of the city.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation for
the city.



   PERMITTEE.  The person issued an alcohol permit or alcohol permit with
a special alcohol permit.



   PLAYGROUND.  The outdoor areas within city parks where there is
playground equipment for children or where there are skate parks or any other
area clearly intended for children to play.



   PLAYING FIELD.  The outdoor areas within city parks set up to play any
turf games such as baseball, softball, soccer, futsal, and the like; and the
outdoor areas within city parks set up to play court games such as
basketball, tennis, and the like.



   WINE.  As wine is defined in A.R.S. §4-101 as it may be amended.



(Ord. 378, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 94.11  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, while in any city park or in any
city facility to commit the following acts except as permitted in this
chapter:



   (A)   Drink or have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage;
and/or



   (B)   Possess any container or receptacle containing any alcoholic
beverage opened, its seal broken or the contents of which have been partially
removed.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-5)  (Ord. 18, passed 9-23-1981; Ord. 53, passed
4-24-1985; Ord. 378, passed 1-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.12  EXCEPTIONS.



   The exceptions to prohibitions on alcohol in § 94.11 are as follows:



   (A)   Beer and wine are allowed in compliance with a valid alcohol
permit as regulated by this chapter.



   (B)   Beer and wine are allowed in compliance with a valid liquor
license issued by the State of Arizona.



(Ord. 53, passed 4-24-1985; Ord. 378, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 94.13  ALCOHOL PERMIT.



   An alcohol permit must be in writing and authorized by the Department.



   (A)   Application, conditions, denial, appeal, revocation of alcohol
permit.



      (1)   Application.



         (a)   With the alcohol permit application, the applicant
must either reserve a ramada in a city park or rent a facility from the
Department.



         (b)   The applicant must be at least 21 years of age as
demonstrated to the Department at the time of application by valid photo
identification or any other demonstration of age required by law.



         (c)   The applicant must pay the fees to reserve a
ramada or to rent a facility and the alcohol permit fees before the
Department will consider the alcohol permit application.



      (2)   Conditions. The Department may require security or make
other reasonable requirements as conditions on the alcohol permit depending
on the number of people anticipated at the event and the nature of the event.



      (3)   Denial. The Director may deny an alcohol permit to
applicants with demonstrated past non-compliance with city park or facility
rules or for other reasonable cause.



      (4)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the denial of an alcohol
permit may appeal the decision of the Director to the City Manager. The
applicant’s appeal must be in writing on a form provided by the Department.
The written appeal must be submitted to the City Clerk’s office within five
working days of the Director’s denial. The City Manager shall act upon the
appeal within five working days following receiving the appeal. The City
Manager’s decision is final and binding on both the applicant and the city.
The City Manager may delegate the duties in this subsection.



      (5)   Revocation. The Director or the City Manager may revoke
an alcohol permit if the Director or the City Manager determines that the
city park or facility is being used contrary to any representation made by
the permittee or to any conditions of the alcohol permit or special alcohol
permit; or the city park or facility is being used in violation of the law.
The Director’s or City Manager’s decision to revoke an alcohol permit is
final.



   (B)   Locations.



      (1)   Ramadas in city parks.



         (a)   An alcohol permit may issue for an event at a
ramada in a city park and an area surrounding the footprint of the ramada up
to 50 feet.



         (b)   Except, the 50 feet around a ramada shall not
include:



            1.   A sidewalk;



            2.   A street;



            3.   An area 50 feet from a playground;



            4.   A playing field and its spectator area.



      (2)   Designated facilities.



         (a)   The Department may issue an alcohol permit for
facilities designated by City Council.



         (b)   The Department may issue an alcohol permit to the
city at facilities City Council designates for city-hosted events.



         (c)   City Council shall designate facilities or remove
facilities from designation under this section by resolution or order.



         (d)   The Director shall have the discretion to deny an
alcohol permit for a facility if the particular event is unsuitable for the
facility. The Director shall have the discretion to close a designated
facility for maintenance, for repair or for public safety.



   (C)   Permittee responsibility. Once the alcohol permit issues, the
permittee shall be the person responsible for ensuring the permittee’s
event complies with the alcohol permit.



      (1)   Alcohol permits are valid for adults over 21 years of
age to consume beer and wine.



      (2)   Permittee must ensure that at permittee’s event there
is no possession or consumption of alcohol by people under 21 years of age,
no drunkenness, and no sale of alcohol.



      (3)   Alcohol permits are only valid for the date and time
period of the ramada reservation or of the facility rental.



      (4)   The alcohol permit must be in the possession of the
permittee at all times during the time reserved for the ramada or the rental
of the facility.



      (5)   The permittee must be present at the ramada or the
facility for the duration of the time reserved or rented.



      (6)   The permittee must show the alcohol permit to any peace
officer with jurisdiction if the peace officer requests to see it.



      (7)   For ramadas, glass bottles or other glass containers are
prohibited.



      (8)   Permittee shall be sure after the event that the ramada
and surroundings or the facility is clean and free of litter.



      (9)   Permittee shall follow any conditions on the
permittee’s alcohol permit.



      (10)   If the permittee has a special alcohol permit, the
permittee shall follow any conditions on that special alcohol permit.



   (D)   Department responsibility. In addition to processing
applications for alcohol permits and special alcohol permits in compliance
with this chapter, the Department shall provide a copy (either on paper or
electronically) of approved alcohol permits and special alcohol permits to
the San Luis Police Department. The Department and the San Luis Police
Department shall devise appropriate procedures for implementation of
effective communication between the two departments regarding these permits.



(Ord. 378, passed 1-24-2018)



§ 94.14  KEGS PROHIBITED EXCEPT WITH SPECIAL ALCOHOL PERMIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or bring
alcoholic beverages in kegs into a city park or city facility.



   (B)   Exception. A person may possess or bring a keg of beer in a
city park or city facility with a special alcohol permit issued by the
Department if the following regulations are met.



      (1)   Special alcohol permits shall only issue with a ramada
reservation or rental of a facility and an alcohol permit.



      (2)   The applicant must pay the fee to reserve a ramada or to
rent a facility, pay the alcohol permit fee and pay the special alcohol
permit fee before the Department will consider the special alcohol permit
application.



      (3)   A special alcohol permit shall be valid for beer, for no
more than two kegs of beer and the maximum keg size allowed is 15.5 gallons.
The applicant may request less than the maximum quantity of beer allowed.



   (C)   Conditions. The Department may require security or make other
reasonable requirements as conditions on the special alcohol permit depending
on the number of people anticipated at the event and the nature of the event.



   (D)   Revocation. A revocation of an alcohol permit is an automatic
revocation of a special alcohol permit.



(Ord. 378, passed 1-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 94.99



TOBACCO PRODUCTS



§ 94.20  DESIGNATED AREAS FOR USE  OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AT CITY PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to use tobacco products
at city parks other than in areas specifically designated for use of such
products. Areas in city parks where the use of tobacco products is allowed
shall be determined by staff and such areas will be indicated by the
placement of signs where the use of tobacco products shall be allowed.



(Ord. 341, passed 9-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Alcoholic beverages.  Upon conviction for violation of §§
94.11, 94.12, 94.13 or 94.14, the sentence to be imposed shall be a fine of
not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



   (C)   Tobacco products. A person who violates § 94.20 of this
chapter is responsible for a civil offense punishable under § 10.99. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 18, passed 9-23-1981; Ord. 53, passed 4-24-1985; Ord. 341, passed
9-9-2015; Ord. 378, passed 1-24-2018)



CHAPTER 95:  ANIMALS



Section



   95.01   Dogs at large



   95.02   Animals disturbing the peace



   95.03   Personal dog kennels



   95.04   Dangerous dog definitions



   95.05   Dangerous dog determination



   95.06   Disposition of dangerous dogs



   95.07   Keeping dangerous dog unlawful



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  DOGS AT LARGE.



   (A)   No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
maintaining a dog shall allow the dog to be at large.



   (B)   A dog is not at large:



      (1)   If restrained by a leash, rope, chain or other restraint
of sufficient strength to control the action of the dog;



      (2)   If the dog is confined in a suitable enclosure;



      (3)   If the dog is engaged in obedience training, so long as
the dog is actually enrolled in a dog obedience school approved by the city
enforcement agent;



      (4)   While the dog is being used for hunting purposes; and



      (5)   While the dog is being exhibited at an American Kennel
Club approved dog show.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AT LARGE.  A dog on or off the premises of the owner and not
under the control of the owner, or other person acting for the owner and the
dog is not confined in a suitable enclosure.



(Ord. 25, passed 7-14-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.02  ANIMALS DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city
any animal or fowl which excessively barks, howls, roars, crows, or makes
other noises by day or night and disturbs the peace of any person or family.



(Ord. 337, passed 5-27-2015)   



§ 95.03  PERSONAL DOG KENNELS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DOG. A member of the canis familiaris family over the age of four
months.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person delegated by the City Manager or his or
her designee who is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and the
regulations promulgated under this chapter.



   IMPOUND FACILITY. Any establishment authorized for the confinement,
maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs and other animals that come into
the custody of the Enforcement Officer in the performance of his or her
official duties.



   KENNEL. Either:



      (1)   Any premise in which seven to a maximum of 12 dogs of
four months of age or older are kept; or



      (2)   Any premise where the business of buying, selling,
breeding, grooming, training or boarding of dogs is conducted; does not
include veterinary hospitals or humane societies.



   SERVICE ANIMAL. As it is defined under the provisions of Title 28 Code
of Federal Regulations Chapter 1, Part 35, relating to nondiscrimination on
the basis of disability in state and local government services at 28 CFR
35.104. Any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for
the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical,
sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. Other species
of animals, whether wild or domestic, trained or untrained, are not service
animals for the purposes of this definition. The work or tasks performed by a
service animal must be directly related to the individual's disability.
Examples of work or tasks include, but are not limited to, assisting
individuals who are blind or have low vision with navigation and other tasks,
alerting individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to the presence of
people or sounds, providing non-violent protection or rescue work, pulling a
wheelchair, assisting an individual during a seizure, alerting individuals to
the presence of allergens, retrieving items such as medicine or the
telephone, providing physical support and assistance with balance and
stability to individuals with mobility disabilities, and helping persons with
psychiatric and neurological disabilities by preventing or interrupting
impulsive or destructive behaviors. The crime deterrent effects of an
animal's presence and the provision of emotional support, well-being,
comfort, or companionship do not constitute work or tasks for the purposes of
this definition.



   (B)   Interpretation. For purposes of this San Luis City Code on
personal kennels, headings and titles of sections and subsections are for
convenience of reference only, and shall in no way be of any weight in
interpretation of these provisions.



   (C)   Personal dog kennel permits.



      (1)   A permit for a personal dog kennel shall be required for
any person who owns, maintains or harbors seven to a maximum of 12 dogs on
property not zoned for kennels. The maximum allowed dogs shall be less than
12 dogs if in the particular case the requirements of personal dog kennel
permit cannot be met for that individual dog owner. For example, a person's
lot size may not be big enough for the enclosure requirements of the personal
dog kennel code.



      (2)   The enclosure shall meet the requirements of this
personal dog kennel code.



      (3)   Any person who owns, maintains or harbors six or fewer
dogs over four months of age is not required to obtain a personal dog kennel
permit.



   (D)   Circumstance personal dog kennel permits not required.



      (1)   Emergency. The permit provisions do not apply to
emergency situations where a person or nonprofit entity boards dogs, subject
to the following conditions:



         (a)   The person boarding dogs will submit a sworn and
notarized statement that they are caring for the dogs for a maximum of 30
calendar days per dog.



         (b)   This statement shall contain the name, address,
and phone number of the individual or organization who provided the dog or
dogs to the boarder.



         (c)   No more than two dogs will be permitted under this
emergency exception.



         (d)   The boarder will provide the Enforcement Officer
with the final disposition of the animal within the 30 calendar days for each
dog noted on the original statement, as well as the name and contact
information of the adopting party. Extensions of the time limit of 30 days
may be permitted at the discretion of the Enforcement Officer, but in no
event shall such extension exceed six months per animal.



         (e)   The goal of this emergency exception is to protect
the animals that are in foster care rather than to punish law abiding pet
owners.



      (2)   Service animals. Any SERVICE ANIMAL as defined in
division (A) above shall not be counted toward the six dogs allowed without a
personal kennel permit.



         (a)   The provisions of Title 28 Code of Federal
Regulations Chapter 1, Part 35, relating to nondiscrimination on the basis of
disability in state and local government services at 28 CFR 35.136(f) apply
to inquiries about service animals. The Enforcement Officer shall not ask
about the nature or extent of a person's disability, but may make two
inquiries to determine whether an animal qualifies as a service animal for
purposes of this section.



            i.   A public entity may ask if the animal is
required because of a disability; and



            ii.   What work or task the animal has been
trained to perform.



         (b)   Generally, the Enforcement Officer may not make
these inquiries about a service animal when it is readily apparent that an
animal is trained to do work or perform tasks for an individual with a
disability (for example, the dog is observed guiding an individual who is
blind or has low vision, pulling a person's wheelchair, or providing
assistance with stability or balance to an individual with an observable
mobility disability).



         (c)   The Enforcement Officer shall not require
documentation, such as proof that the animal has been certified, trained, or
licensed as a service animal.



   (E)   Duration of permits. Each personal dog kennel permit shall be
valid for 12  consecutive months and expire on the first anniversary of the
permit and shall become delinquent 30 calendar days from the date of
expiration. Each subsequent permit issued will be valid for a one-year period
and expire on the respective anniversary date. The fee is established by
resolution. A late fee shall be charged on all delinquent personal dog kennel
permits, as established by resolution. No personal dog kennel permit shall be
prorated or refunded nor shall the permit be transferable.



   (F)   Dogs to be vaccinated, licensed, and fixed. All dogs covered
by a personal dog kennel permit shall be vaccinated, licensed by Yuma County,
and spayed or neutered. A dog owner may apply for a waiver of the spay or
neuter requirement as long as they obtain a veterinarian's written opinion
that such surgery would endanger the safety of the dog, or a certification
from a veterinarian determining that the other dogs owned by the owner or
those maintained or harbored at the same address are spayed and/or neutered.
At the discretion of the Enforcement Officer and upon documented proof, the
spaying and neutering requirement shall not apply to dogs registered by the
American Kennel Club or by the Continental Kennel Club.



   (G)   Commercial Use of dogs prohibited. At no time shall dogs
covered under this section be used for trade, business, profit or gain. There
shall be no boarding or breeding of dogs covered by this permit. All dogs
shall be the exclusive property of the permittee.



   (H)   Sanitation and noise elimination. The permittee shall operate
the personal dog kennel in such a manner to eliminate excessive noises by day
or night which disturbs the peace of any person or family, to eliminate
offensive odors from the kennel and to maintain the kennel and grounds in a
sanitary condition.



   (I)   Fence. The property covered by this permit shall be surrounded
by a fence of sufficient height and strength to confine the dogs. Sufficient
height and strength will be determined by an Enforcement Officer based on the
dog being confined and the provisions and the provisions of this personal
kennel code.



   (J)   Violations. Any violations of this chapter shall be cause to
revoke any dog kennel permit. The permit may be revoked by the Chief of
Police after notice and hearing. The notice, hearing and appeal procedures
shall be handled in the same manner as similar provisions set forth in §
113.11 as nearly as practicable, except that for matters involving this
chapter, the Enforcement Officer shall assume the duties that the that the
Chief of Police or the City Zoning Administrator is responsible for in §
113.11 and the Chief of Police shall assume the duties that the City Manager
is responsible for in § 113.11.



   (K)   Excess of dogs. Any dogs over the allotted number allowed will
either be surrendered to the Enforcement Officer or to new homes found by the
owner within 36 hours after the discovery of the excess number of dogs by
Enforcement Officers. The holder of a personal kennel permit shall not be
bound by the same requirements governing a commercial dog kennel.



   (L)   Inspection. The Enforcement Officer shall, within 30 
calendar days before the annual renewal date for the personal kennel permit,
inspect the premises to confirm compliance with provisions of this chapter.
In no event shall a renewal be issued unless the inspection is made and all
non-compiiant matters are corrected before the annual renewal date.



   (M)   Kennel specifications. Enclosures for dogs must meet the
following minimum requirements:



      (1)   General requirements.



         (a)   Enclosures must be designed and constructed of
suitable materials so that they are structurally sound. The primary
enclosures must be kept in good repair.



         (b)   Enclosures must be constructed and maintained so
that they:



            i.   Have no sharp points or edges that could
injure the dogs;



            ii.   Protect the dogs from injury;



            iii.   Contain the dogs securely;



            iv.   Keep other animals from entering the
enclosure;



            v.   Enable the dogs to remain dry and clean;



            vi.   Provide shelter and protection from extreme
temperatures and weather conditions that may be uncomfortable or hazardous to
all the dogs;



            vii.   Provide sufficient shade to shelter all the
dogs housed in the primary enclosure at one time;



            viii.   Provide all the dogs with easy and
convenient access to clean food and water;



            ix.   Enable all surfaces in contact with the dogs
to be readily cleaned and sanitized in accordance or be replaceable when worn
or soiled;



            x.   Have floors that are constructed in a manner
that protects the dogs' feet and legs from injury, and that, if of mesh or
slatted construction, do not allow the dogs' feet to pass through any
openings in the floor; and



            xi.   Provide sufficient space to allow each dog
to turn about freely, to stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable, normal
position, and to walk in a normal manner.



      (2)   Space.



         (a)   Each dog housed in an enclosure (including weaned
puppies) must be provided a minimum amount of floor space, calculated as
follows: Find the mathematical square of the sum of the length of the dog in
inches (measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail) plus six
inches; then divide the product by 144. The calculation is: (length of dog in
inches + six) x (length of dog in inches + six) = required floor space in
square inches. Required floor space in inches/144 = required floor space in
square feet.



         (b)   Each female dog with nursing puppies must be
provided with an additional amount of floor space, based on her breed and
behavioral characteristics, and in accordance with generally accepted
husbandry practices as determined by a veterinarian. If the additional amount
of floor space for each nursing puppy is less than 5% of the minimum
requirement for the female dog, such housing must be approved by a
veterinarian.



         (c)   The interior height of a primary enclosure must be
at least six inches higher than the head of the tallest dog in the enclosure
when it is in a normal standing position provided that each dog must be able
to stand in a comfortable normal position.



      (3)   All dogs housed in the same enclosure must be
compatible, as determined by observation. Puppies under four months of age
may not be housed in the same primary enclosure with adult dogs, other than
with the natural mother or foster mother of the puppies. Dogs with a vicious
or aggressive disposition must be housed separately.



      (4)   Dogs that are part of a mobile or traveling show or act
may be kept, while the show or act is traveling from one temporary location
to another, in transport containers that comply with all requirements of
Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulation § 3.14. When the show or act is
not traveling, the dogs must be placed in enclosures that meet the minimum
requirements of this personal kennel code.



      (5)   Tethering of dogs is prohibited for use as an enclosure.



      (6)   Interpretations of Title 9 Code of Federal Regulations
§ 3.6 may be used as a guide to interpret the above Kennel Specifications of
this Personal Kennel Permit Code.



(Ord. 358, passed 10-12-2016)



§ 95.04  DANGEROUS DOG DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DANGEROUS DOG.  Any dog which is capable of inflicting death or
serious injury on a person or another animal and which:



      (1)   Has, without provocation, attacked or bitten a person
engaged in a lawful activity; or



      (2)   Has, while off the property of its owner and without
provocation, killed or seriously injured another animal; or



      (3)   Has exhibited a propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack, bite, scratch, or otherwise inflict or cause injury or threaten the
safety of persons or other animals without provocation; or



      (4)   Has a propensity to approach human beings, without
provocation, in a menacing or terrorizing manner so as to confine movement of
or instill fear in a reasonable person; or



      (5)   Has acted in a manner that causes or should cause its
owner to know that the dog is potentially dangerous; and



      (6)   Is declared dangerous after a hearing before a San Luis
City municipal judge.



      (7)   This definition does not apply to dogs utilized by law
enforcement.



   DOG.  Includes a dog of any age, both the male and female sex of the
Canis familiaris family.



(Ord. 380, passed 3-14-2018)



§ 95.05  DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Any person having reasonable grounds to believe a dog is
dangerous may petition the Municipal Court for a determination that the dog
is dangerous. A petition by an enforcement officer of the city shall be based
upon an investigation and a determination by the officer or other officers
that reasonable grounds exist to believe the dog to be dangerous.



   (B)   Any time after the petition is filed, the court may, if it
finds there are reasonable grounds to believe that the dog poses a risk of
injury to any person or is dangerous as defined in § 95.04, order that the
animal be impounded on such terms as the court deems necessary to protect
public safety.



   (C)   After notice to the owner or the person found in control of
the dog, the Municipal Court shall conduct a hearing. The hearing shall be
informal and open to the public. Hearings and appeals shall be conducted, as
nearly as practicable, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure in Civil
Traffic and Civil Boating Violations. Any owner or person having control of
the dog who fails to appear after notice may be deemed to have waived any
right to introduce evidence.



   (D)   A dangerous dog determination may be conducted with and as a
part of a criminal proceeding if dangerousness is alleged in the complaint.



   (E)   Any fee for filing a petition or fees for service of hearing
notices pursuant to this section may be deferred or waived by the court.



(Ord. 380, passed 3-14-2018)



§ 95.06  DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS DOGS.



   Upon determining a dog to be dangerous, the court shall enter such
orders as it deems necessary to protect the public. Any such orders shall be
at the expense of the owner. The court may order, but is not limited to, the
following:



   (A)   That the owner of the dangerous dog display in a prominent
place on the premises where the dog is kept a sign in three-inch letters,
both in English and Spanish, easily readable by the public, using the words
“Vicious Dog” and its equivalent in Spanish;



   (B)   That the owner obtain public liability insurance for a single
incident amount of at least $250,000 for bodily injury or death of any person
or for damage to property caused by the dangerous dog;



   (C)   That the dog at all times be securely confined indoors or in a
securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled;



   (D)   That the dog be microchipped or tattooed or both;



   (E)   That the dog be spayed or neutered;



   (F)   That the dog be destroyed.



(Ord. 380, passed 3-14-2018)



§ 95.07  KEEPING DANGEROUS DOG UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dangerous dog except in
compliance with an order of the court issued pursuant to § 95.06.



(Ord. 380, passed 3-14-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate, or cause
the violation of, any provision of this chapter. Any person, firm, or
corporation violating any of the provisions in this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class 2 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $750 or by imprisonment for not more than four months or
by both such fine or imprisonment.



   (B)   Any violation of § 95.01 “Dogs At-Large” of this chapter
shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or
by both such fine or imprisonment; and upon conviction for a first offense,
the minimum fine to be imposed shall not be less than $50. For each
additional offense within a 12-month period, the following minimum fines
shall be mandatory:



 


(1)   Second offense:

 
   $100


(2)   Third offense:
 
   $200


(3)   Thereafter:
 
   $300


* At all times the court shall retain the right to impose more than the
minimum sentence as provided herein.



 



   (C)   With respect to violations of this chapter which are
continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 337, passed 5-27-2015)



CHAPTER 96:  DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING



Section



   96.01   Declaration of policy



   96.02   Definitions



   96.03   Enforcement Committee



   96.04   Prohibited acts



   96.05   Procedures, powers and enforcement



   96.06   Administrative provisions



   96.07   Conciliation agreement violations



   96.08   Power of subpoena



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   It is declared to be among the civil rights of the people of the city
to be free from discrimination in housing, and it to be contrary to the
policy of the city and unlawful to discriminate against any person because of
sex, race, color, age, creed, national origin or ancestry in housing.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)  Penalty, see § 96.01



§ 96.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION.  To make, directly or indirectly, any
distinction with respect to any person or persons based on the color,
religion or national origin or ancestry.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  Any person as defined herein engaged in the
business of lending money or guaranteeing losses.



   HOUSING.



      (1)   Any parcel or parcels of real property or lands, or any
interest therein, whether contiguous or noncontiguous, located in the city
used for the building or the placing of one or more housing or rooming units
owned by, or otherwise; subject to the control of, one or more persons;



      (2)   Any real property, or any interest therein, located in
the city;



      (3)   Any single-family dwelling or multiple-family dwelling
or trailer house or trailer space or any portion thereof, including a housing
unit or a rooming unit, or any interest therein located in the city, which is
used or occupied, or intended, arranged, assigned or designated to be used or
occupied, as the home, homesite, residence or sleeping place of one or more
persons; and/or



      (4)   Any single room, suite of rooms or apartments with or
without cooking and kitchen facilities, occupies or intended for occupancy as
living quarters, by a person, by a family or by a group of persons living
together.



   OWNERS.  Include a lessee, sublessee, co-tenant, assignee, managing
agent or other person having the right of ownership or possession or the
right to sell, rent or lease any housing.



   PERSON.  An individual and a group of any one or more persons such as,
but not limited to, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees,
partnerships, associations, corporations, unincorporated organizations,
mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, legal representatives,
trustees in bankruptcy, receiver’s, any individuals acting in a financial
or representative capacity either appointed by a court or otherwise, the city
or any of this agencies, and any other legal governmental or commercial
entity, as well as a natural person or persons. The term PERSONS, when
applied to any of the foregoing, includes members, representatives, officers
and directors, agents and employees.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER or REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON.  An individual, whether
licensed or not, who, for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable
consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or
collecting same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases any
housing accommodation, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate the activities; or who advertises or holds himself or
herself out as engaged in the activities; or who negotiates or attempts to
negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer
to any housing accommodation; or who is engaged in the business or charging
an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a
contract whereby he or she undertakes to promote the sale, purchase,
exchange, rental or lease of any housing accomodation through its listing in
a publication issued primarily for the purposes; or an individual employed by
or acting on behalf of any of these.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)



§ 96.03  ENFORCEMENT COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The city shall establish a Housing Committee appointed by the
Mayor and City Council.



   (B)   Each Committee member shall serve for a term of one year and
until his or her successor is appointed. One of the members of the Committee
shall be elected by the members of the Committee to be Chairperson of the
Committee.



   (C)   All communications authorized or required to be lodged with a
Committee shall be furnished to the Chairperson of Committee, or in his or
her absence, any one of the Committee members.



   (D)   Any orders or findings issued by a Committee may be over the
signature of any one of the members.



   (E)   A quorum of the Committee shall be necessary for the
conducting of any vote. A quorum shall consist of a majority number of the
members of the Committee.



   (F)   A majority of the full Committee shall be required on any vote
taken for any proposed action to be effective.



   (G)   All findings or orders of the Committee shall be filed with
the City Attorney’s office and upon the filing shall be deemed public
records of the city.



   (H)   This Committee shall be considered to be a subcommittee of the
city and must comply with state open meeting laws.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)



§ 96.04  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   It shall be unlawful:



   (A)   For any person, including, but not limited to, owners,
lessees, agents, real estate brokers, real estate salespersons, trustees,
mortgagees, financial institutions, title companies or insurance companies:



      (1)   To discriminate against any person because of sex, race,
age, color, religion, ancestry or national origin in the sale, lease, rental
or other transfer of interest housing;



      (2)   To so discriminate in the extension of loans, credit,
insurance or other services relating to the transfer of interest in housing;
or



      (3)   To print or circulate, or cause to be printed or
circulated, any publications, or to use any form of application or to make
inquiry in connection with prospective sales, leases, rentals or other
transfers of interest in housing, or the extension of credit, loans,
insurance or other services relating to the transfer of interest in housing,
which expresses directly or indirectly any limitation, specification or
discrimination as to sex, race, age, color, religion, ancestry or national
origin, or expresses any intent to any limitation, specification or
discrimination.



   (B)   To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell,
purchase, exchange, rent or lease any housing from or to a person because of
his or her sex, race, age, color, religion, ancestry, national origin;



   (C)   To refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, exchange,
rental or lease of any housing to a person because of his or her sex, race,
age, color, religion, ancestry, national origin;



   (D)   To represent to a person that any housing is not available for
inspection, sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing because of
his or her sex, race, age, color, religion, ancestry, national origin;



   (E)   For any person to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the
doing of any of the acts forbidden under this section or to attempt to do so;



   (F)   For any person to go upon the premises of another for the
purpose of abusing the occupants thereof by the use of language or conduct
which reflects unfavorably on the occupants’ sex, age, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin;



   (G)   The above division shall not be a violation of the City Code
unless and until the City Attorney or his or her duly appointed agent has
sent a prior written notice to the person charged with going upon the
property of another and committing the above described acts, the notice
advising the offending party that he or she is unwelcome on the occupant’s
property and that he or she may be charged under this division if he or she,
after receipt of the notice, commits acts which are in violation of this
division; and



   (H)   This section does not preclude the offending party from being
charged with a violation of any offense that he or she might have committed
not covered herein merely because the offending party did not receive written
notice.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  PROCEDURES, POWERS AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The City Attorney, or the Housing Committee, may authorize the
city staff to effectuate conciliations between an aggrieved person and an
alleged violator prior to a formal finding of any unlawful practices when the
facts and circumstances properly indicate the action. If the finding is made
that an unlawful practice has been or is being committed, the Committee shall
endeavor to eliminate the unlawful practice by conference, conciliation and
persuasion. If the Committee fails thereby to eliminate the unlawful
practices:



      (1)   In the case of a violation of § 96.04, it shall issue
an order to the violator within the aforesaid 30-day period, to cease and
desist from further violations of this section and shall promptly mail a copy
of the order to the violator; or



      (2)   In the case of a violation of any other provisions not
listed under § 96.04, it shall file a criminal complaint with the City
Attorney for appropriate action.



   (B)   If the Committee finds that no unlawful practice has been or
is being committed, a copy of the finding shall be promptly mailed to the
grievant. The grievant shall thereafter have the right to file a criminal
complaint with the City Attorney for appropriate action.



   (C)   If the Committee fails to file its findings or a statement
setting forth valid reasons for not having done so with the City Attorney
within 60 days after a grievance is filed with the Housing Committee, the
grievant shall thereafter have the right to file a criminal complaint.



   (D)   If another grievance is filed against a person, after a cease
and desist order pursuant to division (A)(1) above of this section has been
issued by the Committee against the person, and upon investigation, the
Committee finds that the person has committed any further violation of this
chapter, a criminal complaint may be filed with the City Attorney by the
aggrieved person or by the Committee.



   (E)   No criminal complaint for the enforcement of any provisions of
this section may be filed unless the filing is specifically authorized by
this section.



   (F)   All complaints alleging violations of § 96.04 of the Code
shall be in writing and filed with the Housing Committee. The complaints
shall be filed within 30 working days from the date of violation. All
complaints shall be resolved within 120 days from the time they are filed.
The Housing Committee shall cause a summary of complaints to be given to the
Chairperson of the Committee. In carrying out the above provisions, the
Housing Committee shall have full authority to investigate and resolve the
complaints.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.06  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.



   The city and the appropriate committee thereof shall have the following
powers:



   (A)   To make rules and regulations which promote the administration
of and compliance with the provisions of this chapter. These rules and
regulations to become effective upon their approval by the City Council; and



   (B)   The City Attorney is empowered to take all necessary action in
the appropriate court to secure the production of all records, documents or
other evidence necessary to assist the Housing Committee in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)



§ 96.07  CONCILIATION AGREEMENT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   If the City Attorney or Housing Committee and a person accused
of violation of this chapter shall reach agreement and execute a conciliation
agreement, and the person shall then violate any terms and conditions of the
conciliation agreement, it shall be as if the agreement had never been
executed.



   (B)   In that event, the City Attorney shall file criminal charges
as are proper under this chapter and further shall take other civil
crimininal action as may be permitted under the Arizona Revised Statutes.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.08  POWER OF SUBPOENA.



   (A)   The City Attorney or the Housing Committee may:



      (1)   Subpoena witnesses at hearings and compel their
attendance;



      (2)   Administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under
oath, and when deemed necessary record the testimony; and



      (3)   Require the production for examination of books and
paper relating to any matter before the Housing Committee.



   (B)   Failure to obey a subpoena issued purusant to this section
shall constitute a contempt punishable upon action of the City Attorney
before the Superior Court.



   (C)   Any person appearing pursuant to this section shall have the
right to be represented by legal counsel.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Upon conviction of each violation of any provision of this chapter not
otherwise provided for, the person so convicted shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500 or by
imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed six months, or both.



(Ord. 85, passed 6-27-1990)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS
REGULATIONS



      111.   PEDDLERS



      112.   TRANSPORTATION BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      113.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



CHAPTER 110:  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Section



   110.01   BOP license defined



   110.02   License required; exemptions



   110.03   Application; nonprofit entities



   110.04   Fees



   110.05   Issuance; expiration; renewal



   110.06   Nontransferabilty



   110.07   Display



   110.08   Compliance with other laws



   110.09   Itinerants and garage sales



   110.10   Swap meets and fairgrounds



   110.11   Definitions



   110.12   Operation of money exchange business



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  BOP LICENSE DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOP LICENSE.  Any business, occupational or professional license
required under § 110.02.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)



§ 110.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   All persons engaging in any business, occupation or profession
within the city and operating from a regular place of business within the
city, except for those persons specified in division (B) below, shall be
required to obtain a BOP license pursuant to this chapter and to pay an
annual license fee. A separate license shall be required for each location of
a business, occupation or profession licensed under this chapter and for each
type of business, occupation or profession carried on at a particular
location by a licensee.



   (B)   The following persons, when engaging in activities subject to
the following licensing provisions, shall not be required to obtain a BOP
license:



      (1)   Any person licensed pursuant to any other section of
this chapter or any other provision of this Code;



      (2)   Any person licensed by the state pursuant to A.R.S.
Title 20, as amended;



      (3)   Any participant at an open-air market or park-and-swap
operation, if the operator of the market or operation is licensed pursuant to
§ 110.10 of this Code; and



      (4)   Any person who engages in a business, occupation or
profession for which a city license is required only as an employee of or as
an independent contractor for another person or entity which holds a city
license for the business, occupation or profession.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business,
occupation or profession for which a BOP license is required without having
first obtained a license.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.03  APPLICATION; NONPROFIT ENTITIES.



   (A)   An application for a BOP license shall be made on forms
furnished by the city.



   (B)   Any nonprofit entity, save and except entities engaged in the
business of medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation location, which has tax-exempt status under the Internal
Revenue Code § 501(c)(3), as certified by the Internal Revenue Service, and
which is not exempt from obtaining a BOP license under § 110.02(B) is
required to obtain a BOP license. The nonprofit entity shall furnish a copy
of its tax-exempt certification with its application, and the entity shall
not be charged a license fee. Entities engaged in the business of medical
marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location, shall be charged a license fee.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005; Ord. 339, passed 8-26-2015)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.04  FEES.



   The license fee for BOP licenses shall be set by resolution. The city
may set different license fees for an applicant who has not previously been
issued a BOP license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an
application and for an applicant who has been issued a BOP license for the
calendar year in which he or she submits an application and who is required
to obtain a new BOP license due to a change in the location of his or her
business or make other amendments thereto.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Any BOP license shall be valid only for the calendar year in
which it is issued. Each BOP license expires on December 31 of each year and
must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by paying the
applicable renewal fee. The renewal fee must be received by the tax and
license manager by January 31 to be deemed timely paid.



   (B)   (1)   Persons whose initial applications for BOP licenses
are received by the city after March 31 of any year shall be subject to an
initial license fee on a prorated basis as follows:



 


Business Start Date

 

Proration of License Fee




April 1 - June 30

 

75%




July 1 - September 30

 

50%




October 1 -December 31

 

25%




 



      (2)   The applicable proration percentage shall be applied to
the annual license fee set by resolution to determine the initial license fee.



   (C)   Any person who fails to renew a BOP license by January 31 of
any year and who conducts any activity covered by the license after the date
shall be deemed to be operating without a BOP license, shall be subject to
all penalties imposed under this chapter against persons unlawfully operating
without a BOP license, and shall be subject to a penalty of 50% of the annual
license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the BOP
license expired in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All
license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this section must be
paid before a new BOP license is issued to the person.



   (D)   Any person who is required to obtain a BOP license and fails
to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by the license shall be
subject to a penalty of 50% of the annual license fee which would have been
imposed on the date on which the activities commenced in addition to payment
of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a
person pursuant to this section must be paid before a new BOP license is
issued to the person.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.06  NONTRANSFERABILTY.



   No BOP license shall be transferable between persons or locations.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.07  DISPLAY.



    The holder of a BOP license shall at all times display his or her
license in a conspicuous place at his or her regular place of business within
the city.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.08  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   The issuance of a BOP license by the city shall not be construed as
authority to engage in any activity which is in violation of any other law or
regulation to which the activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any
property in violation of the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.09  ITINERANTS AND GARAGE SALES.



   (A)   Itinerants.  Itinerant businesses shall be conducted only in
those zoning districts within which that type of business activity is
permitted according to the Zoning Code, and only in conjunction with an
established resident business.



   (B)   Garage sales.  Garage sales are limited to three consecutive
days conducted no more frequently than four times per calendar year per
residential location. Sales of this nature must be registered with the city
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 110.01 through 110.06 of this chapter.
Sales of this nature occurring beyond these limits are prohibited.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005; Ord. 332, passed 11-24-2014)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.10  SWAP MEETS AND FAIRGROUNDS.



   (A)   As used in this chapter, SWAP MEET means a place of commercial
activity, popularly known as a swap meet or flea market, which is:



      (1)   Open to the public for the purchase of merchandise on
the premises;



      (2)   Available to the public who contract with the swap meet
proprietor to sell merchandise on the premises, whether the sellers or
vendors are in the business of vending or are making casual sales or some
combination thereof; and



      (3)   Composed of 100 or more stalls, stands or spaces
allotted to vendors, at least one of whom does not occupy the same allotted
space or spaces on an uninterrupted continuous daily basis.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the swap meet proprietor,
and not individual vendors, to obtain the license required by this chapter.
Swap meet vendors are not required by this chapter to obtain a city business
license. A SWAP MEET PROPRIETOR is any person who rents, sells, donates or
otherwise makes available to swap meet vendors any space within premises
owned or controlled by the proprietor for the purpose of a swap meet sale.
The swap meet proprietor shall make available to the city, upon reasonable
notice, records containing names, addresses and Arizona transaction privilege
numbers of all vendors.



   (C)   Fairgrounds. As used in this section, FAIRGROUNDS shall refer
to a county fair pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-258 or successors. The fairground
proprietor shall send to the city, on a quarterly basis, a list containing
the names, addresses and Arizona transaction privilege numbers of all vendors.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)



§ 110.11  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY LICENSE TAX COLLECTOR.  The Finance Director, his or her
successor, or other city designee, charged with the administration of this
chapter.



   CURRENCY.  Coined money and banknotes or other money as are authorized
by law and that circulate from hand to hand as the medium of exchange.



   DEALER.  An individual in the act of buying and selling currency or
cashing checks or other negotiable instruments for a profit as an ongoing
business activity.



   EXCHANGE.  A verbal or written agreement between two or more persons
to deliver one currency in exchange for another or exchange a check or other
negotiable instrument for cash, money order, cashier’s check or other form
of negotiable instrument.



   GARAGE SALES.  The sale on residential property of goods typically
associated with residential use, conducted by a resident of the property.



   ITINERANT BUSINESS.  Any person, whether owner or otherwise, whether a
resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling
and delivering goods or providing services within the city, and who, lacking
a fixed location within the city and in furtherance of the purpose, uses any
street or other place within the city for the temporary exhibition and sale
of the goods or provision of services, either privately or at public auction.
The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the
provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with
any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting transient
business in connection with, as a part of or in the name of any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A nonprofit MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
duly registered and certified pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2804.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY OFFSITE CULTIVATION LOCATION.  The one
additional location, if any, duly identified pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2806(E)
during the process of registering a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary,
where marijuana will be cultivated for sale at a nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary duly registered and certified pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2804.



   MERCHANTS.  Shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Automobile dealers (new or secondhand);



      (2)   Automobile accessories;



      (3)   Art goods and curios;



      (4)   Athletic goods;



      (5)   Bakeries (retail or wholesale);



      (6)   Books, magazines and stationery;



      (7)   Butcher shop;



      (8)   Billiards, pool or bowling alleys;



      (9)   Boarding houses;



      (10)   Cafes;



      (11)   Clothing and furnishings;



      (12)   Confectioneries;



      (13)   Creameries;



      (14)   Cleaning and pressing;



      (15)   Drug stores;



      (16)   Department stores and dry goods;



      (17)   Florists;



      (18)   Fuel dealers;



      (19)   Furniture dealers;



      (20)   Grocery stores;



      (21)   Glass and awning;



      (22)   Garage (repair or storage);



      (23)   Hardware stores;



      (24)   Haberdashers;



      (25)   Implement stores;



      (26)   Job printing;



      (27)   Junk dealers;



      (28)   Jewelry stores;



      (29)   Lumber yards;



      (30)   Ladies ready to wear;



      (31)   Laundries (power or steam);



      (32)   Lunch counters;



      (33)   Milk distributors;



      (34)   Machine or repair shop;



      (35)   Motion pictures;



      (36)   Notions;



      (37)   Newspaper publishers;



      (38)   Office supplies and equipment;



      (39)   Plumbing supplies;



      (40)   Restaurants;



      (41)   Sign or car painting;



      (42)   Shoe stores;



      (43)   Shoe repair shops;



      (44)   Seed, hay and grain dealers;



      (45)   Service stations;



      (46)   Secondhand stores;



      (47)   Tire dealers;



      (48)   Wholesale merchants; and



      (49)   Water distributors.



   MONEY EXCHANGE BUSINESS.  A commercial business exchanging currency of
one country for that of another or cashing or exchanging a check or other
negotiable instrument for cash, money order, cashier’s check or other form
of negotiable instrument as an ongoing business activity.



   NONRESIDENT BUSINESS.  Any person, whether owner or otherwise who,
from a fixed place of business outside the city, consummates a business
transaction initiated at that outside fixed location by delivery of goods or
provision of services to a customer’s location within the city.



   PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS BUSINESS.  A business that sells any
permissible consumer fireworks as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601, whether as a
principal or ancillary use, including, but not limited to, as its own
business or in conjunction with any other business or professional activity.



   PROFESSIONALS and PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.  Shall include, but not be
limited to, any person engaged in the practice of any of the following, or
similar occupations. The omission herein of a specific professional is not to
be construed as evidencing an intent to specifically exclude the profession,
business or service from the provisions of this chapter.



      (1)   Architect;



      (2)   Attorney at law;



      (3)   Certified public accountant;



      (4)   Chiropractor;



      (5)   Dentist;



      (6)   Engineer;



      (7)   Geologist;



      (8)   Medicine;



      (9)   Naturopath;



      (10)   Optician;



      (11)   Optometrist;



      (12)   Osteopath;



      (13)   Physician;



      (14)   Podiatrist;



      (15)   Psychiatrist;



      (16)   Psychoanalyst;



      (17)   Psychologist;



      (18)   Psychotherapist;



      (19)   Veterinarian;



      (20)   Assayer;



      (21)   Private investigator;



      (22)   Property manager;



      (23)   Real estate appraiser;



      (24)   Surveyor;



      (25)   Consultant (by whatever definition);



      (26)   Stock broker;



      (27)   Dance, charm or modeling school consultant;



      (28)   Dental and/or medical technician;



      (29)   Insurance and travel agent;



      (30)   Bailsman;



      (31)   Day care center operator;



      (32)   Answering service; and



      (33)   Title company.



   RESIDENT BUSINESS or RESIDENT MERCHANT.  Any person, whether owner or
otherwise, who engages in a regular business of selling and delivering goods
or providing services from a fixed place of business within the city.



   RETAIL MERCHANT or WHOLESALE MERCHANT.  All persons who, at a fixed
place of business, sell goods, wares or merchandise at retail or wholesale or
on commission, consignment or otherwise.



   SECONDARY LOCATION LICENSE.  A temporary license of a sales location
for a resident business.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005; Ord. 290, passed 1-12-2011)



§ 110.12  OPERATION OF MONEY EXCHANGE BUSINESS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in a money exchange
business to conduct a business on the streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way of
the city.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil offense
punishable pursuant to the provisions of § 10.99 of the City Code. Each and
every day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 229, passed 5-11-2005)



CHAPTER 111:  PEDDLERS



Section



   111.01   Registration required



   111.02   Application to Police Chief



   111.03   Issuance of registration cards



   111.04   Revocation of registration cards



   111.05   Peddling without registration cards prohibited



   111.06   Permission required for selling on streets and sidewalks



   111.07   Signs to be observed



   111.08   Newsboys exempt



§ 111.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Any person operating as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, salesperson or
vendor of goods, wares, merchandise, newspapers, magazines or services, who
go from house to house, or to only one house, in the city, shall register
with the Police Department and obtain an identification card showing the
registration.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 111.02  APPLICATION TO POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   Applicants for police registration under the terms of §
111.01 shall be required to furnish two satisfactory photographs of the
applicant, one to be attached to the applicant’s registration card and the
other to be retained by the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall
require the applicant to file his or her fingerprint identification with the
Police Department.



   (B)   The applicants for police registration shall be required to
furnish to the Police Department a complete description of the product to be
sold in the city together with information regarding sales methods to be used
and references that will enable the Chief of Police to determine whether or
not the applicant is qualified to receive a registration card as provided in
§ 111.03. Investigation by the Chief of Police under the provisions of this
chapter shall be completed within 15 days after the applicant has given the
required information.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-2)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 111.03  ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION CARDS.



   Business licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued at a rate
as determined by the Council to all applicants who have complied with §
111.02, unless the Chief of Police discovers that any applicant is deemed not
to be a proper person to be permitted to go from house to house because of
any of the following reasons:



   (A)   He or she has a criminal record;



   (B)   He or she is associated with a company that has engaged in
fraudulent dealings; or



   (C)   The proposed sales propositions include some element of
trickery, fraud or deceit, in which case, in the interest of the public
safety and protection, the applicant shall not be licensed.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 111.04  REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION CARDS.



   Registration cards under this chapter may be revoked by the city at any
time if deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and protection.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-4)



§ 111.05  PEDDLING WITHOUT REGISTRATION CARDS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to take in the act of soliciting,
peddling, hawking, selling or vending of goods, wares, merchandise,
newspapers, magazines or services from house to house, or to only one house,
in the city without having registered with the Police Department and without
having obtained a registration card; without having the card in possession;
or failing to exhibit the card when request is made for the registration card
by any resident of the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-5)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 111.06  PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR SELLING ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any booth, stand or
counter on any sidewalk in the city for the purpose of barter, sale or trade,
or keep or maintain upon the streets or alleys any wagon, cart, wheel,
vehicle, movable booth or stand for the purpose of barter or trade without
obtaining permission of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-6)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 111.07  SIGNS TO BE OBSERVED.



   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser in the course of
his or her business to ring the doorbell or knock at any building whereon a
sign bearing the words “no peddlers, solicitors or canvassers” is exposed
to public view.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-7)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 111.08  NEWSBOYS EXEMPT.



   Newsboys are exempt from the provisions of this chapter for the sale of
newspapers subscriptions.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-8)



CHAPTER 112:  TRANSPORTATION BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Section



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   General



   112.04   Transportation business vehicle permit



   112.05   Individual operator’s business permit



   112.06   Permit terms and fees



   112.07   Taxi stand and taxi waiting stand regulations



   112.08   Bus stand regulations



   112.09   Severability



   112.10   Conflicts



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the safety and welfare of the
public, employees and public transportation companies by regulating certain
aspects of the public transportation business.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any
term included in this chapter which is not defined herein shall be accorded
that definition prescribed under other city ordinance(s) and A.R.S. §§
13-101 and 28-101 et seq., the latter applying in the case of any
inconsistency.



   BUS.  Any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than 11 passengers
and used for the transportation of individuals for hire with driver provided
and has a set schedule and route; is fully licensed as a transportation
business by the city, the state and the United States Department of
Transportation.



   BUS STAND. Such portions of publicly owned property designated as a bus
stand pursuant to § 72.07(B).



   BUSINESS.  Engaging in the activity of carrying passengers or
individuals for profit.



   DETERIORATION.  A lowering in quality in the condition or appearance
of a vehicle or parts thereof characterized by dents, breaks, cracking,
peeling, rusting or any other evidence of physical decay, neglect, excessive
use or lack of maintenance.



   FILTH.  Foul matter, dirt or other matters that are attached to the
body of a vehicle or the interior of the vehicle that causes a bad appearance.



   HOLIDAY.  The following city observed holidays:



      (1)   New Years Day (January 1);



      (2)   Martin Luther King (third Monday in January);



      (3)   President’s Day (third Monday in February);



      (4)   Memorial Day (last Monday in May);



      (5)   Independence Day (July 4);



      (6)   Labor Day (first Monday in September);



      (7)   Columbus Day (second Monday in October);



      (8)   Veteran’s Day (November 11);



      (9)   Thanksgiving (fourth Thursday in November); and



      (10)   Christmas Day (December 25).



   LIMOUSINE SERVICE.  The providing of a motor vehicle designed by its
manufacture and identified by its vehicle registration as a limousine and in
which both the limousine and a driver are provided for hire solely by
individual agreement and which service is not available for open solicitation
on the streets or at a taxicab or bus stand.



   NIGHT TIME.  The hours between 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   PERSON.  Any individual, person, firm, corporation, association, joint
venture, partnership or other form of business or combination thereof.



   TAXI STAND. Such portions of publicly owned property designated as a
taxi stand pursuant to § 72.07(B).



   TAXI WAITING STAND. Such portions of publicly owned property designated
as a taxi waiting stand pursuant to § 72.07(B).



   TAXICAB.  A motor vehicle other than a bus or limousine which is
available for hire by the general public through either private or public
solicitation or notice available to carry no more than ten persons along a
route, all or part of which is in the city, from any point to any other point
for hire with a driver provided and which is not operated on a schedule
and/or a fixed route.



   UNDOCUMENTED ALIEN OR PERSON.  A person who does not have
documentation authorizing the person to be physically present in the United
Sates pursuant to the immigration laws thereof.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 183, passed 2-13-2002; Ord. 205, passed
2-11-2004; Ord. 262, passed 4-23-2008; Am. Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)



§ 112.03  GENERAL.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the public transportation business
in public rights-of-way within the city without complying with the
requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   No taxicab, livery, or bus business or operator of a taxicab,
livery, or bus shall operate without the following:



      (1)   A city business license;



      (2)   Proper Arizona registration;



      (3)   Insurance as required for taxicabs, liveries, and buses
by state law; and



      (4)   It shall be properly registered with the state and if a
bus, the United States Department of Transportation.



   (C)   No vehicle shall stop, stand or park on the designated taxi
stand other than a taxi possessing a license to conduct business as a taxi in
this city.



   (D)   No vehicle shall stop, stand or park on the designated bus
stand other than a bus possessing authorization from this city, the state and
the United States Department of Transportation.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 183, passed 2-13-2002; Ord. 310, passed
11-22-2011; Am. Ord. 346, passed 12-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  TRANSPORTATION BUSINESS VEHICLE PERMIT.



   Each motor vehicle used to provide transportation for hire must have a
current transportation business vehicle permit and comply fully with state
law. The permit covers the designated vehicle and cannot be transferred to
another vehicle. To obtain a transportation business vehicle permit, an
applicant must submit to the city, on a form provided by the city, a sworn
statement stating the age, make, model, description, vehicle identification
number, and license plate number of the vehicle for which the permit is
sought, a photograph showing the identification insignia or other plates or
permits required by the State of Arizona, together with such other lettering
or markings as may be required by the State of Arizona, and a copy of such
other documentation as may be needed or necessary to show compliance with
state regulation.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 310, passed 11-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.05  INDIVIDUAL OPERATOR’S BUSINESS PERMIT.



   No person shall engage in the business of operating a vehicle in the
transportation business within the city without first obtaining an individual
operator’s business permit and complying fully with state law. Each
applicant for an individual operator’s business permit shall submit a
verified form to be provided by the city and a copy of his or her valid state
driver’s license with such endorsements as may be required by state for the
operation of such bus, taxi, livery vehicle, or limousine as proposed to be
operated by the applicant, together with proof of background check as well as
any other documentation as may be needed or necessary to show compliance with
state regulation. The applicant must also provide a three inch by four inch
picture of himself or herself and it shall be affixed to the individual
operator’s business permit.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 183, passed 2-13-2002; Ord. 265, passed
7-9-2008; Ord. 310, passed 11-22-2011)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  PERMIT TERMS AND FEES.



   (A)   Each transportation business vehicle permit and individual
operator’s permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance
unless terminated earlier in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Each transportation business vehicle permit and individual
operator’s permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance
unless terminated earlier in accordance with this chapter. No refunds will be
issued for revoked or suspended permits. Each vehicle safety inspection
sticker shall be valid for six months from the date of issuance unless
terminated earlier in accordance with this chapter.



      (1)   The amount of the annual transportation business vehicle
license fee for calendar year 2010 shall be in an amount as established by
City Council per vehicle for those vehicles who otherwise were validly
licensed and who had properly applied for or been issued permits on or before
January 31, 2010. This change in amount of fee is retroactive to January 1,
2010. For all other vehicles the amount of fee is set by City Council from
time to time. The amount of annual transportation business license fee from
and after January 31, 2010 shall revert to the amount set by City Council
from time to time per vehicle as presently set forth in this division of the
City Code.



      (2)   The annual fee for each individual operator’s permit
shall be as established by City Council from time to time.



   (C)   If an operator of a vehicle has a business arrangement or
other form of written agreement to operate a transportation business vehicle
under the name of a business which has a business license issued pursuant to
Chapter 110 of the City Code, the operator shall not be required to obtain
another such business license pursuant to Chapter 110, and need only register
the vehicle and pay the business vehicle license fee pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 183, passed 2-13-2002; Ord. 261, passed
4-23-2008; Ord. 282, passed 1-27-2010; Ord. 310, passed 11-22-2011; Ord. 324,
passed 2-26-2014)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.07  TAXI STAND AND TAXI WAITING STAND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All taxicabs and liveries shall wait in line at the taxi stand
in the order which they arrive; the taxicab located at the front of the line
shall have priority when soliciting; taxicabs shall move forward as the
taxicab at the front of the line departs. Only three taxicabs will be allowed
at the taxi stand.



   (B)   All taxicabs and liveries wanting to advance to the taxi stand
shall wait in line at the taxi waiting stand; the taxicab at the front of the
line shall have priority to advance to the taxi stand.



   (C)   No taxicab or livery operator shall solicit business three
feet away from their taxicab; at no time shall a taxicab or livery be left
unattended while in line.



   (D)   No taxicab or livery business, or operator of a taxicab or
livery, shall obstruct the flow of foot traffic of any sidewalk.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 310, passed 11-22-2011; Am. Ord. 346,
passed 12-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.08  BUS STAND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No bus operator shall stand more than three feet away from
their bus when parked to solicit business; at no time shall a bus be left
unattended while in line.



   (B)   No bus business or operator of a bus, shall yell, use
whistles, horns or other devices for the purpose of soliciting business that
may disturb the peace and quiet of others.



   (C)   No bus business or operator of a bus, shall obstruct the flow
of foot traffic of any sidewalk.



   (D)   The operator of a bus shall follow the schedule set by the bus
company in which he or she is employed. The operator may depart five minutes
between or five minutes after the scheduled time, and not otherwise.



   (E)   The bus company or operator of a bus company may cancel a
departure but shall not depart until the next scheduled departure.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 310, passed 11-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.09  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter or any part of the Code adopted herein by reference is for any reason
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 183, passed 2-13-2002; Ord. 310, passed
11-22-2011)



§ 112.10  CONFLICTS.



   All ordinances and parts of ordinances, in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter or any part of the section of Code adopted herein, are hereby
repealed.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 183, passed 2-13-2002)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any section of this chapter is responsible for a
civil sanction punishable pursuant to the provisions of § 10.99. Each day a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as heretofore
described.



(Ord. 172, passed 1-24-2001; Ord. 310, passed 11-22-2011)



CHAPTER 113: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



General Provisions



     113.01   Purpose and findings



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Classification



   113.04   License required



   113.05   Issuance of license



   113.06   Fees



   113.07   Inspection



   113.08   Expiration of license



   113.09   Suspension



   113.10   Revocation



   113.11   Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal



   113.12   Transfer of license



   113.13   Injunction



Regulations for Specific Businesses



   113.25   Regulations for escort agencies



   113.26   Regulations concerning public nudity



   113.27   Adult motels



   113.28   Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos



   113.29   Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business



   113.30   Exceptions



 



   113.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration
of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this
chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material.



   (B)   Findings. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses presented in reports made available to the City Council, and on
findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the
cases and materials made available to the City Council, including Pap's A.M.
v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books,
Inc., 122 S. Ct. 1728 (2002); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475
U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes
v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas,
493 U.S. 215 (1990); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); BGHA, Inc. v.
City of Universal City, TX, No. 02-50220 (5th Cir. 2003); Baby Dolls Topless
Saloons, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 2002 U.S. App. LEXIS 12202 (5th Cir., June
20, 2002); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Hang
On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Woodall v. City
of El Paso, 49 F.3d 1120 (5th Cir. 1995); J & B Entertainment, Inc. v. City
of Jackson, 152 F.3d 362 (5th Cir. 1998); SDJ, Inc. v. City of Houston, 837
F.2d 1268 (5th Cir. 1988); TK's Video, Inc. v. Denton County, 24 F.3d 705
(5th Cir. 1994); Lagrange Trading Co. v. Nicolosi, 1991 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 3551
(E.D. La. 1991); Vonderhaar v. City of St Tammany, 633 So. 2d 217 (La. Ct
App. 1993); Liberto v. Rapides City City Council, 667 So. 2d 552 (La. Ct.
App. 1995): City of Gretna v. Russland Enterprises, Inc., 564 So. 2d 367 (La.
Ct. App. 1990); and other cases; and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong.
Rec. S 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 14519; 135 Cong. Rec. S 5636; 134 Cong. Rec. E
3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually
oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1984;
Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Houston, Texas -1997; Indianapolis, Indiana -
1984; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles,
California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986;
Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio -
1977 ; and Dallas, Texas - 1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993;
Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996: New York Times
Square study - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona -1995-98; and also on findings of
physical abuse from the paper entitled Stripclubs According to Strippers:
Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence, by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director,
Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, and from Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View, by David
Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and
Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000, and the Report of the Attorney General's
Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6.
1989; State of Minnesota), the City Council finds:



      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled
by the unlicensed operators of the establishments. Further, there is
presently no mechanism in this city to make the owners and operators of these
establishments responsible for the activities that occur on then premises.



      (2)   Some employees of unregulated sexually oriented
businesses defined in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in
higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees
of other establishments.



      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal
sex. occur at unregulated sexually oriented businesses, especially those
which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films,
videos, or live sex shows.



      (4)   Offering and providing unregulated space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.



      (5)   Some persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult
arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging
in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses, or for the
purpose of purchasing or selling illicit drugs.



      (6)   Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis salmonella, Campylobacter and shigella
infections, chlamydial, myoplasmal and ureoplasmal infections, trichomoniasis
and chancroid.



      (7)   According to research from the Kaiser Family Foundation,
an estimated 650,000 to 900,000 Americans are infected with HIV. The number
of new HIV infections occurring each year is now about 41,000. Men and women
of all races are most likely to be infected by sexual contact.



      (8)   As of December 2004 there were 9,320 reported AIDS cases
in Arizona with 114 reported cases in Yuma County. As of February 2008 there
were 12,677 reported cases of HIV/AIDS in Arizona and 153 cases in Yuma
County according to the Arizona Department of Health Services.



      (9)   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates
that as many as one in three people with HIV/AIDS do not know they are
infected.



      (10)   The number of cases of early (less than one year)
syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases
reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November of 1990. Between 2001 and 2002,
the number of reported primary and secondary syphilis cases increased
12.4%.  According to the 2009 annual report concerning sexually transmitted
diseases in Arizona as made by the Arizona Department of Health Services.
Arizona had a rate of 232 cases per 100,000 population for primary and
secondary (P&S) syphilis.



      (11)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention estimates that more than 700,000 persons in the U.S.
get new gonorrheal infections each year. Only about half of these infections
are reported. According to the 2009 Annual Report concerning Sexually
Transmitted Diseases in Arizona as made by the Arizona Department of Health
Services there were 3,251 gonorrhea cases in Arizona.



      (12)   The surgeon general of the United States in his report
of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse,
exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother
to her newborn.



      (13)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts. See, e.g., Findings of U.S. Dept. of Health & Human Services.



      (14)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities
and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to
self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities.



      (15)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen
is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view
adult oriented films.



      (16)   The findings noted in division (b)(1) through (15)
above raise substantial governmental concerns.



      (17)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational
characteristics that should be reasonably-regulated in order to protect those
substantial governmental concerns.



      (18)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate
mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, the a licensing
procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to
see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with
the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the
citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that
the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully
in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.



      (19)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring
sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in adult theaters.



      (20)   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to
keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will
help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by
preventing minors from working in the establishments.



      (21)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons
ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related
to the significant governmental interest in the operation of the uses, will
aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and will
prevent the further secondary effects of dissemination of illegal obscenity,
child pornography, and to minors, materials harmful to them.



      (22)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of
communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is
designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.



      (23)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use has been
convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that
the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.



      (24)   The barring of these individuals from employment in
sexually oriented businesses for a specified period of years serves to
prevent distribution of illegal material, to prevent conduct which leads to
the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, and to preclude the
establishment of criminal enterprises within the city.



      (25)   The general welfare, health, morals and safely of the
citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited,
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters
exhibiting “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures,
video reproductions, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations
which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or



      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are
designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.



   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear semi-nude; or



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical area” or by “specified sexual
activities;” or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, computer simulations, holograms,
video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which are
characterized by the exhibition or display of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”



   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
exhibition or display of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; and either



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, holograms, computer simulations, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown or displayed which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”



   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS. This term is synonymous with SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS and means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult theater, adult motion picture theater, adult video store, escort
agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.



   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or
semi-nude, or in live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”



   ADULT VIDEO STORE. See ADULT BOOKSTORE.



   EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY and EMPLOYMENT. Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a
full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is
denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or by another
status. EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for
repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Chief of Police, City Zoning Administrator or
such person as may be designated by the City Council.



   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees
or offers to act as a companion, guide, date or to privately model lingerie
or to privately perform a striptease.



   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



   ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business.



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any
other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a
sexually oriented business.



   NUDE, NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” (a commercial
establishment which regularly features a person (or persons) who appears
semi-nude and) is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay
money or airy form of consideration. A NUDE MODEL STUDIO does not mean a
modeling class, or the facility for such class, operated:



      (1)   By a proprietary school licensed by the State of
Arizona; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;



      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in winch credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.



   OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED. To cause to function or to put in a
state of doing business. OPERATOR means any person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control
of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation,
the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated
a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner,
part owner, or licensee of the business.



   PERSON An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. A consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.



   SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or
the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human breast, but shall not include any portion
of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse,
skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola
is not exposed in whole or in part.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial establishment, that
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration: a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate,
or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities.” The
definition of SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER or any sexually oriented businesses
shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. This term is synonymous With ADULT ORIENTED
BUSINESS and means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store,
adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture theater,
adult video store, escort agency, semi-nude model studio, or sexual encounter
center.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.



      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered; or



      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Any one of the following offenses: prostitution or
promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or
display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child;
possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent
exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity
relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to
those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or
countries;



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or



         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or
more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with
the applicant.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region,
anus, or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or



      (3)   Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with,
any of the activities set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT. The increase in floor areas occupied by the
business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist on the date this chapter
takes effect.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any
of me following:



      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.03  CLASSIFICATION.



   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcades;



   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;



   (C)   Adult cabarets;



   (D)   Adult motels;



   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;



   (F)   Escort agencies;



   (G)   Nude model studios;



   (H)   Sexual encounter centers.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)    It is unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business
to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to
this chapter.



      (2)   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business
to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to
this chapter.



      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually
oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city. All applications must be qualified according to the provisions
of this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   An applicant for a sexually oriented business license
or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file with the
Enforcement Officer a completed application made on a form prescribed and
provided by the city. An application shall be considered complete if it
includes the information required in this section. The applicant shall be
qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application shall
be notarized. The application shall include the information called for in
divisions (1)(a) through (f) below, and where applicable division (1)(g)
below, as follows:



         (a)   The full true name and any other names used in the
preceding five years,



         (b)   The current business address.



         (c)   Either a set of fingerprint suitable for
conducting necessary background checks pursuant to this chapter, or the
applicant's social security number, to be used for the same purpose.



         (d)   If the application is for a sexually oriented
business license, the name, business location, legal description, business
mailing address and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business.



         (e)   Written proof of age, in the form of either:



            1.   A copy of a birth certificate and current
photo;



            2.   A current driver's license with picture; or



            3.   Other picture identification document issued
by a governmental agency.



         (f)   The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates
of any license or permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually
oriented business, and whether any such license or permit has been denied,
revoked, or suspended, and if so, the reason or reasons therefor.



         (g)   If the application is for a sexually oriented
business license, the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent
authorized to receive sendee of process.



      (2)   The information provided pursuant to divisions (1)(a)
through (f) above shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the Enforcement Officer within ten working days of a
change of circumstances winch would render the information originally
submitted false or incomplete,



   (D)   The application for a sexually oriented business license shall
be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but
shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.



   (E)   If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license
as applicant. If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual (such as a corporation), each officer,
director, general partner, or other person who will participate directly in
decisions relating to management of the business shall sign the application
for a license as the applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under §
113.05 below  and each applicant shall be considered as a licensee if a
license is granted.



   (F)   A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt
from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business
license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a
business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this
chapter, where applicable.



   (G)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with
the application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the
Enforcement Officer on a confidential basis, and may be disclosed only:



      (1)   To other governmental agencies in connection with a law
enforcement or public safety function, or



      (2)   As may otherwise be required by law or a court order.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, § 113.99



§ 113.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)    Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license,
the Enforcement Officer shall issue a temporary license to the applicant,
which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the
Enforcement Officer to deny or grant the license. Within 20 days after the
receipt of a completed application, the Enforcement Officer shall either
issue a license, or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license, to
the applicant. The Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a
license unless one or more of the following is found to be true:



      (1)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age.



      (2)   An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of
taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business.



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information as
required by § 113.04 for issuance of the license.



      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
under this subsection. For purposes of this division, CONVICTION:



         (a)   Means a conviction or a guilty plea; and



         (b)   Includes a conviction of any business entity for
which the applicant had, at the time of the offense leading to the conviction
for a specified criminal activity, a management responsibility or a
controlling interest.



      (5)   The license application fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.



      (6)   An applicant has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form.



      (7)   The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a
zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses
are allowed to operate under the zoning and land use regulations of the city,
or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for
sexually oriented businesses in the appropriate zoning district(s).



      (8)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with



§§ 113.25 through 113.29.



   (B)   An applicant who is ineligible for a license due to division
(A)(4) above may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when
the time period required by the applicable subsection of specified criminal
activity, as defined in § 113.02 has elapsed.



   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued
to that applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually
oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually
oriented business employee license shall contain a photograph of the
licensee. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that it may be easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business
employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the
premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall produce
the license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other
authorized city official.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.06 FEES.



   (A)   The non-refundable initial license fee for a sexually oriented
business license is $2,000 and the annual renewal fee for a sexually oriented
business license is $750.



   (B)   The non-refundable initial license fee for a sexually oriented
business employee license is $500 and the annual renewal fee for a sexually
oriented business employee license is $200.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.07 INSPECTION.



   (A)   For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, an
applicant operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any
other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any
function connected with the enforcement of this chapter, normally and
regularly conducted by the agencies, to inspect, at any time the business is
occupied or open for business, those portions of the premises of a sexually
oriented business which patrons or customers are permitted to occupy.



   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.08 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 113.04. An
application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (B)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent
to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license
has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.09 SUSPENSION.



   The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period
not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter.



   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.10 REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall issue a written statement of
intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of
suspension in § 113.09 occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The Enforcement Officer shall issue a written statement of
intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the Officer
determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;



      (4)   A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur
in or on the licensed premises. This division will not apply to an adult
motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur
either:



         (a)   In exchange for money, or



         (b)   In a public place or within public view.



      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad
valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.



When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in § 113.11, the
Enforcement Officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business
license for one year from the date revocation became effective, provided
that, if the conditions of § 113.11(B) are met, a provisional license will
be granted pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the
Enforcement Officer finds that the basis for the revocation found in
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(4) above have been corrected or abated, the
applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.11 HEARING; LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; APPEAL.



   (A)   (1)    If the Enforcement Officer determines that facts
exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter,
the Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent)
in writing of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, including
the grounds therefor, by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The
notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file
with the Enforcement Officer. Within five working days of receipt of the
notice, the respondent may provide to the City Manager, in writing, a
response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit
should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within three days of the receipt
of respondent's written response, the City Manager shall notify respondent in
writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation
proceeding.



         (2)   Within ten working days of the receipt of
respondent's written response, the City Manager shall conduct a hearing at
which respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and
present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. If a response is not
received by the City Manager in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the
City Manager finds that grounds as specified in this chapter exist for
denial, suspension, or revocation, the decision shall become final five days
after the City Manager sends, by certified mail, written notice that the
license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a
statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.



         (3)   If the City Manager finds that no grounds exist
for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within five days
after the hearing, the City Manager shall withdraw the intent to deny,
suspend, or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing
by certified mail of such action and shall contemporaneously issue the
license.



   (B)   When a decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license becomes
final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a
license has been denied, or whose license has been suspended or revoked,
shall have the right to appeal the action to a court of competent
jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge,
restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial,
suspension, or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved
party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the
aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to
continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee, as the case may
be, and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved
party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's
enforcement.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.12 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, § 113.99



§ 113.13 INJUNCTION.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually operated
business without a valid license or in violation of § 113.12 is subject to a
suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. These
violations shall be punishable as a class one misdemeanor pursuant to §
10.99 of this Code. Each day a sexually oriented business operates is a
separate offense or violation.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC BUSINESSES



§ 113.25 REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.



   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, § 113.99



§ 113.26 REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY.



   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly and
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity
or engage in specified sexual activities.



   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude
condition, unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is at least
six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from
the floor.



   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in
a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from
any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is semi-nude in a
sexually oriented business.



   (D)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to
knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, § 113.99



§ 113.27 ADULT MOTELS.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
chapter.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that
does not have a sexually oriented business license, he or she rents or
subrents a sleeping room to a person and within ten hours from the time the
room is rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



   (C)   For purposes of division (B) above, the terms RENT or SUBRENT
mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, § 113.99



§ 113.28 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business (other than an adult motel) which exhibits on the premises,
in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements:



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business
license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's
stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit, if granted, will be
conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each
diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The
city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city.



      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure
that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all tunes that any patron is present inside the premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
view area specified in division (A)(5) above remains unobstructed by any
doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials and, at all times, that any patron is present in the premises and
to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted
in the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) above.



      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any time.



      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 5.0 footcandles as
measured at the floor level.



      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.



      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist
between viewing rooms or booths.



      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of
any kind between viewing booths or rooms.



      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.



      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing
booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or
other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.



   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (14)
above commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, § 113.99



§ 113.29 PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.



   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person
under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)  Penalty, § 113.99



§ 113.30 EXCEPTIONS.



   It is a defense to prosecution under § 113.26 that a person appearing
in a state of nudity did so In a modeling class operated:



   (A)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Arizona: a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;



   (B)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



   (C)   In a structure:



      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing; and



      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student
must enroll at least three days in advance of the class: and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



§ 113.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
violate, or cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter. Any
person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of the
requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor,
punishable pursuant to § 10.99 of this Code.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 113.04 of this chapter
that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for
sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.



(Ord. 289, passed 12-8-2010)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   FIREARMS



      131.   FIREWORKS



      132.   POSSESSION, USE, SALE AND DISPLAY OF CERTAIN FEDERALLY
CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES AND THEIR CHEMICAL ANALOGUES



CHAPTER 130:  FIREARMS



Section



   130.01   Minors prohibited from carrying or possessing firearms



   130.02   Exceptions



   130.03   Seizure and forfeiture



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  MINORS PROHIBITED FROM CARRYING OR POSSESSING FIREARMS.



   Except as provided in § 130.02 of this chapter, an unemancipated
person who is under 18 years of age and who is unaccompanied by a parent,
grandparent or guardian, or a certified hunter, safety instructor or
certified firearms safety instructor acting with the consent of the
unemancipated person’s parent or guardian shall not knowingly carry or
possess on his or her person, within his or her immediate control, or in or
on a means of transportation a firearm in any place that is open to the
public or on any street or highway or on any private property except private
property owned or leased by the minor or the minor’s parent, grandparent or
guardian.



(Ord. 109, passed 5-26-1993)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to a person who is 14, 15, 16 or 17 years
of age and is any of the following:



   (A)   Engaged in lawful hunting or shooting events or marksmanship
practice at established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a
firearm is not prohibited;



   (B)   Engaged in lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm for
the purpose of lawful hunting; or



   (C)   Engaged in lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm
between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for the purpose of shooting
events or marksmanship practice at established ranges or other areas where
the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited.



(Ord. 109, passed 5-26-1993)



§ 130.03  SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE.



   If the minor is not exempt under § 130.02 of this section and is in
possession of a firearm, a peace officer may seize the firearm and hold it
until the agency returns the firearm to the parent or guardian or initiates
forfeiture proceedings pursuant to A.R.S. Chapter 39 (A.R.S. §§ 13-4301 et
seq.).



(Ord. 109, passed 5-26-1993)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who violates § 130.01 of this chapter is an
incorrigible child and shall be subject to the following penalties:



      (1)   For an offense involving an unloaded firearm, a fine of
not more than $250 and the court may order the suspension or revocation of
the person’s driver’s license; or



      (2)   For an offense involving a loaded firearm, a fine of not
more than $500 and the court may order the suspension or revocation of the
person’s driver’s license;



   (B)   If the firearm is not returned to the parent or guardian
pursuant to § 130.03 of this section it shall be held by the law enforcement
agency responsible for the seizure until the charges have been adjudicated or
otherwise disposed of and until the conclusion of any forfeiture proceedings.
Upon adjudication of a person for a violation of this section, the court in
accordance with A.R.S. Chapter 39 (A.R.S. §§ 13-4301 et seq.) shall order
the firearm forfeited and sold, destroyed or disposed of otherwise.



   (C)   If the court finds that the parent or guardian of a minor
found responsible for violating this chapter knew of the minor’s unlawful
conduct and made no effort to prohibit it, the parent or guardian is jointly
and severally responsible for any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter.



   (D)   This section is supplemental to any other law imposing a
criminal penalty for the use or exhibition of a deadly weapon. A minor who
violates this chapter may be prosecuted and convicted for any other criminal
conduct involving the use or exhibition of the deadly weapon.



(Ord. 109, passed 5-26-1993)



CHAPTER 131: FIREWORKS



Section



   131.01   Definitions



   131.02   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions



   131.03   Fireworks: sales prohibited; exceptions



   131.04   Enforcement



   131.05   Emergency response; liability



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER FIREWORK.  Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601, as
amended.



   DISPLAY FIREWORK.  Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601, as
amended.



   FIREWORKS.  Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or permissible
consumer firework as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   NOVELTY ITEMS.  Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as
snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices,
sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS.  Those fireworks as defined by A.R.S.
§ 36-1601 that may be sold within the city even where use of those items has
been prohibited.



   SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY. A monitored performance of display fireworks
open to the public and authorized by the Fire Marshal after appropriate
inspection(s) to confirm that all safety precautions deemed necessary and
prudent by the Fire Marshal for safe deployment of the display are in place.



(Ord. 288, passed 11-10-2010)



§ 131.02  FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks within the city
is prohibited.



   (B)   No person shall possess fireworks within the city except as
follows:



      (1)   Persons of suitable age and discretion may possess
novelty items.



      (2)   Persons at least 16 years of age or older may possess
permissible consumer fireworks.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
use, discharge, or ignition of novelty items when supervised by a responsible
adult.



   (D)   Supervised displays of fireworks by a licensed fireworks
contractor and shooter may be used within the city after proper inspection
and authorization by the Fire Marshal or designee. These displays shall be of
a character and so located, discharged or fired, as to not endanger persons,
animals, or property. The Fire Marshal or designee has authority to impose
conditions on any display and to decline to authorize, or revoke
authorization, of any public display of fireworks during time periods when
high fire danger warnings are in effect. Failure to comply with the
requirements issued by the Fire Marshal for a public display of fireworks is
punishable as provided in this section and the applicable rules and
regulations of the State Fire Marshal.



(Ord. 288, passed 11-10-2010)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.03  FIREWORKS: SALES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Sale of fireworks within the city is prohibited with the
exception of novelty items and permissible consumer fireworks which may be
sold by a retailer pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 36-1601 et seq., as amended;
provided, however, that no person shall sell, permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age or to
any person or entity prior to the effective date of A.R.S. §§ 36-1601 et
seq., as amended by Laws 2010, Ch. 286, §§ 1-6. Sale of permissible
consumer fireworks and novelty items shall conform to the requirements of the
City Code.



   (B)   All sales of permissible consumer fireworks shall conform to
the requirements of state law and to the rules and regulations adopted by the
State Fire Marshal pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-1609.



(Ord. 288, passed 11-10-2010)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.04 ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Chief/Fire Marshall or designee, a police officer, or
the City Attorney may issue civil citations to enforce violations of this
section as civil offenses.



   (B)   Any person authorized to issue a civil complaint may also
issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in
which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil or criminal complaint.



   (C)   A police officer or marshal or the City Attorney may issue
criminal complaints to enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 288, passed 11-10-2010)



§ 131.05 EMERGENCY RESPONSE; LIABILITY.



   (A)   A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer
fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and
explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable for
the expenses of any emergency response that is required by use, discharge or
ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a
violation(s) of this section is prima facie evidence of liability under this
section.



   (B)   The expenses of an emergency response include all reasonable
costs directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or
not-for-profit entities that make an appropriate emergency response to the
incident. The expenses constitute a debt against the person liable for those
expenses pursuant to division (A) above and may be collected proportionately
by the responding agencies/entities that incurred the expenses. A person's
liability for the expense of an emergency response shall not exceed $10,000
for a single incident. The liability imposed under this section is in
addition to, and not in limitation of, any other liability that may be
imposed.



(Ord. 288, passed 11-10-2010)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99 PENALTY.



   The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement by this
section is a class three misdemeanor unless another penalty is specifically
provided for.



(Ord. 288, passed 11-10-2010)



CHAPTER 132: POSSESSION, USE, SALE AND DISPLAY OF CERTAIN FEDERALLY
CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES AND THEIR CHEMICAL ANALOGUES



Section



   132.01   Prohibited substances; chemical compounds



   132.02   Prohibited substances; commonly used names and labels



   132.03   Products not intended or labeled for human consumption



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to possess, sell,
transfer, use or display or offer for sale any product or substance
containing 4-methyl-N-methylcathinone (mephedrone);
3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone (methylone);
3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV); 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol with
substitution at the 5-position of the phenolic ring by alkyl or alkenyl,
whether or not substituted on the cyclohexyl ring to any extent;
3-(l-naphthoyl)indole or 3-(l-naphthyl)indole by substitution at the nitrogen
atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted on the indole
ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl or naphthyl
ring to any extent; 3-(l-naphthoyl)pyrrole by substitution at the nitrogen
atom of the pyrrole ring, whether or not further substituted in the indole
ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl ring to any
extent; 1-(1-naphthylmethyl)indene by substitution of the 3-position of the
indene ring, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any
extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent;
3-phenylacetylindole or 3-benzoylindole by substitution at the nitrogen atom
of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to
any extent, whether or not substituted on the phenyl ring to any extent;
5-(l,l-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(lR,3S) -3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (CP-47,497);
‘(ii) 5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(lR,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl] -phenol
(cannabicyclohexanol or CP-47,497 C8-homolog); l-pentyl
-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-018 and AM678); 1-butyl-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole
(JWH-073); l-hexyl-3- (l-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-019); ‘(vi)
l-[2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-200);
l-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (JWH-250); 1 -penty
1-3-[l-(4-methoxynaphthoy 1)]indole (JWH-081); l-pentyl-3-(4-methyl-l
-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-122); l-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-l-naphthoyl)indole
(JWH-398); l-(5-fluoropentyl)-3- (l-naphthoyl)indole (AM2201);
l-(5-fluoropentyl)-3-(2-iodobenzoyl)indole (AM694); l-pentyl-3-
[(4-methoxy-benzoyl]indole (SR-19 and RCS-4);
l-cyclohexylethyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (SR-18 and RCS-8); and
l-pentyl-3-(2-chlorophenylacetyl)indole (JWH-203). or any product or
substance that would constitute a controlled substance analogue of any of
those substances under 21 U.S.C. Section 802(32).



(Ord. 322, passed 4-10-2013)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.02  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; COMMONLY USED NAMES AND LABELS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to possess, sell,
transfer, use or display or offer for sale any product or substance using the
names and/or labels “spice”, “bath salts”, “synthetic cannabis”,
“herbal incense”, “K-2", “Black Mamba”, “Bombay Blue”, “Fake
Weed”, “Genie”, “Zohai”, “herbal smoking blends”, “Yucatan
Fire”, “Skunk”, “Moon Rocks”, “Thunda”, “White Lightning”,
“White Snow”, “Purple Wave”, “Zoom”, “Cloud Nine”,
“Dynamite Plus”, “Cotton Cloud”, “Blaze”, “Volcano”, “Spicy
Haze”, “Dragon Spice”, “The Hampster”, “Puff, “Voodoo Spice”,
“Ninja Aroma Plus”, “Dark Night”, and “spice product”, or to
repackage for purpose of sale or distribution, or possess, sell, transfer,
use, display, offer for sale, or distribute repackaged products which
originally were manufactured and packaged using said names and/or labels.



(Ord. 322, passed 4-10-2013)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  PRODUCTS NOT INTENDED OR LABELED FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to possess for sale, offer for
sale, or sell any product that is not intended or labeled for human
consumption, knowing or having reason to know that the purchasers and/or end
users of such product commonly intentionally misuse such product.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section:



      (1)   INTENTIONAL MISUSE OF A PRODUCT.  The consumption,
ingestion, smoking, or other introduction of a product into the human body
for the purpose of obtaining a high, hallucinogenic, psychoactive,
psychotropic, or other mind altering effect.



      (2)   If an employee of the federal, state, county, or local
government, acting in his/her official capacity, provides a person with
information documenting the common intentional misuse of a product, such
person shall be deemed to know or have reason to know of the common
intentional misuse of the product.



(Ord. 322, passed 4-10-2013)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person or entity violating any provision of §§ 132.01 or
132.03 of this chapter shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor punishable
pursuant to § 10.99 of the San Luis City Code.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 132.02 of this
chapter shall be responsible for a civil violation punishable pursuant to §
10.99 of the San Luis City Code.



   (C)   Each day during which any violation of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 322, passed 4-10-2013)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      152.   ZONING REGULATIONS



      153.   PUBLIC WORKS AND STANDARDS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   Adoption of International Building Code 2003



   150.002   Adoption of International Residential Code 2003



   150.003   Adoption of International Existing Building Code 2003



   150.004   Adoption of International Mechanical Code 2006



   150.005   Adoption of International Plumbing Code 2006



   150.006   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code 2003



   150.007   Adoption of National Electric Code 2008



   150.008   Adoption of NFPA1: Uniform Fire Code 2003



   150.008.1   Reference sections



   150.008.2   Areas where certain materials are prohibited



   150.008.3   Establishment and duties of the prevention division of
the City of San Luis Fire Department



   150.008.4   Appeals



   150.009   Construction debris



   150.010   Miscellaneous rescinded and repealed codes; excepted
moratorium



   150.011   Building Official



   150.012   Enforcement



   150.013   Additional regulations



   150.014   Conflict




Development Impact Fee




   150.040   Title



   150.041   Legislative intent and purpose



   150.042   Definitions



   150.043   Applicability



   150.044   Authority for development impact fees



   150.045   Administration of development impact fees



   150.046   Land use assumptions



   150.047   Infrastructure improvements plan



   150.048   Adoption and modification procedures



   150.049   Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure
improvements plan and the land use assumptions



   150.050   Collection of development impact fees



   150.051   Development impact fee credits and credit agreements



   150.052   Development agreements



   150.053   Appeals



   150.054   Refunds of development impact fees



   150.055   Oversight of development impact fee program



Property Maintenance



   150.065   Adoption of property maintenance order



Board of Appeals



   150.080   Purposes; created; qualifications; appointment; term of
members



   150.081   Advisory capacity



   150.082   Authority; regulations; decisions



   150.083   Decisions: vote, quorum



   150.084   Secretary to Board: appointment, powers



   150.085   Appeals: procedure, meetings, effect of decisions



   150.086   Reference to Board of Appeals



 



   150.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 2003.



   That certain document entitled International Building Code 2003, three
copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the city,
together with that certain document entitled City of San Luis Amendments to
International Building Code 2003, three copies of which are on file in the
office of City Clerk of the city, which documents were made a public record
of the city, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this code.



(Ord. 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.002  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 2003.



   That certain document entitled International Residential Code 2003 For
One- and Two-Family Dwellings, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk of the city, together with that certain document
entitled City of San Luis Amendments to 2003 International Residential Code
For One- and Two-Family Dwellings which documents were made a public record
of the city, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this code.



(Ord. 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.003  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE 2003.



   That certain document entitled International Existing Building Code
2003, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of
the city, together with that certain document entitled City of San Luis
Amendments to International Existing Building Code 2003, which documents were
made a public record of the city, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this code.



(Ord. 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.004  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 2006.



   That certain document entitled International Mechanical Code 2006,
three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
city, which document was made a public record of the city, is hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code.



(Ord. 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.005  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE 2006.



   That certain document entitled International Plumbing Code 2006, three
copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the city,
which document was made a public record by of the city, is hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code.



(Ord. 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.006  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 2003.



   That certain document entitled International Property Maintenance Code
2003, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of
the city, which document was made a public record of the city, is hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code.



(Ord. 276, passed 4-4-2010; Ord. 305, passed 6-8-2011)



§ 150.007  ADOPTION OF NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE 2008.



   That certain document entitled National Electrical Code 2008, three
copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the city,
together with that certain document entitled City of San Luis Amendments to
National Electrical Code 2008, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk, which documents were made a public record of the
city, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this code.



(Ord. 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.008  ADOPTION OF NFPA1: UNIFORM FIRE CODE 2003.



   That certain document known as "NFPA 1, Fire Code 2012" including
Annexes "A", "B", "D", "E", and "G" published by the National Fire Protection
Association three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk, together with this Ordinance No. 353 which lists certain amendments,
which documents were made a public record by Resolution No. 1146 of the city,
is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section the provisions thereof to become effective on the 24th day of
June, 2016.



(Ord. 276, passed 4-4-2010; Am. Ord. 353, passed 5-25-2016)



§ 150.008.1  REFERENCE SECTIONS.



   This edition of NFPA 1, the Fire Code, adopted by the provision of this
chapter is hereby amended, altered, and changed in the following respects:



   NOTE: The section numbers that follow are the reference sections found
in NFPA-1.



1.1.2 Title. Is hereby amended as follows:



   These regulations shall be known as the 2012 Fire Code with City of San
Luis Amendments, hereinafter referred to as "this code."



1.3.1 Application. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   All construction and/or alterations of a structure, which require a
building permit, shall comply with the current building code adopted by the
City of San Luis.



1.3.2 Reference Standards. Is hereby amended as follows:



   1.3.2.1.1



   When reference is made to the Building Code, it shall mean the current
building code adopted by the City of San Luis with amendments by the City of
San Luis.



1.3.3.1 Conflicts. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any
provisions of local, state or federal law.



1.3.3.2 Conflicts. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.



1.3.6.3 Buildings. Is hereby amended as follows:



   Repairs, renovations, alterations, reconstruction, change of occupancy,
and additions to buildings shall conform to the adopted building code of the
jurisdiction having authority, except for repairs, renovation, alteration and
reconstruction of fire sprinkler and fire alarms. Those activities shall be
regulated by the current fire and building codes adopted by this ordinance.



1.7.11 Plans and Specifications. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following sentence:



   All plans, specifications, calculations, and design criteria shall be
stamped by a registrant licensed to practice in the state of Arizona.
Calculation sheets for fire sprinkler systems shall be made a permanent part
of the submitted design drawings.



1.10.1 Fire Code Board of Appeals. Is hereby amended by striking the entire
paragraph and replacing it with the following:



   Whenever reference is made to the "Board of Appeals" in "NFPA 1 - The
Fire Code 2012", it shall mean the City of San Luis "Fire Appeals Board" and
will follow rules, guidelines and terms of service as identified within the
criteria for establishing the "Fire Appeals Board".



1.10.1.1.4 Membership. Is hereby amended by striking the entire sentence.



1.10.1.1.5 Membership. Is hereby amended by striking the entire paragraph.



1.10.1.1.5.3 Membership. Is hereby amended by striking the entire sentence.



1.10.3 Authority of the Board of Appeals. Is hereby amended by striking
sections 1.10.3.3 and 1.10.6.2.



Chapter 2 Reference Publications



2.2 NFPA Publications



   The reference to the 2012 Edition of the NFPA 5000, Building
Construction and Safety Code shall be changed to name the current building
code adopted by the City of San Luis.



Chapter 3 Definitions. Is hereby amended by addition of the following:



3.3.01 Chief



   Whenever the word Chief, Fire Chief or Chief of the Fire Department is
used in NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2012 Edition shall be construed to mean the Fire
Chief or the authorized representative of the City of San Luis Fire
Department.



3.3.02 City



   Whenever the word City, Municipality, Jurisdiction or Authority having
Jurisdiction (AHJ) is used in NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2012 Edition shall be
construed to mean the City of San Luis, Arizona.



3.3.03 Corporate Counsel



   Whenever the word "Corporate Counsel" or "City Attorney" used in NFPA
1, Fire Code, 2012 Edition shall be construed to mean the Attorney of the
City of San Luis, Arizona.



3.3.165.1 Combustible Liquid. Is hereby amended by addition of the following
paragraph:



   Note: Storage and use of combustible liquids with a flash point under
141 degrees F in outdoor areas and areas without climatic controls will be
treated as Class l-C flammable liquids throughout the code.



Chapter 4 General Requirements



4.5.7 Changes of Occupancy. In order to determine when a change of occupancy
will initiate a fire sprinkler retrofit, the following will be added to
subsection (1):



   (1)   For the purpose of determining if a change of occupancy will
be a more hazardous operation requiring the retrofit of a fire sprinkler
system, the "Means of Egress Hazard Categories Table" (for life safety) in
the edition of the International Existing Building Code currently adopted by
the City of San Luis will be referenced. See section 10.3.4.



Chapter 10 General Fire Safety



10.1.3 Building Code. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   The design and construction of new structures shall comply with the
current building code adopted by the City of San Luis, and any alterations,
additions, changes in use or changes in structures required by this code,
which are within the scope of the current building code adopted by the City
of San Luis, shall be made in accordance therewith.



10.3.4.01 Change of Use or Occupancy Classification. Is hereby amended by the
addition of the following paragraph:



   No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any structure that
would place the structure in a different division of the same group or
occupancy or in a different group of occupancies, unless such structure is
made to comply with the requirements of this code and the current building
code adopted by the City of San Luis. Subject to the approval of the fire
code official, the use or occupancy of an existing structure shall be allowed
to be changed and the structure is allowed to be occupied for the purposes in
other groups without conforming to all the requirements of this code and the
current building code adopted by the City of San Luis for those groups,
provided the new or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire
risk, than the existing use.



10.12.1.1 Premises Identification. Is hereby amended by addition of the
following sentence:



   NFPA 704, figure 9.1(c) shall be used to determine the size of address
lettering and numbering.



Chapter 11 Building Services



11.3.6.1 Requirements for Standardized Fire Service Keys. Is hereby amended
by addition of the following exception:



   Exception: The owner shall be permitted to place the building's
non-standardized fire service elevator keys in a key box installed in
accordance with section 11.3.6.5.1.1-7.



11.12.1 Photovoltaic Systems. Is hereby amended by addition of the following
reference:



   New photovoltaic systems shall be installed in accordance with section
11.10, section 11.12, NFPA 70, and the current building code adopted by the
City of San Luis.



Chapter 12 Features of Fire Protection



12.5.1 Interior Finish, is hereby amended by addition of the following
reference:



   Interior finish in buildings and structures shall meet the requirements
of NFPA 101, this code, and the current building code adopted by the City of
San Luis. Chapter 13 Fire Protection Systems



13.1.4.1 Fire Department Connection. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following sentence:



   The Fire Department Connection shall be remotely located from the
building in a location approved by the AHJ.



13.3 Automatic Sprinklers



13.3.2.1 to 13.3.2.29 Where Required. Is hereby amended by the addition of
the following to read as follows:



   A.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all
levels of all buildings here after constructed, except for Group U and R-3
occupancies.



      a.   Exception 1: Buildings housing a group A-1, A-2, A-3,
A-4, A-5, B, E, F-2, M, or S-2 occupancy having square footage less than 500
square feet.



         i.   Note: For the purposes of this article, fire
resistive fire walls will not be considered a barrier creating a separate
building.



      b.   Exception 2: Temporary use of modular or factory built
structures shall not be required to provide an automatic fire sprinkler
system, provided that the use of the structure and the "Certificate of
Occupancy" is limited to one year from the time of set up to removal.



      c.   Exception 3: Free standing open canopy structure. When
automatic fire sprinklers are not required by the current building code
adopted by the City of San Luis, and when the structure meets each of the
following criteria, fire sprinklers will not be required:



         i.   The structure shall not exceed 10,000 square feet.



         ii.   The entire covered area is open on all sides void
of interior walls or partitions.



         iii.   Setbacks from property lines or other structures
are in accordance with the current building code adopted by the City of San
Luis.



         iv.   The building use is not classified as hazardous,
or mercantile occupancy.



         v.   Portable fire extinguishers are installed in
accordance with NFPA 10.



         vi.   Open flames and devices emitting flames or
creating a glow capable of igniting combustible materials shall not be used
in or adjacent to the structure.



         vii.   Flammable or combustible liquids and LP-Gas shall
not be stored in or adjacent to the structure, except for automobile fueling
islands.



         viii.   An approved water supply capable of supplying
the required fire flow shall be provided.



         Note: Any changes to the free standing open canopy
structure or its use may result in the loss of this exception and may require
a retrofit of an automatic fire sprinkler system.



   B.   Retrofit of fire sprinklers to existing structures. An existing
building that undergoes a "change of occupancy" as outlined in section 4.5.7,
whereby the new occupancy is deemed a greater hazard than the previous
occupancy, the building will be treated as a new building and may require the
installation of fire sprinklers. The "Means of Egress Hazard Categories
Table" (for life safety) in the edition of the International Existing
Building Code currently adopted by the City of San Luis shall be referenced
to determine occupancy hazard level.



   C.   Any building except Group U and R-3 occupancies, which
undergoes a total summation renovation in excess of 50% of value as assessed
by the building code, shall meet the requirements of this section.



   D.   Any building that increases in size by a total summation of 50%
as a result of one or more expansions will require a retrofit of an automatic
fire sprinkler system.



13.3.2.20.1 One and Two-Family Dwellings. Is hereby amended by deletion.



Chapter 16 Safeguarding During Construction, Alteration, and Demolition
Operations.



16.1.1 General Requirements. Is hereby amended by addition of the following
reference:



   Structures undergoing construction, alteration, or demolition
operations, including those in underground locations, shall comply with NFPA
241, Standard for Safeguarding Construction, Alteration, and Demolition
Operations, this chapter, and the current building code adopted by the City
of San Luis.



Chapter 18 Fire Department Access and Water Supply.



18.2.3.1.1 Required Access. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following sentence:



   When required, the apparatus access road shall be located no closer
than fifty (50) feet from any structure unless authorized by the Chief.



18.5.1 Fire Hydrants. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
paragraph:



   The average spacing in residential areas shall be 500 feet or as
otherwise approved by the Fire Chief and/or the Chiefs designee. For
educational, industrial, commercial, institutional, mercantile, multi-family
dwellings and storage areas, the average fire hydrant spacing shall be 300
feet or as otherwise approved by the Fire Chief and/or the Chiefs designee.



Chapter 66 Flammable and Combustible Liquids



66.21.3 General Requirements. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following sentence:



   Any permanent tank installation over 500 gallons will require that the
foundation and anchorage be engineered by a design professional registered in
the State of Arizona.



Chapter 69 Liquefied Petroleum Gases and Liquefied Natural Gasses



69.1 General Provisions. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   Any permanent tank installation over 500 gallons will require that the
foundation and anchorage be engineered by a design professional registered in
the State of Arizona.



69.4.2   Operational Safety. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following paragraph:



   Dispensing, filling, and evacuating of LP gases shall be performed by a
qualified person. In service training for qualified persons shall be
conducted annually and current records of such training shall be maintained
on site.



(Ord. 353, passed 5-25-2016)



§ 150.008.2  AREAS WHERE CERTAIN MATERIALS ARE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. For volumes exceeding the
maximum allowable quantities (as outlined in the Fire Code) the location in
which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby
established as follows:



      (1)   In all areas within the corporate limits of the city,
other than those defined and designated as "light industrial" or "heavy
industrial" districts by the zoning ordinance of the city, such storage is
prohibited.



      (2)   Upon presentation of plans conforming to design criteria
as established in the Fire Code and its referenced standards, the Authority
Having Jurisdiction, as defined by the Fire Code, may approve the location of
such storage, in areas where such storage is not prohibited by subdivision
(1) above.



   (B)   Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of
flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited.
The limits, referred to in the Fire Code and its referenced standards,
establishing districts in which the aboveground storage of flammable or
combustible liquids is restricted are hereby established as follows:



      (1)   In all areas within the corporate limits of the city
other than those defined and designated as "light industrial" or "heavy
industrial" districts by the zoning ordinance of this city, the storage of
flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited.



      (2)   Exception 1: Vaulted tanks up to 1,000 gallons which
provide two-hour fire protection may be used in prohibited areas.



      (3)   Exception 2: Aboveground tanks up to 500 gallons in
capacity may be used in commercial districts when tanks meet all setbacks,
containment, and are screened from view. Screening shall meet standards set
forth in the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 353, passed 5-25-2016)



§ 150.008.3  ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF THE PREVENTION DIVISION OF CITV OF
SAN LUIS FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The City of San Luis Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention
Division in the fire department of the City of San Luis, which is hereby
established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of
the San Luis Fire Department.



(Ord. 353, passed 5-25-2016)



§ 150.008.4  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Chief of the City of San Luis Fire Department shall
disapprove an application or refuses to grant a license or permit applied
for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or
that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Chief of
the Fire Department to the Fire Appeals Board, as established and referred to
in the current adopted fire code for the City of San Luis, within 30 days
from the date of the decision.



(Ord. 353, passed 5-25-2016)



§ 150.009  CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.



   (A)   Each property or lot upon which a residential unit for either
a single-family home or duplex is to be constructed, reconstructed, remodeled
or to which an addition is to be built, shall have on-site a receptacle or
container for the collection of debris that is a minimum of three yards in
size, and arrangements shall be made for the collection and removal of debris
from the construction site by a commercial hauler of solid waste authorized
to do business in the city. The Building Official may waive this requirement
if the building site already has established solid waste disposal service and
the amount of debris anticipated to be generated by the construction activity
can be handled by the established service.



   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant for
the permit shall show proof to the Building Official of arrangements for the
delivery and placement on site of a receptacle or container for collection of
debris as required by division (A) above.



   (C)   The applicant for the building permit for construction,
reconstruction or remodeling of a single-family residence or duplex, or the
addition to a single-family residence or duplex, the owner and/or any person
in control of the property upon which the construction, reconstruction,
remodeling is occurring, is responsible to keep the site clean of litter,
rubbish, trash, filth or debris, and shall at all times maintain the site or
property upon which the construction activity is occurring in a condition so
that construction materials, litter, rubbish, trash, filth or debris will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any other
adjoining property or properties in the neighborhood.



   (D)   The applicant for the building permit for construction,
reconstruction or remodeling of a single-family residence or duplex, or the
addition to a single-family residence or duplex, the owner and/or any person
in control of the property upon which the construction, reconstruction,
remodeling is occurring, is responsible to ensure that no placement of
concrete, earth, rock, gravel, mortar, bricks, block or other heavy material
in the receptacle or container for collection of debris shall occur which
would prevent removal of debris from the container by the solid waste hauler
who provided the container.



   (E)   No receptacle or container for debris required by this section
shall be used for disposal of concrete, earth, rock, gravel, mortar, bricks,
block or other material which would prevent removal of debris from the
container by the solid waste hauler who provided the container.



(Ord. 258, passed 9-10-2008; Ord 276, passed 4-4-2010)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.010 MISCELLANEOUS RESCINDED AND REPEALED CODES; EXCEPTED MORATORIUM.



   (A)   The 1991 Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city is
hereby rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the
moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the
moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application
for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the 1991 Uniform Building
Code will apply to the parcel, structure, building, application, and/or
permit.



   (B)    The 1991 Uniform Sign Code as adopted by the city is hereby
rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the moratorium
provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the



moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application
for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the 1991 Uniform Sign Code
will apply to the parcel, structure, building, application, and/or permit.



   (C)   The 1991 Uniform Sound Transmission Code as adopted by the
city is hereby rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the
moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the
moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application
for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the 1991 Uniform Sound
Transmission Code will apply to the parcel, structure, building, application,
and/or permit.



   (D)   The 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
as adopted by the city is hereby rescinded and repealed, save and except to
the extent that the moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in
the event that the moratorium applies to a particular parcel, building,
structure, application for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the
1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings will apply to the
parcel, building, structure, application, and/or permit.



   (E)   The 1991 Uniform Mechanical Code and any amendments thereto as
adopted by the city is hereby rescinded and repealed, save and except to the
extent that the moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the
event that the moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure,
building, application for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the
1991 Uniform Mechanical Code and any amendments thereto will apply to the
parcel, structure, building, application, and/or permit.



   (F)   The 1991 Uniform Plumbing Code and any amendments thereto as
adopted by the city is hereby rescinded and repealed, save and except to the
extent that the moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the
event that the moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure,
building, application for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the
1991 Uniform Plumbing Code and any amendments thereto will apply to the
parcel, structure, building, application, and/or permit.



   (G)   The 1993 National Electrical Code as adopted by the city is
hereby rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the
moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the
moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application
for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the 1993 National Electrical
Code will apply to the parcel, structure, building, application, and/or
permit.



   (H)   The 1997 Uniform Sign Code as adopted by the city is hereby
rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the moratorium
provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the moratorium
applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application for permit,
or permit, then, and in that event, the 1971 Uniform Sign Code will apply to
the parcel, structure, building, application, and/or permit.



   (I)   The 1991 Uniform Solar Energy Code as adopted by the city is
hereby rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the
moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the
moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application
for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the 1991 Uniform Solar Energy
Code will apply to the parcel, structure, building, application, and/or
permit.



   (J)   The 1991 Uniform Sound Transmission Code as adopted by the
city is hereby rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the
moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the
moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application
for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the 1991 Uniform Sound
Transmission Code will apply to the parcel, structure, building, application,
and/or permit.



   (K)   The 1991 Uniform Housing Code as adopted by the city is hereby
rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the moratorium
provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the moratorium
applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application for permit,
or permit, then, and in that event, the 1991 Uniform Housing Code will apply
to the parcel, structure, building, application, and/or permit.



   (L)   The 2000 Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city is hereby
rescinded and repealed, save and except to the extent that the moratorium
provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the moratorium
applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application for permit,
or permit, then, and in that event, the 2000 Uniform Fire Code will apply to
the parcel, structure, building, application, and/or permit.



(Ord 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.011  BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   The Building Official and administrative authority as such may be
referenced in any section of this chapter for all matters pertaining to any
building, plumbing, electrical or any other inspections shall be vested in
the office of the Clerk, provided that the Council may authorize deputies as
needed to perform any inspection work or other functions that may be required
by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-5)  (Ord. 10, passed 7-24-1980)



§ 150.012  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to administer and enforce
this chapter. All other city law enforcement officials and agencies shall,
whenever requested by the Building Official, participate in and assist the
Building Official in the enforcement of this chapter to the extent that they
are lawfully authorized to do so.



(Ord. 10, passed 7-24-1980)



§ 150.013  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Sewer system.  The Council may from time to time, by
resolution, prescribe additional regulations and requirements governing
connections to and the use of the sewer system as may be proper or expedient.



   (B)   Arizonans with Disabilities Act.



      (1)   Standards and specifications set forth in A.R.S. Title
41, Chapter 9, Art. 8, Arizonans with Disabilities Act, and its implementing
rules, including Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for
Buildings and Facilities declared a public record by Resolution 341, as
applying to public entities, are hereby adopted and incorporated as an
amendment to the Uniform Building Code adopted in § 150.001 and made a part
thereof as though fully set forth therein. The standards and specifications
shall apply to new construction and alterations and are not required in
buildings or portions of existing buildings that do not meet the standards
and specifications.



      (2)   Standards and specifications set forth in A.R.S. Title
41, Chapter 9, Art. 8, Arizonans with Disabilities Act, and its implementing
rules, including Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for
Buildings and Facilities declared a public record by Resolution 341, as
applying to public accommodations and commercial facilities, are hereby
adopted and incorporated as an amendment to the Uniform Building Code adopted
in § 150.001 and made part thereof as though fully set forth therein. The
standards and specifications shall apply to new construction and alterations
commenced after September 3, 1996.



(Ord. 10, passed 7-24-1980; Ord. 143, passed 12-26-1996)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.014  CONFLICT.



   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this subchapter,
or any code or amendment adopted hereby, and any other ordinance, code,
resolution, regulation, or policy of the city, the conflicting provisions are
hereby repealed, superseded, and replaced, save and except to the extent that
the moratorium provided by A.R.S. § 9-805 applies, and in the event that the
moratorium applies to a particular parcel, structure, building, application
for permit, or permit, then, and in that event, the codes previously in
effect prior to the adoption of this subchapter will apply to the parcel,
structure, building, application, and/or permit.



(Ord 276, passed 4-4-2010)



DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE



§ 150.040  TITLE.



   This subchapter, §§ 150.040 through 150.055 inclusive, shall be known
and may be cited as the “San Luis development impact fee ordinance”.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.041  LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   This subchapter, sections 150.040 through 150.055, are adopted
for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the city by:



      (1)   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share
of the costs incurred by the city that are associated with providing
necessary public services to new development;



      (2)   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and
assessing development impact fees consistent with the requirements of A.R.S.
§ 9-463.05, including requirements pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
subsection K that, on or before August 1, 2014, the city replace its
development impact fees that were adopted prior to January 1, 2012 with
development impact fees adopted pursuant to the requirements of A.R.S. §
9-463.05 as amended by the state legislature in SB 1525, fiftieth
legislature, first regular session;



      (3)   Providing for the temporary continuation of certain
development impact fees adopted prior to January 1, 2012 until otherwise
replaced pursuant to this subchapter; and



      (4)   Setting forth procedures for administering the
development impact fee program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and
refunds of development impact fees. All development impact fee assessments,
offsets, credits, or refunds shall be administered in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   This subchapter, §§ 150.040 through 150.055, shall not
affect the city’s zoning authority or its authority to adopt or amend its
general plan, provided that planning and zoning activities by the city may
require amendments to development impact fees as provided in § 150.046 below.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.042  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Singular terms shall include their plural.



   APPLICANT.  A person who applies to the city for a building permit.



   APPURTENANCE.  Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other
fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components,
associated with a capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the
operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding
replacement of the same after initial installation.



   AQUATIC CENTER.  A facility primarily designed to host
non-recreational competitive functions generally occurring within water,
including, but not limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving
events. The facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof,
and includes all necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited
to, locker rooms, offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.



   BUILDING PERMIT.  Any permit issued by the city that authorizes
vertical construction, increases square footage, authorizes changes to land
use, or provides for the addition of a residential or non-residential point
of demand to a water or wastewater system.



   CAPITAL FACILITY.  An asset having a useful life of three or more
years that is a component of one or more categories of necessary public
service provided by the city. A CAPITAL FACILITY may include any associated
purchase of real property, architectural and engineering services leading to
the design and construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to
existing facilities, improvements to or expansions of existing facilities,
and associated financing and professional services. INFRASTRUCTURE shall have
the same meaning as CAPITAL FACILITIES.



   CATEGORY OF NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICE.  A category of necessary public
services for which the city is authorized to assess development impact fees,
as further defined in § 150.047(A)(1).



   CATEGORY OF DEVELOPMENT.  A specific land use category against which a
development impact fee is calculated and assessed. The city assesses
development impact fees against residential, commercial, institutional,
industrial, office, land use categories, and other services, each of which is
defined in this list of definitions.



   CITY.  The City of San Luis, Arizona.



   COMMERCIAL LAND USE.  A land use category consisting of the uses
permitted pursuant to §§ 152.105 through 152.108, save and except for
office and other services land use as defined below.



   CREDIT.  A reduction in an assessed development impact fee resulting
from developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or
dedications for capital facilities included in an infrastructure improvements
plan pursuant to § 150.051 below (or as otherwise permitted by this
subchapter).



   CREDIT AGREEMENT.  A written agreement between the city and a
developer or landowner that allocates credits to the development pursuant to
§ 150.051 below. A credit agreement may be included as part of a development
agreement pursuant to § 150.052 below.



   CREDIT ALLOCATION.  A term used to describe when credits are
distributed to a particular development or parcel of land after execution of
a credit agreement, but are not yet issued.



   CREDIT ISSUANCE.  A term used to describe when the amount of an
assessed development impact fee attributable to a particular development or
parcel of land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.



   DEVELOPER.  An individual, group of individuals, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation,
state agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development
activity, and their respective successors and assigns.



   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.  An agreement prepared in accordance with the
requirements of § 150.052 below, A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and any applicable
requirements of the city code.



   DIRECT BENEFIT.  A benefit to an EDU resulting from a capital facility
that:



      (1)   Addresses the need for a necessary public service
created in whole or in part by the EDU; and that



      (2)   Meets either of the following criteria:



         (a)   The capital facility is located in the immediate
area of the EDU and is needed in the immediate area of the EDU to maintain
the level of service; or



         (b)   The capital facility substitutes for, or
eliminates the need for a capital facility that would have otherwise have
been needed in the immediate area of the EDU to maintain the city’s level
of service.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of
rooms, or single room occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant,
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.



   EQUIPMENT.  Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not
including vehicles, that a capital facility needs to provide the level of
service specified by the infrastructure improvement plan, but excluding
replacement of the same after initial development of the capital facility.



   EQUIVALENT DEMAND UNIT (EDU).  A unit of development within a
particular category of development, defined in terms of a standardized
measure of the demand that a unit of development in that category of
development generates for necessary public services in relation to the demand
generated by a detached single-family dwelling unit. For all categories of
necessary public services, the EDU factor for a detached single-family
dwelling unit is one, while the EDU factor for a unit of development within
another category of development is represented as a ratio of the demand for
each category of necessary public services typically generated by that unit
as compared to the demand for such services typically generated by a detached
single-family dwelling unit. An EDU shall be a “service unit” for
purposes of A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(10).



   EXCLUDED LIBRARY FACILITY.  Library facilities for which development
impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including that
portion of any library facility that exceeds 10,000 square feet, and
equipment, vehicles or appurtenances associated with library operations.



   EXCLUDED PARK FACILITY.  Park and recreational facilities for which
development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums, arenas,
arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities, bathhouses,
boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than 3,000 square feet in
floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian facilities, golf
course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks, water
reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.



   FEE REPORT.  A written report developed pursuant to § 150.051 that
identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of each development
impact fee, explains the relationship between the development impact fee to
be assessed and the plan-based cost per EDU calculated in the infrastructure
improvements plan, and which meets other requirements set forth in A.R.S. §
9-463.05.



   FINANCING or DEBT.  Any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund
transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or
expansion of a capital facility.



   FIRE PROTECTION.  A category of necessary public services that
includes fire stations, fire equipment, fire vehicles, and all appurtenances
for fire stations. FIRE PROTECTION does not include vehicles or equipment
used to provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. FIRE
PROTECTION does not include any facility that is used for training
firefighters from more than one station or substation.



   GENERAL GOVERNMENT.  A category of necessary public services that
includes principal and interest for debt service for buildings, equipment,
and all appurtenances for city administration which were acquired, developed,
built, constructed, and/or financed pursuant to bonds issued for this purpose
pursuant to the San Luis Civic Improvement Corporation Municipal Facilities
Excise Tax Revenue Bonds Series 2005.



   GENERAL PLAN.  The most recently adopted San Luis general plan.



   GRANDFATHERED FACILITIES.  Capital facilities provided through
financing or debt incurred before June 1, 2011 for which a development impact
fee has been pledged towards repayment.



   GROSS IMPACT FEE.  The total development impact fee to be assessed
against a subject development on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of
any credits.



   INDUSTRIAL LAND USE.  Uses permitted pursuant to §§ 152.120 through
150.122.



   INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.  A document or series of documents
that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including those
adopted pursuant to § 150.048 below to cover any category or combination of
categories of necessary public services.



   INSTITUTIONAL LAND USE.  A category of nonresidential land use that
includes private schools, hospitals, religious facilities, day care centers
and other similar public and quasi-public uses when not elsewhere classified
in other land use categories in the fee schedule.



   INTERIM FEE SCHEDULE.  The San Luis development impact fee schedule as
established prior to January 1, 2012 in accordance with then-applicable law,
and which shall expire not later than August 1, 2014.



   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.  Projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least ten
years as specified in § 150.046 below.



   LEVEL OF SERVICE.  A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a
necessary public service that is to be provided by the city to development in
a particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between
service capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort
or convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures.
LEVEL OF SERVICE may be measured differently for different categories of
necessary public services, as identified in the applicable infrastructure
improvements plan.



   MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL (2+) LAND USE SUBCATEGORY.  Predominantly uses
permitted pursuant to §§ 152.090 through 152.092, and similar uses as
determined by the Public Works Director.



   NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICES.  Has the meaning prescribed in A.R.S. §
9-463.05(T)(5).



   OFFICES AND OTHER SERVICES LAND USE.  A category of use described as
professional, administrative, and general offices; urgent care facilities;
veterinary hospitals or clinics; medical, dental, chiropractic, and clinical
offices; and similar uses as determined by the City Public Works Director.



   OFFSET.  An amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of
providing necessary public services to account for those capital components
of infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a
development through taxes, fees (except for development impact fees), and
other revenue sources, as determined by the city pursuant to § 150.047 below.



   PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public
services including but not limited to parks, swimming pools and related
facilities and equipment located on real property not larger than 30 acres in
area, as well as park facilities larger than 30 acres where such facilities
provide a direct benefit. PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACULTIES do not include
excluded park facilities, although parks and recreational facilities may
contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded park facility.



   PLAN-BASED COST PER EDU.  The total future capital costs listed in the
infrastructure improvements plan for a category of necessary public services
divided by the total new equivalent demand units projected in a particular
service area for that category of necessary public services over the same
time period.



   POLICE FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services, including
vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve
the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders,
protect the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized
and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain
police records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. POLICE
FACILITIES do not include vehicle and equipment used to provide
administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. POLICE FACILITIES do
not include any facility that is used for training officers from more than
one station or substation.



   PUBLIC SAFETY.  A category of necessary public services combining
police facilities and fire protection.



   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL.  A professional engineer, surveyor, financial
analyst, or planner providing services within the scope of his or her
license, education or experience.



   RESIDENTIAL LAND USE CATEGORY.  Includes all uses in the single family
residential, multifamily, hotel/motel, congregate care, age restricted single
family residential, and age restricted multifamily residential land use
subcategories.



   SERVICE AREA.  Any specified area within the boundaries of the city
within which: (a) the city will provide a category of necessary public
services to development at a planned level of service; and (b) within which
(I) a substantial nexus exists between the capital facilities to be provided
and the development to be served, or (ii) in the case of a park facility
larger than 30 acres, a direct benefit exists between the park facilities and
the development to be served, each as prescribed in the infrastructure
improvements plan. Some or all of the capital facilities providing service to
a service area may be physically located outside of that service area
provided that the required substantial nexus or direct benefit is
demonstrated to exist.



   SINGLE UNIT RESIDENTIAL LAND USE SUBCATEGORY.  Detached and attached
residential structures characteristic of a primary residence, even if the
residence is subsequently rented. Mobile homes and manufactured homes on
individual parcels, and duplexes, triplexes, condominiums, and townhomes are
assessed at the single family residential land use rate.



   STREET FACILITIES.  A category of necessary public services including
arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on an
officially adopted plan of the city, traffic signals and rights-of-way and
improvements thereon.



   STORM DRAINAGE.  A category of necessary public services including but
not limited to storm sewers constructed in sizes needed to provide for
stormwater management for areas beyond major street projects and stormwater
detention/ retention basins, tanks, pump stations and channels necessary to
provide for proper stormwater management, including any appurtenances for
those facilities.



   SUBJECT DEVELOPMENT.  A land area linked by a unified plan of
development, which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a
development agreement executed in accordance with § 150.052 below.



   SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS.  A SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS exists where the demand for
necessary public services that will be generated by an EDU can be reasonably
quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of
existing capital facilities, the need it will create for new or expanded
capital facilities, and/or the benefit to the development from those capital
faculties.



   SWIMMING POOL.  A public facility primarily designed and/or utilized
for recreational non-competitive functions generally occurring within water,
including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public swimming
sessions, and recreational league swimming/diving events. The facility may be
indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary
supporting amenities.



   USEFUL LIFE.  The period of time in which an asset can reasonably be
expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will
continue to be owned and operated by the city over the entirety of such
period.



   VEHICLE.  Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for
transportation in the course of providing a particular category of necessary
public services at a specified level of service, excluding helicopters and
other aircraft.



   WASTEWATER.  A category of necessary public services including but not
limited to sewers, lift stations, reclamation plants, wastewater treatment
plants, and all other facilities for the collection, interception,
transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater, and any appurtenances
for those facilities.



   WATER.  A category of necessary public services including but not
limited to those facilities necessary to provide for water services to
development, including the acquisition, supply, transportation, treatment,
purification and distribution of water, and any appurtenances to those
faculties.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.043  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, this
subchapter shall apply to all new development within any service area, except
for the development of any city facility.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all of the
territory within the corporate limits of the city and within the city’s
water and wastewater service areas.



   (C)   The city manager or the city manager’s designee is
authorized to make determinations regarding the application, administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.044  AUTHORITY FOR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Fee report and implementation. The city may assess and collect
a development impact fee for costs of necessary public services, including
all professional services required for the preparation or revision of an
infrastructure improvements plan, fee report, development impact fee, and
required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this subchapter. Development
impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   The city shall develop and adopt a fee report that
analyzes and defines the development impact fees to be charged in each
service area for each capital facility category, based on the infrastructure
improvements plan and the plan-based cost per EDU calculated pursuant to §
150.047(A)(13).



      (2)   Development impact fees shall be assessed against all
new commercial, residential, and industrial developments, provided that the
city may assess different amounts of development impact fees against specific
categories of development based on the actual burdens and costs that are
associated with providing necessary public services to that category of
development. No development impact fee shall exceed the plan-based cost per
EDU for any category of development.



      (3)   No development impact fees shall be charged, or credits
issued, for any capital facility that does not fall within one of the
categories of necessary public services for which development impact fees may
be assessed as identified in § 150.047(A)(1).



      (4)   Costs for necessary public services made necessary by
new development shall be based on the same level of service provided to
existing development in the same service area. Development impact fees may
not be used to provide a higher level of service to existing development or
to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory
standards to the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities
that are serving existing development.



      (5)   Development impact fees may not be used to pay the
city’s administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.



      (6)   Projected interest charges and financing costs can only
be included in development impact fees to the extent they represent principal
and/or interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the
construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the
infrastructure improvements plan.



      (7)   Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules,
all development impact fees charged by the city must be included in a “fee
schedule” prepared pursuant to this subchapter and included in the fee
report.



      (8)   All development impact fees shall meet the requirements
of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   (B)   Costs per EDU. The fee report shall summarize the costs of
capital facilities necessary to serve new development on a per EDU basis as
defined and calculated in the infrastructure improvements plan, including all
required offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee structure for
adoption by the city. The actual impact fees to be assessed shall be
disclosed and adopted in the form of impact fee schedules.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.045  ADMINISTRATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Separate accounts. Development impact fees collected pursuant
to this subchapter shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing accounts for
each capital facility category within each service area.



   (B)   Limitations on use of fees. Development impact fees and any
interest on them collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be spent to
provide capital facilities associated with the same category of necessary
public services in the same service area for which they were collected,
including costs of financing or debt used by the city to finance those
capital facilities and other costs authorized by this subchapter that are
included in the infrastructure improvements plan.



   (C)   Time limit. Development impact fees collected after July 31,
2014 shall be used within ten years of the date upon which they were
collected for all categories of necessary public services except for water
and wastewater facilities. For water faculties or wastewater facilities
collected after July 31, 2014, development impact fees shall be used within
15 years of the date upon which they were collected.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.046  LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.



   (A)   Consistency. The infrastructure improvements plan shall be
consistent with the city’s current land use assumptions for each service
area and each category of necessary public services as adopted by the city
pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   (B)   Reviewing the land use assumptions. Prior to the adoption or
amendment of an infrastructure improvements plan, the city shall review and
evaluate the land use assumptions on which the infrastructure improvements
plan is to be based to ensure that the land use assumptions within each
service area conform with the general plan.



   (C)   Evaluating necessary changes. If the land use assumptions upon
which an infrastructure improvements plan is based have not been updated
within the last five years, the city shall evaluate the land use assumptions
to determine whether changes are necessary. If, after general evaluation, the
city determines that the land use assumptions are still valid, the city shall
issue the report required in § 150.049.



   (D)   Required modifications to land use assumptions. If the city
determines that changes to the land use assumptions are necessary in order to
adopt or amend an infrastructure improvements plan, it shall make such
changes as necessary to the land use assumptions prior to or in conjunction
with the review and approval of the infrastructure improvements plan pursuant
to § 150.049.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.047  INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.



   (A)   Infrastructure improvements plan contents. The infrastructure
improvements plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be
based upon or incorporated within the city’s capital improvements plan. The
infrastructure improvements plan shall:



      (1)   Specify the categories of necessary public services for
which the city will impose a development impact fee, which may include any or
all of the following:



         (a)   Water;



         (b)   Wastewater;



         (c)   Stormwater, drainage, and flood control;



         (d)   Street facilities;



         (e)   Parks;



         (f)   Police;



         (g)   Fire;



         (h)   Public safety; and



         (i)   General government;



      (2)   Define and provide a map of one or more service areas
within which the city will provide each category of necessary public services
for which development impact fees will be charged. Each service area must be
defined in a manner that demonstrates a substantial nexus between the capital
facilities to be provided in the service area and the EDUs to be served by
those capital facilities. For parks larger than 30 acres, each service area
must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a direct benefit between the
capital facilities and the EDUs to be served by those capital facilities. The
city may cover more than one category of capital facilities in the same
service area provided that there is an independent substantial nexus or
direct benefit, as applicable, between each category of necessary public
services and the EDUs to be served;



      (3)   Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon
which the infrastructure improvements plan is based in each service area;



      (4)   Analyze and identify the existing level of service
provided by the city to existing EDUs for each category of necessary public
services in each service area;



      (5)   Identify the level of service to be provided by the city
for each category of necessary public services in each service area based on
the relevant land use assumptions and any established city standards or
policies related to required levels of service. If the city provides the same
category of necessary public services in more than one service area, the
infrastructure improvements plan shall include a comparison of the levels of
service to be provided in each service area;



      (6)   For each category of necessary public services, analyze
and identify the existing capacity of the capital facilities in each service
area, the utilization of those capital facilities by existing EDUs, and the
available excess capacity of those capital facilities to serve new EDUs
including any existing or planned commitments or agreements for the usage of
such capacity. The infrastructure improvements plan shall additionally
identify any changes or upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be
needed to achieve or maintain the planned level of service to existing EDUs,
or to meet new safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory
requirements for services provided to existing EDUs;



      (7)   Estimate the total number of existing and future EDUs
within each service area based on the city’s land use assumptions and
projected new EDUs in each service area;



      (8)   Based on the analysis in divisions (A)(3) through (6) of
this section, provide a summary table or tables describing the level of
service for each category of necessary public services by relating the
required capital facilities to EDUs in each service area, and identifying the
applicable EDU factor associated with each category of development;



      (9)   For each category of necessary public services, analyze
and identify the projected utilization of any available excess capacity in
existing capital facilities, and all new or expanded capital facilities that
will be required to provide and maintain the planned level of service in each
service area as a result of the new projected EDUs in that service area, for
a period not to exceed ten years. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit
the city from additionally including in its infrastructure improvements plan
projected utilization of, or needs for, capital facilities for a period
longer than ten years, provided that the costs of such capital facilities are
excluded from the calculation of the plan-based cost per EDU;



      (10)   For each category of necessary public services,
estimate the total cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or
expanded capital facilities that will be required to serve new EDUs,
including costs of land acquisition, improvements, engineering and
architectural services, studies leading to design, design, construction,
financing, and administrative costs, as well as projected costs of inflation.
Such total costs shall not include costs for ongoing operation and
maintenance of capital facilities, nor for replacement of capital facilities
to the extent that such replacement is necessary to serve existing EDUs. If
the infrastructure improvements plan includes changes or upgrades to existing
capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or maintain the planned
level of service to existing EDUs, or to meet new regulatory requirements for
services provided to existing EDUs, such costs shall be identified and
distinguished in the infrastructure improvements plan;



      (11)   Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or
other sources that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital
facilities identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, which shall
include estimated state-shared revenue, highway users revenue, federal
revenue, ad valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar
excise taxes and the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to
development based on the approved land use assumptions. The infrastructure
improvements plan shall additionally estimate the time required to finance,
construct and implement the new or expanded capital facilities;



      (12)   Calculate required offsets as follows:



         (a)   From the forecasted revenues in division (A)(11)
of this section, identify those sources of revenue that:



            (1)   Are attributable to new development; and



            (2)   Will contribute to paying for the capital
costs of necessary public services;



         (b)   For each source and amount of revenue identified
pursuant to division (A)(12)(a) of this section, calculate the relative
contribution of each category of development to paying for the capital costs
of necessary public services in each service area;



         (c)   Based on the relative contributions identified
pursuant to division (A)(12)(b), for each category of necessary public
services, calculate the total offset to be provided to each category of
development in each service area;



         (d)   For each category of necessary public services,
convert the total offset to be provided to each category of development in
each service area into an offset amount per EDU by dividing the total offset
for each category of development by the number of EDUs associated with that
category of development;



         (e)   Beginning August 1, 2014, for purposes of
calculating the required offset, if the city imposes a construction,
contracting, or similar excise tax rate in excess of the percentage amount of
the transaction privilege tax rate that is imposed on the majority of other
transaction privilege tax classifications in the city, the entire excess
portion of the construction, contracting, or similar excise tax shall be
treated as a contribution to the capital costs of necessary public services
provided to new development unless the excess portion is already utilized for
such purpose pursuant to this section; and



         (f)   In determining the amount of required offset for
land included in a community facilities district established under A.R.S.
title 48, chapter 4, article 6, the city shall take into account any capital
facilities provided by the district that are included in the infrastructure
improvements plan and the capital costs paid by the district for such capital
facilities, and shall offset impact fees assessed within the community
facilities district proportionally; and



      (13)   Calculate the plan-based cost per EDU by:



         (a)   Dividing the total projected costs to provide
capital facilities to new EDUs for each category of necessary public services
in each service area as determined pursuant to division (A)(8) of this
section into the number of new EDUs projected for that service area over a
period not to exceed ten years, considering the specific EDU factors
associated with those EDUs for each category of necessary public services; and



         (b)   Subtracting the required offset per EDU calculated
pursuant to division (A)(12) of this section.



   (B)   Multiple plans. An infrastructure improvements plan adopted
pursuant to this section may address one or more of the city’s categories
of necessary public services in any or all of the city’s service areas.
Each capital facility shall be subject to no more than one infrastructure
improvements plan at any given time.



   (C)   Reserved capacity. The city may reserve capacity in an
infrastructure improvements plan to serve one or more planned future
developments, including capacity reserved through a development agreement
pursuant to § 150.052. All reservations of existing capacity must be
disclosed in the infrastructure improvements plan at the time it is adopted.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.048  ADOPTION AND MODIFICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Adopting or amending the infrastructure improvements plan. The
infrastructure improvements plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the
following procedures.



      (1)   Major amendments to the infrastructure improvements
plan. Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, the adoption or
amendment of an infrastructure improvement plan shall occur at one or more
public hearings according to the following schedule, and may occur
concurrently with the adoption of an update of the city’s land use
assumptions as provided in § 150.046.



         (a)   Sixty days before the first public hearing
regarding a new or updated infrastructure improvements plan, the city shall
provide public notice of the hearing and post the infrastructure improvements
plan and the underlying land use assumptions on its website; the city shall
additionally make available to the public the documents used to prepare the
infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions and the
amount of any proposed changes to the plan-based cost per EDU.



         (b)   The city shall conduct a public hearing on the
infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions at least
30 days, but no more than 60 days, before approving or disapproving the
infrastructure improvements plan.



      (2)   Minor amendments to the infrastructure improvements
plan. Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the city may
update the infrastructure improvements plan and/or its underlying land use
assumptions without a public hearing if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The changes in the infrastructure improvements
plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not add any new category
of necessary public services to any service area;



         (b)   The changes in the infrastructure improvements
plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not increase the level
of service to be provided in any service area;



         (c)   Based on an analysis of the fee report and the
city’s adopted development impact fee schedules, the changes in the
infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions
would not, individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken
pursuant to this subsection, have caused a development impact fee in any
service area to have been increased by more than 5% above the development
impact fee that is provided in the current development impact fee schedule;
and



         (d)   At least 30 days prior to the date that the
amendment pursuant to this section is adopted, the city shall post the
proposed amendments on the city website.



   (B)   Amendments to the fee report. Any adoption or amendment of a
fee report and fee schedule shall occur at one or more public hearings
according to the following schedule:



      (1)   The first public hearing on the fee report must be held
at least 30 days after the adoption or approval of and infrastructure
improvements plan as provided in division (A) of this section. The city must
give at least 30 days’ notice prior to the hearing, provided that this
notice may be given on the same day as the approval or disapproval of the
infrastructure improvements plan;



      (2)   The city shall make the infrastructure improvements plan
and underlying land use assumptions available to the public on the city’s
website 30 days prior to the public hearing described in division (B)(1) of
this section;



      (3)   The fee report may be adopted by the city no sooner than
30 days, and no later than 60 days, after the hearing described in division
(B)(1) of this section; and



      (4)   The development fee schedules in the fee report adopted
pursuant to this subsection shall become effective 75 days after adoption of
the fee report by the city.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.049  TIMING FOR THE RENEWAL AND UPDATING OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN AND THE LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.



   (A)   Renewing the infrastructure improvements plan. Except as
provided in division (B) of this section, not later than every five years the
city shall update the applicable infrastructure improvements plan and fee
report related to each category of necessary public services pursuant to §
150.048. Such five-year period shall be calculated from the date of the
adoption of the infrastructure improvements plan or the date of the adoption
of the fee report, whichever occurs later.



   (B)   Determination of no changes. Notwithstanding division (A) of
this section, if the city determines that no changes to an infrastructure
improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, or fee report are needed,
the city may elect to continue the existing infrastructure improvements plan
and fee report without amendment by providing notice as follows:



      (1)   Notice of the determination shall be published at least
180 days prior to the end of the five-year period described in division (A)
of this section.



      (2)   The notice shall identify the infrastructure
improvements plan and fee report that shall continue in force without
amendment.



      (3)   The notice shall provide a map and description of the
service area covered by the infrastructure improvements plan and fee report.



      (4)   The notice shall identify an address to which any
resident of the city may submit, within 60 days, a written request that the
city update the infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use
assumptions, and/or fee report and the reasons and basis for the request.



   (C)   Response to comments. The city shall consider and respond
within 30 days to any timely requests submitted pursuant to division (B)(4)
of this section.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.050  COLLECTION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Collection. Development impact fees shall be calculated and
collected prior to issuance of permission to commence development;
specifically:



      (1)   Unless otherwise specified pursuant to a development
agreement adopted pursuant to § 150.052, development impact fees shall be
paid prior to issuance of a building permit according to the current
development impact fee schedule for the applicable service area as adopted
pursuant to this subchapter, or according to any other development impact fee
schedule as authorized in this subchapter;



      (2)   If a building permit is not required for the
development, but water or wastewater connections are required, any and all
development impact fees due shall be paid at the time the water service
connection is purchased. If only a wastewater connection is required, the
development impact fees shall be paid prior to approval of a connection to
the sewer system. Wastewater development impact fees shall be assessed if a
development connects to the public sewer, or as determined by the city
utilities director, is capable of discharging sewage to a city public sewer;



      (3)   If the development is located in a service area with a
stormwater, drainage, and flood control development impact fee, and neither a
building permit, water, or sewer service connection is required, the storm
drainage development impact fee due shall be paid at the time a civil or site
permit is issued for the development;



      (4)   No building permit, water or sewer connection, or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued if a development impact fee is not
paid as directed in the previous paragraphs;



      (5)   If the building permit is for a change in the type of
building use, an increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an
addition to a residential or non-residential point of demand to the water or
wastewater system, the development impact fee shall be assessed on the
additional service units resulting from the expansion or change, and
following the development impact fee schedule applicable to any new use type;
and



      (6)   For issued permits that expire or are voided, and the
development impact fees paid for such development have not been refunded, the
permittee shall pay the difference between any development impact fees paid
at the time the permit was issued and those in the fee schedule at the time
the permit is reissued or renewed.



   (B)   Exceptions. Development impact fees shall not be owed under
either of the following conditions:



      (1)   Development impact fees have been paid for the
development and the permit that triggered the collection of the development
impact fees has not expired or been voided; and



      (2)   The approval that triggers the collection of development
impact fees involves modifications to existing residential or non-residential
development that do not: (a) add new EDUs, (b) increase the impact of
existing EDUs on existing or future capital facilities, or (c) change the
land-use type of the existing development to a different category of
development for which a higher development impact fee would have been due. To
the extent that any modification does not meet the requirements of this
paragraph, the development impact fee due shall be the difference between the
development impact fee that was or would have been due on the existing
development and the development impact fee that is due on the development as
modified.



   (C)   Temporary exemptions from development impact fee schedules.
New developments in the city shall be temporarily exempt from increases in
development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or modified
development impact fee schedules as follows.



      (1)   Residential uses (other than multifamily). On or after
the day that the first building permit is issued for a residential
development (other than multifamily), the city shall, at the permittee’s
request, provide the permittee with an applicable development impact fee
schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months beginning on the
day that the first building permit is issued, and which shall expire at the
end of the first business day of the 25th month after the first building
permit is issued. During the effective period of the applicable development
impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same residential
development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact
fee schedule.



      (2)   All other uses. On or after the city’s approval of a
development plan or subdivision plat for a retail, high traffic retail,
industrial, general office, medical facilities, institutional, recreational,
or multifamily development, the city shall provide an applicable development
impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months
beginning on the day the development plan or subdivision plat was approved,
and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the 25th month
after the development plan or subdivision plat was approved. During the
effective period of the applicable development impact fee schedule, any
building permit issued for the same development shall not be subject to any
new or modified development impact fee schedule.



      (3)   Changes to development plans and subdivision plats.
During the 24-month period referred to in division (C)(1) or (2) of this
section, if changes are made to a development’s final development plan or
subdivision plat that will increase the number of service units, the city may
assess any new or modified development impact fees against the additional
service units. If the city reduces the amount of an applicable development
impact fee during the 24-month period referred to in division (C)(1) or (2)
of this section, the city shall assess the lower development impact fee.



   (D)   Option to pursue special fee determination. Where a
development is of a type that does not closely fit within a particular
category of development appearing on an adopted development impact fee
schedule, or where a development has unique characteristics such that the
actual burdens and costs associated with providing necessary public services
to that development will differ substantially from that associated with other
developments in a specified category of development, the city may require the
applicant to provide the city engineer with an alternative development impact
fee analysis. Based on a projection of the actual burdens and costs that will
be associated with the development, the alternative development impact fee
analysis may propose a unique fee for the development based on the
application of an appropriate EDU factor to the applicable plan-based cost
per EDU, or may propose that the development be covered under the development
impact fee schedule governing a different and more analogous category of
development. The Public Works Director shall review the alternative impact
fee analysis and shall make a determination as to the development impact fee
to be charged. The decision shall be appealable pursuant to § 150.053. The
Public Works Director may require the applicant to pay an administrative fee
to cover the actual costs of reviewing the special fee determination
application.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.051  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CREDITS AND CREDIT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Eligibility of capital facility. All development impact fee
credits must meet the following requirements:



      (1)   One of the following is true:



         (a)   The capital facility, or the financial
contribution toward a capital facility that will be provided by the developer
and for which a credit will be issued, must be identified in an adopted
Infrastructure improvements plan and fee report as a capital facility for
which a development impact fee was assessed; or



         (b)   The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the city that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject
capital facility should have been included in the infrastructure improvements
plan in lieu of a different capital facility that was included in the
infrastructure improvements plan and for which a development impact fee was
assessed. If the subject capital facility is determined to be eligible for a
credit in this manner, the city shall amend the infrastructure improvements
plan to (I) include the subject replacement facility and (ii) delete the
capital facility that will be replaced.



      (2)   Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure
provided by a developer if the cost of the infrastructure will be repaid to
the developer by the city through another agreement or mechanism. To the
extent that the developer will be paid or reimbursed by the city for any
contribution, payment, construction, or dedication from any city funding
source including an agreement to reimburse the developer with future
collected development impact fees pursuant to § 150.052 below, any credits
claimed by the developer shall be (a) deducted from any amounts to be paid or
reimbursed by the city or (b) reduced by the amount of the payment or
reimbursement.



   (B)   Eligibility of subject development. To be eligible for a
credit, the subject development must be located within the service area of
the eligible capital facility.



   (C)   Calculation of credits. Credits will be based on that portion
of the costs for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted
infrastructure improvements plan for which a development fee was assessed
pursuant to the fee report. If the gross impact fee for a particular category
of necessary public service is adopted at an amount lower than the plan-based
cost per EDU, the amount of any credit shall be reduced in proportion to the
difference between the plan-based cost per EDU and the gross impact fee
adopted. A credit shall not exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in
providing the eligible capital facility.



   (D)   Allocation of credits. Before credits can be issued to a
subject development (or portion of it), credits must be allocated to that
development as follows:



      (1)   The developer and the city must execute a credit
agreement including all of the following:



         (a)   The total amount of the credits resulting from
provision of an eligible capital facility;



         (b)   The estimated number of EDUs to be served within
the subject development; and



         (c)   The method by which the credit values will be
distributed within the subject development.



      (2)   It is the responsibility of the developer to request
allocation of development impact fee credits through an application for a
credit agreement (which may be part of a development agreement entered into
pursuant to § 150.052).



      (3)   If a building permit is issued or a water/sewer
connection is purchased, and a development impact fee is paid prior to
execution of a credit agreement for the subject development, no credits may
be allocated retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits may be
allocated to any remaining permits for the subject development in accordance
with this subchapter.



      (4)   If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility
sells or relinquishes a development (or portion of it) that it owns or
controls prior to execution of a credit agreement or development agreement,
credits resulting from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated
to the development if the entity legally assigns such rights and
responsibilities to its successor in interest for the subject development.



      (5)   If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital
facility, both entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the
city, and any request for the allocation of credit within the subject
development must be made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible
capital facility.



      (6)   Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject
development with the city’s approval of an amendment to an executed credit
agreement, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   The entity that executed the original agreement
with the city, or its legal successor in interest and the entity that
currently controls the subject development are parties to the request for
reallocation; and



         (b)   The reallocation proposal does not change the
value of any credits already issued for the subject development.



      (7)   A credit agreement may authorize the allocation of
credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions
are met:



         (a)   The entity that executed the original agreement
with the city or its legal successor in interest, the entity that currently
controls the subject development, and the entity that controls the
non-contiguous parcel are parties to the request for reallocation;



         (b)   The reallocation proposal does not change the
value of any credits already issued for the subject development;



         (c)   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service
area as that served by the eligible capital facility;



         (d)   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary
public service from the eligible capital facility;



         (e)   The credit agreement specifically states the value
of the credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or EDU, or establishes a
mechanism for future determination of the value of the credits; and



         (f)   The credit agreement does not involve the transfer
of credits to or from any property subject to a development agreement.



   (E)   Credit agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a
credit agreement that conforms to the requirements set forth in division (D)
of this section. The city manager or authorized designee is authorized by
this subchapter to enter into a credit agreement with the controlling entity
of a subject development, subject to the following:



      (1)   The developer requesting the credit agreement shall
provide all information requested by the city to allow it to determine the
value of the credit to be applied;



      (2)   An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted
to the city by the developer within one year of the date on which ownership
or control of the capital facility passes to the city;



      (3)   The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to
the city manager or authorized designee for review in the form provided to
the applicant by the city. The draft credit agreement shall include, at a
minimum, all of the following information and supporting documentation:



         (a)   A legal description and map depicting the location
of the subject development for which the credits are being applied. The map
shall depict the location of the capital facilities that have been or will be
provided;



         (b)   An estimate of the total EDUs that will be
developed within the subject development depicted on the map and described in
the legal description;



         (c)   A list of the capital facilities, associated
physical attributes, and the related costs as stated in the infrastructure
improvements plan;



         (d)   Documentation showing the date of acceptance by
the city, if the capital facilities have already been provided;



         (e)   The total amount of the credits to be applied
within the subject development and the calculations leading to the total
amount of the credits; and



         (f)   The credits to be applied to each EDU within the
subject development for each category of necessary public services;



      (4)   The city’s determination of the credits to be
allocated is final;



      (5)   Upon execution of the credit agreement by the city and
the applicant, credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development;



      (6)   Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement
must be initiated within two years of the city’s final acceptance of the
eligible capital facility for which the amendment is requested; and



      (7)   Any credit agreement approved as part of a development
agreement shall be amended in accordance with the terms of the development
agreement and § 150.052.



   (F)   Issuance of credits. Credits allocated pursuant to division
(D) of this section  may be issued and applied toward the gross impact fees
due from a development, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only
be applied to the development impact fee due for the applicable category of
necessary public services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another
category of necessary public services;



      (2)   Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital
facility from which the credits were derived has been accepted by the city or
when adequate security for the completion of the eligible capital facility
has been provided in accordance with all terms of an executed development
agreement;



      (3)   Where credits have been issued pursuant to division
(F)(2) of this section, an impact fee due at the time a building permit is
issued shall be reduced by the credits stated in or calculated from the
executed credit agreement. Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross
impact fee shall be paid in full, and a refund of the credits shall be due
when the developer demonstrates compliance with division (F)(2) of this
section in a written request to the city;



      (4)   Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or
reallocated to another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released
for reuse on the same subject development if a building permit for which the
credits were issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for
a refund under § 150.054(A)(2)(a); and



      (5)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section,
credits issued prior to January 1, 2012 may only be used for the subject
development for which they were issued. The credits may be transferred to a
new owner of all or part of the subject development in proportion to the
percentage of ownership in the subject development to be held by the new
owner.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.052  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   General. Development agreements containing provisions
regarding development impact fees, development impact fee credits, and/or
disbursement of revenues from development impact fee accounts shall comply
with the requirements of this section.



   (B)   Development agreement required. A development agreement is
required to authorize any of the following:



      (1)   To issue credits prior to the city’s acceptance of an
eligible capital facility;



      (2)   To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous
with the subject development and that does not meet the requirements of §
150.051(D)(7);



      (3)   To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital
facility using funds from development impact fee accounts;



      (4)   To allocate different credit amounts per EDU to
different parcels within a subject development; and



      (5)   For a single family residential dwelling unit, to allow
development impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a
building permit as provided in division (H) of this section.



   (C)   General requirements. All development agreements shall be
prepared and executed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and any
applicable requirements of the city code. Except where specifically modified
by this section, all provisions of § 150.051 shall apply to any credit
agreement that is authorized as part of a development agreement.



   (D)   Early issuance of credits. A development agreement may
authorize the issuance of credits prior to acceptance of an eligible capital
facility by the city when the development agreement specifically states the
form and value of the security (i.e. bond, letter of credit, etc.) to be
provided to the city prior to issuance of any credits. The city shall
determine the acceptable form and value of the security to be provided.



   (E)   Non-contiguous allocation of credits. A development agreement
may authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if
all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as
that served by the eligible capital facility;



      (2)   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public
service from the eligible capital facility; and



      (3)   The development agreement specifically states the value
of the credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or EDU, or establishes a
mechanism for future determination of the credits.



   (F)   Uneven allocation of credits. The development agreement must
specify how credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per-EDU
basis, if the credits are not to be allocated evenly. If the development
agreement is silent on this topic, all credits will be allocated evenly
amongst all parcels on a per-EDU basis.



   (G)   Use of reimbursements. Funds reimbursed to developers from
impact fee accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility must be
utilized in accordance with applicable law for the use of city funds in
construction or acquisition of capital facilities, including A.R.S. §§
34-201 et seq.



   (H)   Deferral of fees. A development agreement may provide for the
deferral of payment of development impact fees for a residential development
beyond the issuance of a building permit; provided that a development impact
fee may not be paid later than 15 days after the issuance of the certificate
of occupancy for that dwelling unit. The development agreement shall provide
for the value of any deferred development impact fees to be supported by
appropriate security, including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond.



   (I)   Waiver of fees. If the city agrees to waive any development
impact fees assessed on development in a development agreement, the city
shall reimburse the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount
that was waived.



   (J)   No obligation. Nothing in this section obligates the city to
enter into any development agreement or to authorize any type of credit
agreement permitted by this section.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.053  APPEALS.



   (A)   General. A development impact fee determination by city staff
may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.



   (B)   Limited scope. An appeal shall be limited to disputes
regarding the calculation of the development impact fees for a specific
development and/or permit and calculation of EDU’s for the development.



   (C)   Form of appeal. An appeal shall be initiated in a format
prescribed by the city, and shall be submitted to the city engineer.



   (D)   Department action. The Public Works Director shall act upon
the appeal within 30 calendar days of the filing of the appeal, and the
applicant shall be notified of the city engineer’s decision in writing.



   (E)   Appeal to council. The applicant may appeal the decision of
the Public Works Director to the council by submitting an appeal to the city
clerk within 14 calendar days of the city engineer’s written decision.



   (F)   Action by council. The council shall hear and act upon the
appeal within 45 calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and the applicant
shall be notified of the council’s decision in writing.



   (G)   Final decision. The council’s decision regarding the appeal
is final.



   (H)   Fees during pendency. Building permits may be issued during
the pendency of an appeal if the applicant (1) pays the full impact fee
calculated by the city at the time the appeal is filed or (2) provides the
city with financial assurances in the form acceptable to the city manager or
authorized designee equal to the full amount of the impact fee. Upon final
disposition of an appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the
decision rendered, and a refund paid if warranted. If the appeal is denied by
the council, and the applicant has provided the city with financial
assurances as set forth in clause (2) above, the applicant shall deliver the
full amount of the impact fee to the city within ten days of the council’s
final decision on the appeal. If the applicant fails to deliver the full
amount of the impact fees when required by this subsection, the city may draw
upon such financial assurance instruments as necessary to recover the full
amount of the impact fees due from the applicant.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.054  REFUNDS OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any
current owner of property within the city who submits a written request to
the city and demonstrates that:



      (1)   The permit that triggered the collection of the
development impact fee has expired or been voided prior to the commencement
of the development for which the permit was issued and the development impact
fees collected have not been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the
repayment of financing or debt; or



      (2)   The owner of the subject real property or its
predecessor in interest paid a development impact fee for the applicable
capital facility on or after August 1, 2014, and one of the following
conditions exists:



         (a)   The capital facility designed to serve the subject
real property has been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject
real property and any development for which there is reserved capacity, and
the service which was to be provided by that capital facility has not been
provided to the subject real property from that capital facility or from any
other infrastructure;



         (b)   After collecting the fee to construct a capital
facility the city fails to complete construction of the capital facility
within the time period identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, as
it may be amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to
the subject real property from that capital facility or any other
infrastructure;



         (c)   For a category of necessary public services other
than water or wastewater facilities, any part of a development impact fee is
not spent within ten years of the city’s receipt of the development impact
fee;



         (d)   Any part of a development impact fee for water or
wastewater facilities is not spent within 15 years of the city’s receipt of
the development impact fee; or



         (e)   The development impact fee was calculated and
collected for the construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific
capital facility serving the subject real property and the actual
construction costs for the capital facility are less than the construction
costs projected in the infrastructure improvements plan by a factor of 10% or
more. In such event, the current owner of the subject real property shall,
upon request as set forth in this section, be entitled to a refund for the
difference between the amounts of the development impact fee charged for and
attributable to such construction cost and the amount the development impact
fee would have been calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been
included in the fee report. The refund contemplated by this subsection shall
relate only to the costs specific to the construction of the applicable
capital facility and shall not include any related design, administrative, or
other costs not directly incurred for construction of the capital facility
that are included in the development impact fee as permitted by A.R.S. §
9-463.05.



   (B)   Earned interest. A refund of a development impact fee shall
include any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the
development impact fee by the city from the date of collection to the date of
refund. All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at the
time the refund is paid.



   (C)   Refund to government. If a development impact fee was paid by
a governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



§ 150.055  OVERSIGHT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE PROGRAM.



   (A)   Annual report. Within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year,
the city shall file with the city clerk an unaudited annual report accounting
for the collection and use of the fees for each service area and shall post
the report on its website in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05(N) and (O),
as amended.



   (B)   Biennial audit. In addition to the annual report described in
paragraph A of this section, the city shall provide for a biennial, certified
audit of the city’s land use assumptions, infrastructure improvements plan
and development impact fees.



      (1)   An audit pursuant to this subsection shall be conducted
by one or more qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of
the city and who did not prepare the infrastructure improvements plan.



      (2)   The audit shall review the collection and expenditures
of development fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments
describing the amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and
spent on capital facilities.



      (3)   The audit shall describe the level of service in each
service area, and evaluate any inequities in implementing the infrastructure
improvements plan or imposing the development impact fee.



      (4)   The city shall post the findings of the audit on the
city’s website and shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within 60
days of the release of the audit to the public.



      (5)   For purposes of this section a certified audit shall
mean any audit authenticated by one or more of the qualified professionals
conducting the audit pursuant to division (B)(1) of this section.



(Ord. 327, passed 5-28-2014)



PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



§ 150.065  ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ORDER.



   The certain document known as “Property Maintenance Order,” three
copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, which document
was made a public record by Resolution 176 of the city is hereby referred to,
adopted and made provision thereof to become effective on the April 12, 1989.



(Ord. 73, passed 4-26-1989)  Penalty, see § 150.999



BOARD OF APPEALS



§ 150.080  PURPOSES; CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials
or alternate types or methods of construction and of installation of building
service equipment under the provisions of the building codes of the city as
adopted by this chapter, including, but not limited to, any building,
electrical, fire, mechanical, plumbing, solar system and/or spa/pool codes of
the city as may be adopted pursuant to this chapter, and to provide for
reasonable interpretations of the provisions of the codes, there shall be,
and there is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of seven members
who shall be selected upon the following qualifications:



      (1)   An architect or professional civil engineer duly
licensed in the State of Arizona;



      (2)   A professional structural engineer duly licensed in the
State of Arizona;



      (3)   A general contractor duly licensed in the State of
Arizona;



      (4)   A plumbing contractor licensed in the State of Arizona;



      (5)   A mechanical contractor licensed in the State of Arizona;



      (6)   An electrical contractor licensed in the State of
Arizona;



      (7)   A resident of the city who shall be indirectly
associated with the construction industry and building code issues such as a
realtor, an insurance agent, an appraiser, a loan officer, a property
manager, or other similar trade or profession.



   (B)   In the event that no professionals are available for
appointment that meet the criteria listed above, the City Council may select
a person or persons whose background approximates the knowledge and
background being sought.



   (C)   The Board of Appeals members shall be appointed by the Mayor
and Council, shall serve without compensation, and shall hold office and be
subject to removal therefrom as may be determined by action of the Mayor and
Council.



   (D)   The Board of Appeals shall have no authority to interpret
administrative provisions of the building codes of the city nor shall the
Board be empowered to waive requirements of the building codes.



(Ord. 284, passed 5-12-2010)



§ 150.081 ADVISORY CAPACITY.



   In addition to the purposes of the Board of Appeals as provided in §
150.080, the Board of Appeals may also advise the City Building Official
and/or the Fire Chief in matters pertaining to the development and
enforcement of all building and construction codes adopted by the city.



(Ord. 284, passed 5-12-2010)



§ 150.082  AUTHORITY; REGULATIONS; DECISIONS.



   The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its hearings and investigations; provided, the rules and
regulations shall not be effective unless three copies of the rules and
regulations are filed with the City Clerk, and provided further, that they
are not inconsistent with the codes and ordinances of the city. The rules and
regulations may be those provided in the codes as may be adopted by this
chapter. The Board shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
Secretary of the Board, with a duplicate copy to the inspector concerned, and
with a duplicate copy to the applicant or appellant.



(Ord. 284, passed 5-12-2010)



§ 150.083  DECISIONS: VOTE, QUORUM.



   Decisions of the Board shall be made by a majority vote of the members
present at any meeting; provided that a quorum shall consist of a majority of
the Board members appointed at the time of that meeting.



(Ord. 284, passed 5-12-2010)



§ 150.084 SECRETARY TO BOARD: APPOINTMENT, POWERS.



   The Secretary of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed to duties by
the Building Official, and he or she shall keep the minutes and records of
the Board; but the Secretary shall have no voting power.



(Ord. 284, passed 5-12-2010)



§ 150.085 APPEALS: PROCEDURE, MEETINGS, EFFECT OF DECISIONS.



   (A)   An appeal to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved by any decision, act or ruling of the City Inspectors or other city
staff involving the interpretation of the codes adopted by this chapter. The
appeal shall be made by filing with the Secretary of the Board, within ten
days of the date of the decision complained of, a written notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Secretary of the Board shall immediately
transmit a copy of such notice of appeal to the director of the department
whose action, ruling or decision is challenged. Upon receipt of the notice,
the director of the affected department shall forthwith transmit to the
Secretary of the Board all papers which shall constitute the record upon
which the action appealed from is taken.



   (B)   The Board shall hold a meeting when there is pending business.
The Board shall hear appeals at a meeting to be scheduled within 45 calendar
days from the date of filing of the unless a special meeting is requested by
either the appellant or the affected inspector or the director of the
affected department within two business days of the time the notice of appeal
is filed with the Board's Secretary. In such cases a special meeting shall
then be held within 21 calendar days after the notice of appeal is filed.



   (C)   All other matters, including the consideration of alternate
materials and alternate types of construction normally shall be heard at
meeting to be scheduled by the City Building Official. However, a special
meeting for any purpose may be called by the Board Chairperson when he or she
deems the meeting to be reasonably necessary or proper.



   (D)   In cases involving the use of alternate materials or alternate
types of construction where tests are necessary, the time for hearing may be
enlarged to permit the making of the tests. Reasonable notice shall be given
by the Secretary of the Board to the appellant or applicant and to the
inspector concerned of the time and place when any appeal shall be considered
by the Board. Any party may attend the hearings in person or by agent or
attorney. At all times the Board Chairperson shall have the discretion to
continue a hearing to other dates and times as may be appropriate. The Board
shall decide any appeal immediately after the hearing, or within a reasonable
time thereafter, but in no event shall the Board keep an appeal under
consideration for more than five days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays, after the hearing. After the notice and hearing, the decision of
the Board shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board. The Board shall
render its decision and findings in writing, with a copy to the inspector
involved, the director of the affected department, and with a copy to the
appellant or applicant; and the decision of the board shall be final.



(Ord 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.086  REFERENCE TO BOARD OF APPEALS.



   Whenever reference is made to Board of Appeals other similar
designation in any of the ordinances or codes of the city as adopted by this
chapter, the reference shall mean the Board of Appeals created in this
chapter.



(Ord 276, passed 4-4-2010)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter or any code, part of code, or amendments
thereto, shall be punished as a civil violation pursuant to § 10.99 of the
City Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as herein above described.



(Ord. 10, passed 7-24-1980; Ord. 73, passed 4-26-1989; Ord. 258, passed
9-10-2008; Ord 276, passed 4-4-2010)



CHAPTER 151:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   151.01   Adopted by reference



§ 151.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s subdivision regulations are adopted by reference and made
a part hereof as if appearing in total.



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING REGULATIONS



Section




Title, Scope and Definitions




   152.001   Short title



   152.002   Authority



   152.003   Purpose and intent



   152.004   Applicability



   152.005   Conformance with the General Plan



   152.006   Interpretation



   152.007   Compliance



   152.008   Transitional provisions



   152.009   Fees



   152.010   Enforcement



   152.011   Violations and penalties



   152.012   Severability



   152.013   Definitions




Administration




   152.025   City Council



   152.026   Planning and Zoning Commission



   152.027   Board of Adjustment



   152.028   Zoning Administrator




Zoning Procedures




   152.040   General procedural requirements



   152.041   Notification for public hearings



   152.042   Zoning text amendment and zoning map changes



   152.043   Conditional use permits



   152.044   Temporary use permits



   152.045   Variances and appeals



   152.046   Site plan review



   152.047   General plan amendments



   152.048   Minor variance




Zoning Districts and Map




   152.060   Purpose



   152.061   Establishment of zoning districts



   152.062   Zoning map



   152.063   District boundaries



   152.064   Establishing city zoning in annexed areas




Single Residence Zoning Districts




   152.075   General requirements – single residence zoning districts



   152.076   “RA-10” Rural Area Residential Zoning District



   152.077   “SR-5” and “SR-2” Suburban Ranch Residential
Zoning Districts



   152.078   “R1-35”, “R1-20”, “R1-12”, “R1-8” and
“R1-6” low and medium density residential zoning districts




Multiple Residence Zoning Districts




   152.090   General requirements – multiple residence zoning
districts



   152.091   “R-2" Medium-High Density Residential Zoning District



   152.092   “R-3" High Density Residential Zoning District




Commercial Zoning Districts




   152.105   General requirements – commercial zoning districts



   152.106   “C-1” Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District



   152.107   “C-2” Community Commercial Zoning District



   152.108   “MU” Mixed Use Zoning District




Industrial Zoning Districts




   152.120   General requirements - industrial zoning districts



   152.121   “L-I” Light Industrial Zoning District



   152.122   “H-I” General Industrial Zoning District




Planned Unit Development Zoning District




   152.135   General requirements – PUD Zoning District



   152.136   “R-PUD” Residential PUD Zoning District




Manufactured Home Zoning District




   152.150   General requirements – “MH” Zoning District



   152.151   Manufactured home subdivisions



   152.152   Manufactured home park



   152.153   Building placement permit



   152.154   Exceptions – “MH” Zoning District




Recreational Vehicle Zoning District




   152.165   General requirements – “RV” Zoning District



   152.166   Recreational vehicle parks



   152.167   Recreational vehicle subdivisions



   152.168   Building placement permit




Open Space Zoning Districts




   152.180   General requirements – Open Space Zoning Districts



   152.181   “OSC” Open Space Conservation Zoning District



   152.182   “OSR” Open Space Recreational Zoning District




Overlay Zoning Districts




   152.195   General requirements – Overlay Zoning Districts



   152.196   “AP” Airport Overlay Zoning District



   152.197   “FP” Floodplain Overlay Zoning District



   152.198   “AO” Aesthetic Overlay Zoning District



   152.199   “P” Public Overlay Zoning District




General Provisions




   152.210   Purpose



   152.211   Use restrictions



   152.212   Re-dividing of recorded lots



   152.213   Street dedication requirements



   152.214   Unsuitable sites



   152.215   Performance standards



   152.216   Projections into required yards



   152.217   Height limitations



   152.218   Accessory building and uses



   152.219   Fences and walls



   152.220   Swimming pools



   152.221   Home occupations



   152.222   Outdoor storage and junk automobiles



   152.223   Dumping and disposal



   152.224   Mobile vendors



   152.225   Medical marijuana



   152.226   Sexually oriented businesses




Parking Regulations




   152.240   Purpose



   152.241   General Regulations



   152.242   Improvements



   152.243   Required parking by land use type



   152.244   Parking space maneuvering dimensions




Sign Regulations




   152.255   Purpose



   152.256   Applicability and general requirements



   152.257   Definitions



   152.258   On-site signage



   152.259   Temporary signage



   152.260   Political signs on public streets



   152.261   Off-site signage



   152.262   Administration




Outdoor Lighting Regulations




   152.275   Purpose



   152.276   Conformance with applicable codes



   152.277   Definitions



   152.278   General requirements



   152.279   Specific uses of illumination



   152.280   Prohibitions



   152.281   Exemptions and waivers



   152.282   Procedures for compliance




Landscape Regulations




   152.295   Purpose



   152.296   Plant specifications



   152.297   Landscape requirements for specific land uses



   152.298   Landscape for specific roadways



   152.299   Parking lot landscape requirements



   152.300   Landscape plan submittal requirements




Wireless Communications




   152.315   Purpose and intent



   152.316   Conformance with applicable codes



   152.317   Definitions



   152.318   General requirements



   152.319   Zoning districts and provisions



   152.320   Conditional use permits



   152.321   Submittal requirements



   152.322   Exemptions




Nonconforming Uses




   152.335   Purpose



   152.336   Limitation on buildings



   152.337   Limitations on uses



   152.338   Limitations on lots



   Appendix A   Landscape plant list




TITLE, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS




§ 152.001  SHORT TITLE.



   These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “City of San
Luis Zoning Ordinance” and will be referred to herein as “this code”,
or “this chapter”. All appendices, tables, exhibits and/or maps within
this chapter are hereby adopted and shall be incorporated herein as a part of
this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.002  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in the
Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) §§ 9-462 et seq. and general laws in
order to conserve and promote the public interest, health, comfort, safety,
convenience, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of San Luis.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.003  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter and the intent of its application
is to provide the minimum requirements for the implementation of the City of
San Luis General Plan; to provide for procedures that respond uniformly and
consistently to development proposals; to guide, control, and regulate the
future growth and development of the city consistent with the municipal
capability to provide utilities and services; to enhance the character and
the stability of the residential, commercial, industrial, and recreational
areas of the city. This chapter shall further provide for the preservation of
open space, adequate light and air, avoidance of overcrowding of land and
excessive concentration of population by establishing land use
classifications and by imposing regulations on the use of land, on the
location, height and bulk of buildings and structures and by establishing
standards for design and development.



   (B)   This zoning chapter establishes offices, boards, and
commissions and defines the power and duties of each; provides procedures for
changing zoning districts and the standards which govern those districts,
variances, uses permits and all other permits required by this zoning
chapter; provides for enforcement, interpretation, and appeals; prescribes
penalties for violations and infractions of these zoning regulations.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.004  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the development
and the uses of all buildings, structures, and land within the corporate
limits of the City of San Luis.



   (B)   Any use not described and included by this chapter as being a
permitted use, a temporary use permit, a use subject to conditions, or a use
subject to a conditional use permit within a specific zoning district shall
be prohibited and is a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and
no building, structure, or land shall be developed, and no permit,
certificate or license shall be issued for any building, structure, or land
unless it is in conformity with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
Any permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the terms or
provisions of this chapter is subject to revocation, and/or work stoppage
order, and any other remedy available as law.



   (D)   All changes to distinguishing traits or primary features or
the use of a building or land, as evidenced by increased parking
requirements, change of occupancy, change of outside storage, or other
features, occurring to existing properties after the effective date of this
zoning chapter shall be subject to all provisions of this zoning chapter. The
use of a building or land shall refer to the primary or specific purpose for
which the building or land is occupied, designed, intended, or maintained.



   (E)   This chapter is intended to benefit the public as a whole and
not any specific person or class of persons. Although through the
implementation, administration and enforcement of this chapter, benefits and
detriments will be enjoyed or suffered by specific individuals, such is
merely a by-product of the overall benefit to the whole community. Therefore,
unintentional breaches of the obligations of administration and enforcement
imposed on the city shall not be enforceable in tort, nor create a case of
action against the city.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.005  CONFORMANCE WITH THE GENERAL PLAN.



   This chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives and
policies of the “City of San Luis General Plan” and is hereby deemed to
be in conformance with the adopted general plan. Any amendments to or actions
pursuant to this chapter shall be in conformance with the General Plan, as it
may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.006  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The standards and restrictions established by this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the general
plan, and for the interpretation and administration of the zoning
regulations, standards, restrictions, uses, procedures, enforcement, fees,
administration, and all other areas addressed herein.



   (B)   This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those
zoning and building ordinances specifically repealed by this chapter, and
providing that they are not in conflict with this chapter. In the event of a
conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. This chapter also is
not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any private agreements
between persons, such as easements, deeds, covenants, except that if this
chapter imposes higher standards or a greater restriction on land, buildings
or structures than an otherwise applicable provision of a law, ordinance, or
a private agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.



   (C)   Where other laws, ordinances, or private restrictions are more
restrictive, the city cannot enforce the more restrictive laws, ordinances,
or private restrictions as a part of this zoning chapter.



   (D)   This chapter, upon its adoption, amends the text of all other
zoning ordinances previously adopted by the city.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.007  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   No building permit or other permit required by this chapter
may be lawfully issued nor shall a certificate of occupancy be granted until
the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee has given authorization
indicating all requirements of this zoning chapter, all conditions and
stipulations of approval, and any other specific project related requirements
have been met.



   (B)   Except as specifically provided to the contrary in this
chapter, each review and approval required by this chapter shall be
independent of every other review and approval, and no review or approval
shall be deemed to waive or satisfy any other requirement set forth herein.



   (C)   Where, in any specific case, different sections of this
chapter or any other city ordinance or code specify different requirements,
the more restrictive shall govern. Where there is conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall apply.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.008  TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   All conditional uses which have been legally approved and
established, shall be permitted to proceed under such approvals, provided
that the person, firm, or corporation that obtained such conditional uses
have also obtained Building Permits for all buildings and structures to be
constructed within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter and
provided that all construction is completed within six months of the approval
of such conditional use, unless the Council action approving such conditional
use had a longer period of time or unless a time extension is applied for and
approved by Council.



   (B)   A planned unit development and/or a development agreement
approved prior to the adoption of this chapter will guide and control the
specific development for such property. The provisions of this zoning chapter
shall apply to the planned unit development and/or the development agreement
if the prior plan approval has expired.



   (C)   For any building, structure, or development for which plans
have been reviewed and/or approved by the city, under the terms of the
previous ordinance, the developer has 90 days from the date the city notifies
them that the plans are approved and/or permits are ready to be issued to pay
for the permit and commence construction otherwise the building, structure,
or development shall be in compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.009  FEES.



   The Mayor and City Council of the City of San Luis may from time to
time establish, and set by resolution, administrative fees considered
necessary to enforce the zoning ordinance and for the administration and
processing applications for development. The developer/applicant shall, at
the time of filing, pay to the city those established fees. These fees shall
be non-refundable.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.010  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter to further the promotion of the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall in no case grant permission for
the issuance of any permit for the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
demolition, movement or use of any building, structure, lot, or parcel if the
Zoning Administrator determines that the building, structure, lot or parcel
as proposed to be constructed, reconstructed, altered, used, or moved, would
be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, unless directed to
issue such permit by the Board of Adjustment after interpretation of the
ordinance or the granting of a variance.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.011  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate, or cause the violation of any provision of this
chapter. Each separate day, or part thereof, that a violation continues is a
separate offense. Any violation of or failure to do or perform any act
required by this chapter constitutes a civil offense punishable pursuant to
§ 10.99. Any third, or more, offense committed within one year of the date
of the first offense shall be punishable as a class one misdemeanor pursuant
to § 10.99.



   (B)   In addition to, or independent of the penalties provided
above, the city may bring a civil proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce compliance with the terms of the San Luis Zoning
Ordinance or to prevent, restrain, or abate any violation of the terms of the
San Luis Zoning Ordinance.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure, or land or
cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. It shall
also be unlawful for any person to violate any provision designated as a
condition of approval either by the plan review process or through an
amendment, conditional use permit, temporary use permit, variance, site plan,
or appeal by an office, board, commission, or the City Council as established
by this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.012  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in the judgment.



   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid
the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application
of the provision to any other property, building or structure not
specifically included in the judgment.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.013  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Zoning
Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined
as follows:



      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future;
words used in the singular include the plural; and words in the plural
include the singular.



      (2)   The word “shall” and “will” are mandatory. The
word “may”, “could” and “should” are permissive. The words
“guidelines”, “provisions”, “standards” and “regulations” are
used interchangeably and are mandatory.



      (3)   The word “person” includes an individual, firm,
partnership, joint venture, corporations, associations, organizations,
estate, trust, receiver, or and any other group or combination acting as a
singular entity, including the federal government, another city or town,
county, or school district, except as exempt by law.



      (4)   The following words or terms when applied in this
chapter may be used interchangeably unless contrary to the circumstances:
lot, plot, parcel or premise; and “building” applies to the word
“structure”.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABUTTING.  The condition of two adjoining properties having a
common property line or boundary or being contiguous to each other.



      ACCESS or ACCESS WAY.  The place, means, or way by which
pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and
egress to a property or use as required by this chapter.



      ACCESSORY BUILDING.  A detached building, situated on the same
lot or building site, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of a
principal use of the main building or premise. This does not include
manufactured homes or recreational vehicles.



      ACCESSORY USE.  A subordinate use of a building, other
structure, or land that is clearly incidental to the use of the primary
building, other structure, or use of the land and is conducted on the same
lot with the primary building, other structure or use of land.



      ADJACENT.  Nearby, but not necessarily touching.



      ADJOINING.  Touching at some point.



      ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION.  Any decision on a development
application made by the Zoning Administrator or his/her authorized
representative pursuant to this chapter.



      ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
matters exhibiting “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.



      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A
commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of
its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, computer simulations, holograms, motion
pictures, video reproductions, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or display of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”; or



         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are
designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.



      ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:



         (a)   Persons who appear semi-nude;



         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical area” or by “specified sexual
activities;” or



         (c)   Films, motion pictures, computer simulations,
holograms, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions,
which are characterized by the exhibition or display of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



      ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel, or similar commercial
establishment which:



         (a)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form
of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the exhibition or display of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign visible
from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult
type of photographic reproductions; and either



         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time that is less than ten hours; or



         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where,
for any form of consideration, films, holograms, computer simulations, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown or displayed which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.



      ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS.  This term is synonymous with sexually
oriented business and means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret,
adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture theater, adult video store,
escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. (Chapter 113
Sexually Oriented Businesses of the City of San Luis City Code).



      ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or
semi-nude, or in live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”.



      ADULT VIDEO STORE.  See ADULT BOOKSTORE.



      AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS. 



         (a)   The following are animals, other than household
pets, that are considered accessory agricultural animals to an agricultural
use, whether kept and maintained for production and sale, family food
production, education or for personal enjoyment. AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS are
classified as



large and small animals. Future Farmers of America (F.F.A.) or a 4-H project
limited to one such animal is permitted in residential zoning districts
provided that it is kept in a manner that does not create a nuisance for
adjacent neighbors or land uses. Swine and potbelly pigs will not be
permitted in any district except for a limited time in conjunction with a
Future Farmers of America (F.F.A.) or a 4-H project.



         (b)   Examples of the types of animals in the different
categories include, but are not limited to:



            1.   Large animals: horses, burros, donkeys and
mules, miniature horses, cattle, sheep, goats, llamas, and ratites.



            2.   Small animals: rabbits, chinchillas, and
poultry.



      AGRICULTURAL BUILDING.  A structure designed and constructed to
house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural
products. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place
used by the public.



      ALLEY.  A public or private thoroughfare, other than a street,
which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and
not intended for general traffic circulation.



      ALTERATION.  Any architectural, structural, or use change to a
building that requires a permit under the building code of the city.



      AMATEUR RADIO TOWER.  A freestanding or building-mounted
structure, including any base, tower or pole, antenna and appurtenances,
intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid
amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission.



      AMENDMENT.  A change in the wording, application, or substance
of this chapter, or an addition or deletion or change in the zoning district
boundaries or classifications of the zoning map.



      ANTIQUE SHOP.  A retail business specializing in the sale of
merchandise made in, or typical of, a previous era. Typical merchandise
includes, but is not limited to, furniture, silverware, glassware, and other
collectibles. Items shall not be donated for resale, but may be displayed on
consignment.



      ARCHEOLOGICALLY SIGNIFICANT.  A site which has revealed or has
the potential of revealing important information regarding the lifestyles of
prehistoric peoples and/or cultures which occupied the city and surrounding
region in prehistoric and historic times.



      A.R.S.  The abbreviation for the Arizona Revised Statutes.



      ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY.  Providing a homelike environment
where people can remain as independent as possible, for as long as possible
and are licensed by the Arizona Department of Health Services. This
designation is determined by the level of care given and not by the number of
residents.



      ATTACHED BUILDING.  Any structure sealed from the elements with
a permanent slab foundation and architecturally integrated with the main
structure.



      AUTOMOBILE REPAIR (GENERAL).  Servicing of motor vehicles
including tire repair, battery changing, engine rebuilding and transmission
repair, storage of merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor
vehicles, sale of lubricants, automobile washing and lubrication, but
excluding body work and painting of vehicles, or other similar activities.



      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.  A convenience use having pumps and
storage tanks or other facilities from which gasoline, diesel or alternative
fuels are dispensed into motor vehicles.



      AWNING.  An architectural projection that provides weather
protection, identity or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to
which it is attached. An AWNING is comprised of a lightweight, rigid skeleton
structure over which a covering is attached.



      BABY-SITTING.  Any residential dwelling in which child care is
regularly provided for compensation for no more than four children who do not
reside in the home.



      BAR OR COCKTAIL LOUNGE.  An establishment whose primary business
is the serving of alcoholic beverages to the public for consumption on the
premises and where food may be available for consumption as an accessory use.



      BED & BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT.  A dwelling in which the
occupants of the dwelling provide, for compensation, the short term lodging
and meals for guests, occupying not more than four guest rooms, located
within the same principal dwelling. Any dwelling in which more than four
guest rooms are provided shall be deemed a hotel.



      BOARD.  Is the City of San Luis Board of Adjustment.



      BUILDABLE AREA.  The portion of a lot, which is within the
envelope formed by the required setbacks or building envelope, if applicable.
See “Yard, Required”.



      BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls for the shelter, use, occupancy, or enclosure of persons, animals, or
chattel or property of any kind, with the exception of dog houses, playhouses
and similar structures.



      BUILDING AREA.  The total areas, taken on a horizontal plane at
the mean grade level, of the principal buildings and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, steps, roof overhangs, and balconies.



      BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the
natural grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the
highest point of a mansard roof, or to the highest gable of a pitch or hip
roof.



      BUILDING OFFICIAL.  An employee of the city authorized to issue
building permits and certificates of occupancy and to administer all
applicable construction codes.



      BUILDING PERMIT.  An authorization to construct, repair, alter,
or add on to a building or structure as issued by the Building Official and
authorized by the Zoning Administrator.



      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building or structure in which the
principal or dominant use of the property is conducted.



      BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The required minimum distance, as
prescribed by this chapter, between the property line and the closest point
of any building or structure.



      CARGO CONTAINER.  A standardized, reusable vessel that is or
appears to be originally, specifically or formerly designed for or used in
the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight articles. Goods
or commodities. Also frequently referred to as a “sea container”.



      CARPORT.  A roofed structure which may be attached or unattached
to the principal structure providing space for the storage of motor vehicles,
at least two sides of which shall be at least 50% open. Enclosed storage
facilities may be provided as part of a CARPORT.



      CEMETERY.  Land used or intended to be used for the burial of
the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes including columbariums,
crematoriums, mausoleums, and funeral establishments, when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.



      CHILD CARE, HOME BASED (DHS CERTIFIED GROUP HOME).  Any
residential dwelling in which child care is regularly provided for
compensation for no more than ten children who do not reside in the home. The
home-based child care center shall meet all requirements for certification by
the appropriate state agencies and city departments.



      CHILD CARE CENTER (DHS LICENSED CHILD CARE CENTER).  Any
facility in which the care, supervision and guidance of a child or children
are regularly provided for compensation for ten or more children. The CHILD
CARE CENTER shall meet all requirements for certification by the appropriate
state agencies and city departments.



      CITY.  The City of San Luis.



      CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.  A development design technique that
concentrates development/buildings in specific areas on a site, rather than
distributing them evenly, thereby allowing the remaining land to be retained
as natural open space for the preservation of sensitive lands, parks, and
public open space areas.







 



      COMMISSION.  The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of
San Luis.



      CONDITIONAL USE.  A use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will
comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of
such use as specified in this chapter.



      CONTIGUOUS.  See ABUTTING.



      CONVENIENCE MARKET.  A small-scale retail establishment the
primary purpose of which is the sale of fresh or packaged food, dry goods,
and nonprescription medicine primarily to customers from the immediate
neighborhood or area. A CONVENIENCE MARKET shall not exceed 5,000 square feet
of gross floor area.



      CORRAL.  A fenced area for the confinement of large agricultural
animals.



      COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of San Luis.



      DECORATIVE WALL.  A decorative wall shall mean stucco or masonry
that matches the architectural style of adjacent on-site buildings.



      DEMOLISH.  To pull down or tear down a structure without regard
to maintaining the visual or structural integrity of its various components.



      DENSITY.  A ratio expressing the number of dwelling units, lots
or spaces per acre. For the purpose of calculating DENSITY the equation shall
be as follows:



         D =                   du           



             Ac - (C+ I + S + R)



      where:   D   =    Density



         du   =   Total number of dwelling units.



         Ac   =   Total gross site area (acres)



         C   =   Total commercial land (acres)



         I   =   Total industrial land (acres)



         S   =   Reserved but undedicated school sites (acres)



         R   =   Arterial and collector street rights-of-way
(acres)



      DENSITY TRANSFER.  Permitted unused allowable densities in one
area to be used in another area of the same development. (Examples: within a
subdivision clustering of homes on smaller lots to retain larger open space
areas; within the floodplain area to cluster homes at a higher elevation to
retain undisturbed floodplains.)



      DESIGNATION.  The process through which a site, structure,
objects or district is officially recognized as worthy of preservation.



      DEVELOPER.  A person, firm, partnership, joint venture, trust,
syndicate, association, corporation, limited liability company or other legal
entity who desires to improve or otherwise engage in any development of
property within the City of San Luis, including the owner of the property;
except that an individual serving as agent for such legal entity is not a
DEVELOPER.



      DUSTPROOF SURFACE.  Includes one or more of the following
dustproof paving methods:



         (a)   Asphaltic concrete.



         (b)   Cement concrete.



         (c)   Penetration treatment of bituminous material and
seal coat of bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate.



         (d)   A stabilization method approved by the Zoning
Administrator.



      DWELLING, MULTIPLE RESIDENCES.  A building or buildings
containing two or more housekeeping units.



      DWELLING, SINGLE RESIDENCE.  A building containing only one
housekeeping unit.



      DWELLING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms within a building
containing provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
which is designed to be occupied exclusively by a single housekeeping unit.



      EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY, AND EMPLOYMENT.  Describe and pertain to any
person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented
business on a full-time, part-time, or contract



basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or by another status. EMPLOYEE does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.



      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The Chief of Police, City Zoning
Administrator or such person as may be designated by the City Council.



      ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, and for another
person, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, date or to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease.



      ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



      ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT.  Any of the following:



         (a)   The opening or commencement of any sexually
oriented business as a new business.



         (b)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or
not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



         (c)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to
any other existing sexually oriented business; or



         (d)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



      EXHIBIT.  Any graphic representation noted as “Exhibit”
within this chapter that is used to illustrate and exemplify certain
standards and regulations contained within the language of this chapter. If
an EXHIBIT and text of the ordinance conflict, the written text of the
ordinance shall control.



      FACTORY-BUILT BUILDING.  A residential or nonresidential
building including a dwelling unit or habitable room thereof which is either
wholly or in substantial part manufactured at an off-site location to be
assembled on-site, except that it does not include a manufactured home,
recreational vehicle or mobile home as defined elsewhere in this chapter.



      FARM/AGRICULTURE.  An agricultural use, and all accessory
structures customarily associated with such use, where the growing and
harvesting of field, tree or bush crops including flowers is the primary land
use, along with the incidental raising of agricultural animals takes place,
and which may or may utilize employees who are not owners or family of the
owners. Does not include: dairies, concentrated animal feeding operations
(CAFO), slaughter and meat packing plants, fertilizer yards.



      FENCE OR WALL HEIGHT.  Where a fence or wall faces a public
street, highway or alley, height shall be measured from the top of the curb,
or where no curb exists, the centerline of the street, highway, or alley.
Where a fence or wall is between two properties, the height shall be the
average measured from each side of the base of the fence as established at
the time of final grading. A retaining wall will be counted as part of the
total wall or fence height where the minimum horizontal distance between the
retaining wall and the fence is less than the average height of the retaining
wall. Where the minimum horizontal distance between the retaining wall and
the fence is greater than the average height of the retaining wall the fence
or wall height shall be measured from the base of the fence or wall.



      FLOOD HAZARD ZONE.  Any land area partially or wholly within a
delineated floodplain susceptible to flood related damage as designated on
the flood management maps. Such FLOOD HAZARD ZONES may include, but not be
limited to, areas highly susceptible to erosion, stream meander sensitivity,
moveable bed, scour, wave action, and subsidence.



      FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.  The Yuma County Floodplain
Administrator.



      FLOODPLAIN.  Areas adjoining the channel of a watercourse, or
areas where drainage is or may be restricted by manmade structures which have
been or may be covered partially or wholly by floodwater from the 100 year
flood. It means the combined areas of the floodway and the floodway fringe
(see illustration below). A FLOODPLAIN may be that area further defined by
the Yuma County Flood Control District and as shown on Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or an approved
flood control study.



      FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas necessary in order to discharge the 100 year flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.



      FLOODWAY FRINGE.  That area of the floodplain on either side of
the floodway where encroachment may be permitted.







 



      FLOOR AREA, GROSS (G.F.A.).  The combined gross area of all of
the floor(s) within the exterior walls of a building. Included shall be any
basement floor, interior balconies and mezzanines, elevator shafts and
stairwells and enclosed porches. The floor area of accessory uses and of
accessory buildings on the same lot shall be included.



      FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.).  The ratio of the floor area of all
structures on a parcel to the net lot area of the parcel expressed as a
percent or decimal.



         FAR   =    total floor area



               total net lot area



      FRONTAGE.  The frontage of a parcel of land is that distance
where a property line is common with a road right-of-way.



      FUNERAL PARLORS AND MORTUARIES.  An establishment primarily
engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or
disposition of the human dead and conducting memorial services. Typical uses
may include a crematory, columbarium, mausoleum, or mortuary.



      GARAGE SALE.  The sale on residential property of goods
typically associated with residential use, conducted by a resident of the
property.



      GENERAL PLAN.  A comprehensive plan pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-461.05, providing for the future growth and improvement of the city and for
the general location of streets, schools and recreation areas, public
building sites, and other physical development, and including any part of
such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan, or parts thereof.



      GRADE, FINISH.  Final elevation of the ground surface conforming
to the approved grading plans.



      GRADE, NATURAL.  Elevation of the natural or undisturbed ground
surface prior to any grading operation. Building elevations for purposes of
height limitations shall be measured from NATURAL GRADE.



      GROCERY STORE.  A retail establishment which primarily sells
food, but also may sell other convenience and household goods, and which
occupies at least 5,000 square feet but not more than 25,000 square feet of
gross floor area.



      GROUP HOME.  Dwelling unit shared as their primary residence by
handicapped, elderly or other persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit in which staff persons provide on-site care, meals,
supervision, and other support services for the residents. The facility shall
be licensed by the State of Arizona.



      GUEST HOUSE.  Living quarters for immediate family or guests on
the premises in an accessory building or attached to the principal residence.
A GUEST HOUSE shall not be rented and/or otherwise used for income purposes.



      HOME OCCUPATION.  A business activity conducted as an accessory
use to a dwelling unit.



      HOTEL.  A building designed for occupancy by persons for which
lodging or boarding is provided and offered to the public for compensation
and in which ingress and egress to and from all guest rooms are made through
an inside lobby or office. A HOTEL shall customarily provide housekeeping,
bellhop, laundry, and on-site recreation services.



      HOUSEKEEPING UNIT.  Any number of related persons living
together within a single dwelling unit; provided, however, that it shall not
include a group of more than five persons living together who are unrelated
by blood, marriage or adoption.



      INDIVIDUAL.  Any private individual, tenant, lessee, owner, or
any commercial entity including, but not limited to, companies, partnerships,
joint ventures or corporations.



      JUNK AUTOMOBILE.  Any vehicle missing one or more body parts; or
is incapable of operating under its own power; or is missing any wheels; or
has missing or severely shattered glass which prohibits safe operation; or
has one or more flat tires for a period of 72 or more hours.



      JUNK YARD.  The use of a lot, or portion thereof, for the
storage, keeping, baling, packing, disassembly, exchange or handling of,
including but not limited to; junk, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags,
rubber tires, bottles, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or other motor
vehicles or machinery but does not include uses confined entirely within
enclosed buildings.



      KENNEL.  Any premises in which four or more dogs three months of
age or older are kept; or where the business of buying, selling, breeding,
grooming, training or boarding of dogs is conducted; does not include
veterinary hospitals or humane societies.



      LARGE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  A retail establishment (store) with
any commercial retail uses or combination of such commercial retail uses
comprised of greater than 25,000 square feet. The 25,000 square feet of floor
area includes gross floor area and ancillary outdoor storage or merchandise
display areas. The floor area does not include motor vehicle parking or
loading areas. For purpose of determining the applicability of the 25,000
square foot area, the aggregate square footage of all adjacent stores with
common check stands, management, a controlling ownership interest, and
storage areas, shall be considered one establishment, e.g. a plant nursery
associated with a general merchandise area such as a home improvement area.



      LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a
sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed
as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an
employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing
employment in a sexually oriented business.



      LOADING SPACE.  An off-street space or berth on the same lot
with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials.



      LOT.  A single piece of property located in a recorded
subdivision, having frontage on a publicly dedicated and accepted street or a
private road approved and accepted by the city, which is described and
denoted as such. A LOT also includes a parcel of land, shown in the records
of the Yuma County Assessor’s Office, divided to be used separately from
other parcels of property by description, as on a recorded survey map, or by
metes and bounds, for purposes of sale, lease, or separate use in a legal
manner pursuant to all state, county, and city requirements for the
development and proposed use of that property.



      LOT AREA (NET).  The area of a horizontal plane within the lot
lines of a lot but not including any area in a public way such as
right-of-way, alleys, or easements.



      LOT, CORNER.  A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets.



      LOT COVERAGE.  The percentage of the area of a lot that is
occupied by all buildings or other covered structures using the roof outline
for all outer dimensions.



      LOT DEPTH.  The horizontal length of a straight line connecting
the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines; and for triangular shaped
lots, the shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot
line, having a length of not less than ten feet.



      LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot.



      LOT, KEY.  A lot adjacent to a corner lot having its side lot
line in common with the rear lot line of the corner lot and fronting on the
street that forms the side boundary of the corner lot.



      LOT LINE.  A line dividing one lot from another or from a street
or any public place.



      LOT LINE, FRONT.  In the case of an interior lot, a line
separating the lot from the street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot,
the narrower of the two lot lines adjoining a street right-of-way.



      LOT LINE, REAR.  A lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line; except that in the absence of a REAR LOT LINE as is
the case of the triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line may be considered as
a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front
lot line, having a length of not less than ten feet.



      LOT LINE, SIDE.  The boundary of a lot that is not a front lot
line or a rear lot line.



      LOT, THROUGH.  A lot having a part of opposite lot lines
abutting two streets, and which is not a corner lot, (Also known as a
“double frontage lot”). On such lot, both lot lines are front, except
that where a non-access easement has been established on such a lot, the
front lot line shall be considered as that lot line most distant from the lot
line containing the non-access easement.



      LOT WIDTH.



         (a)   For rectangular lots, lots having side lot lines
not parallel, and lots on the outside of the curve of a street, the distance
between side lot lines measured at the required minimum front yard setback
line on a line parallel to the street or street chord.







 



         (b)   For lots on the inside of the curve of a street,
the distance between side lot lines measured at the required minimum front
yard setback line on a line parallel to the street or street chord.







 



      MANUFACTURED HOME.  A residential dwelling built in accordance
with and certified as a manufactured home under the Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective
June 15, 1976, and the laws of the State of Arizona Office of Manufactured
Housing.



      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK (LAND LEASE) DEVELOPMENT.  A residential
development, typified by single ownership of the land within the development,
approved pursuant to this chapter for placement of manufactured homes used
for residential purposes.



      MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE.  A plot of ground within a manufactured
home park (land lease) development designed for the accommodation of one
manufactured home with an annual lease.



      MASTER PLAN DEVELOPMENT.  A development application which
provides information and graphics meeting the requirements of this chapter,
and an overall master plan meeting the requirements of the subdivision
ordinance, for the purpose of implementing an integrated development scheme
for all phases of the proposed development.



      MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY.  A nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary duly registered and certified pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2804.



      MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY OFF-SITE CULTIVATION LOCATION.  The
one additional location, if any, duly identified pursuant to A.R.S. §
36-2806(E) during the process of registering a nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary, where marijuana will be cultivated for sale at a nonprofit
medical marijuana dispensary duly registered and certified pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 36-2804.



      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR.  A vehicle mounted food service
establishment designed to be readily movable. This term includes
self-propelled kitchens, trailer mounted kitchens, and/or any vehicle mounted
food service facility where food is composed, compounded, processed, or
prepared and/or from which food in any form is sold or given away.



      MOBILE HOME.  A residential dwelling that was fabricated or
built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. MOBILE
HOMES are not permitted within the City of San Luis.



      MOBILE VENDOR.  A vehicle mounted establishment designed to be
readily movable. This term includes self-propelled units, trailer mounted
units, and/or any vehicle mounted facility where goods in any form are sold
or given away.



      MODULAR HOME.  A structure intended for residential use and
manufactured off-site in accord with the Uniform Building Code (UBC) or
International Building Code (IBC) as adopted by the City of San Luis. (See
FACTORY-BUILT BUILDING).



      MOTEL.  A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms
or rooming units, each of which maintains a separate entrance leading
directly from the outside of the building. Such building or group of
buildings being designed, intended, or used primarily for the accommodation
of automobile travelers, and provide automobile parking conveniently located
on the premises. MOTELS include motor courts, motor lodges and tourist
courts, but not mobile home parks or recreational vehicle parks.



      NET ACRES.  The total acreage of a tract or parcel of land
exclusive of the area existing or required for arterial or collector street
right-of-way dedications and school/public site reservations. When
calculating NET ACRES within a residential P.U.D. any commercial and
industrial zoned land must be excluded in addition to those uses previously
listed herein.



      NET LOT AREA.  The area of a lot or parcel excluding all
dedicated streets, alleys, roadway or alley easements.



      NON-CONFORMING BUILDING.  A building or portion thereof which
was lawful when established but which does not conform to a subsequently
established district or district regulations.



      NON-CONFORMING LOT.  A parcel of land which was lawful when
established but which does not conform to a subsequently established district
or district regulations and now has less area, frontage or dimensions than
required in the district in which it is located.



      NON-CONFORMING USE.  A use of land that:



         (a)   Legally existed before its current zoning or land
use category designation was adopted; and



         (b)   Has been maintained continuously since the time
the applicable regulations governing the land changed; and



         (c)   Because of subsequent changes, does not conform to
this chapter or General Plan provisions that now govern the land.



      NUDE, NUDITY, or A STATE OF NUDITY.  The showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than
a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



      NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” [a commercial
establishment which regularly features a person (or persons) who appears
semi-nude and] is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay
money or any form of consideration. A NUDE MODEL STUDIO does not mean a
modeling class, or the facility for such class, operated:



         (a)   By a proprietary school licensed by the State of
Arizona; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;



         (b)   By a private college or university which maintains
and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.



      NURSERIES, RETAIL.  The use of the land, buildings, or
structures for the sales of plant materials, landscape materials, gardening
supplies and fertilizer, excluding production of plant materials.



      NURSING HOME.  A nursing home is an extended health care
facility licensed by the Arizona Department of Health Services (Office of
Long Term Care Licensing) which provides lodging, meals,  personal services,
and skilled nursing and medical care on a long-term basis to individuals who,
because of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to care
for themselves. They provide long term care services to chronically ill
persons, including those with chronic mental illness. Many NURSING HOMES also
offer short term rehabilitative services (such as those needed to help people
continue to recover from recent hospitalization) and special units for people
with Alzheimer’s disease or other types of dementia. NURSING HOMES are
licensed by the Arizona Department of Health Services.



      OPEN SPACE.  Any parcel or area of land or water, natural or
improved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for the use and
enjoyment of all the residents of the development or the public in general.
OPEN SPACE may include water retention/detention areas but does not include
vacant or undeveloped lots, bike lanes or sidewalks attached to the back of
curb or parking areas/lots.



      OPEN SPACE, COMMON.  Open space usable by all people within a
certain development and such area is owned in common by all property owners
in that development.



      OPEN SPACE, NATURAL AREA.  Open space areas required for the
preservation and conservation of plant and animal life, including habitat for
fish and wildlife species; and areas required for ecological, cultural and
other scientific study purposes for long-term public benefit.



      OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC.  An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, school district, state or
county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.



      OPEN SPACE, USABLE.  Land which can be actively used by people.
This could include landscaped or hardscaped plazas, paseo and promenades,
fountains and sitting areas meant to provide an open park like atmosphere.
Also playgrounds, golf courses, bicycle trails (but not bike lanes),
pedestrian trails (not residential sidewalks), and trail heads. USABLE OPEN
SPACE does not include parking areas and vacant or undeveloped lots.



      OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED.  To cause to function or to put
in a state of doing business. Operator means any person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control
of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation,
the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated
a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner,
part owner, or licensee of the business.



      OUTDOOR LIGHTING.  See §§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      OUTDOOR SALES.  The display of products or services, which are
intended for retail or wholesale purchase not within a completely enclosed
building.



      OUTDOOR STORAGE.  The location of any goods, wares, merchandise,
commodities, junk, debris, or any other item outside of a completely enclosed
building for a continuous period longer than 24 hours.



      PARK(S).  A public tract of land that contains a mix of active
and passive recreation facilities including tot lots, defined and improved
play fields and/or sport court areas, and picnic/seating/shade areas that are
landscaped or hardscaped in a pleasing manner.



      PARK MODEL RECREATIONAL UNIT.  A unit built on a single chassis
mounted on wheels, or originally mounted on wheels and from which the wheels
have been removed, and designed to be connected to utilities necessary for
operation of installed fixtures and appliances and has a gross trailer area
of not less than 320 square feet and not more than 400 square feet when it is
set up, except that it does not include fifth wheel trailers.



      PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity.



      PERSONAL DOG KENNEL.  Any premise in which seven to a maximum of
12 dogs of three months of age or older are kept in accordance with San Luis
City Code Chapter 95.



      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.).  A development of a minimum
40 or more contiguous acres, as specified by this chapter, in which
flexibility can be sought in the zoning standards, in order to encourage more
creativity and sustainable design, thereby providing usable open space within
and about the development and enhancing the residential character of the
city. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS shall be subject to Planning Commission and
City Council approval.



      PLANT NURSERIES AND GREENHOUSES.  The use of the land,
buildings, or structures for the growth and production of flowers, plants and
trees for transplanting or sale. It may also include, as accessory to the
above activities, the sale of materials commonly used for landscaping
purposes, such as soil, rock, bark, mulch and other materials determined by
the Zoning Administrator to be landscaping materials.



      PRINCIPAL USE.  The main or primary use on any lot or parcel
that establishes the basic land use characteristics of the property, as
opposed to an accessory use. In some instances, a property may have more than
one PRINCIPAL USE.



      PRODUCE STAND (FARMERS MARKET).  A temporary open-air stand or
place for the seasonal selling of agricultural produce. A produce stand must
be portable and capable of being dismantled or removed from the sales site.



      PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT.  The right to undertake and
complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions
of a protected development right plan, without compliance with subsequent
changes in zoning regulations and development standards during the term of
the PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT, except as provided by A.R.S. § 9-1204.



      PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLAN.  A development plan identified
as a PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLAN at the time of the landowner’s
submission, that, if approved by the Council, grants to the landowner a
protected development right to undertake and complete development and use of
the property as shown thereon for a specified period of time.



      RANCH.  An area of not less than five contiguous acres used for
the keeping of agricultural animals, along with necessary accessory uses and
limited crop production. Allowed RANCH uses shall include: equine boarding,
breeding, training, and lessons; the sale of ranch animals; 4-H and other
youth-related activities. Allowed RANCH uses do not include: dairies;
concentrated animal feeding operations, liveries; the retail sale of hay;
feed or tack; or equine activities open to the general public.



      RANCH, COMMERCIAL.  An area not less than ten contiguous acres
which may be open to the general public and may be used for: the following
equine uses: polo fields; riding arenas used for scheduled public or club
events or activities such as barrel racing, bull riding, cutting, gymkhanas,
roping, team penning or other rodeo related activities. COMMERCIAL RANCH uses
do not include: dairies; concentrated animal feeding operations, liveries;
the retail sale of hay, feed or tack; or livestock auctions. A COMMERCIAL
RANCH requires a “conditional use permit”.



      RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, INDOOR.  Establishments providing
indoor amusement or recreation. Typical uses include: martial arts studios,
billiard and pool halls, electronic and coin-operated game rooms, bowling
alleys, skating rinks, and health and fitness establishments.



      RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, OUTDOOR.  Long term facilities
providing outdoor amusement and entertainment. Typical uses include miniature
golf, skateboard parks, amusement parks, go cart race tracks, and batting
cages.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicular type of unit 40 feet or less
in length and eight feet or less in width, primarily designed for temporary
living quarters, recreation, camping, or travel use, which either:



         (a)   Contains its own motive power as in the case of
motor homes, mini-motor homes, or recreational vans;



         (b)   Is drawn by another vehicle as in the case of
travel trailers, tent trailers, camper trailers, or water craft on boat
trailers; or



         (c)   Is mounted on another vehicle as in the case of
truck campers.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK.  An integrated development, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, where recreational vehicles
are used for temporary residential purposes.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE.  A parcel of land which is
designated and intended for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle on
a short term basis.



      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN.  A consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a
part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.



      REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION.  An elevation one foot above the
base flood elevation.



      RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  A building, together with its accessory
buildings, where the principal uses are for religious worship and related
activities including meeting hall, administrative offices, private school,
and clergy housing.



      RELOCATED DWELLING UNITS.  Either relocated site built or
factory built structures which must meet current I.B.C. or U.B.C. codes for
on-site work when placed at the new location. If the structure does not meet
I.B.C. or U.B.C. codes, it will not be allowed.



      RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED.  A home in
which persons with developmental disabilities live and that is licensed,
operated, supported or supervised by the department. As per A.R.S. §§
36-581 et seq., no conditional use permit, zoning variance or other zoning
clearance shall be required of a residential facility which serves six or
fewer persons which is not required of a single family residence in the same
zone. No RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED shall be
established within a 1,200 foot radius of an existing RESIDENTIAL FACILITY
FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED in a residential area.



      RESORT.  A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms
providing outdoor recreational activities such as golf, tennis, horseback
riding or swimming for guests. A RESORT may provide services customarily
furnished by a hotel including restaurant, bar and convention facilities. A
RESORT may contain dwelling units in conjunction with guest rooms.



      SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA.  An antenna designed to receive
electromagnetic transmissions from a satellite.



      SATELLITE EARTH STATION.  A device consisting of an antenna and
reflector, having any dimension of more than one and one-half meters, and is
solid or open mesh configured structure used for reception or transmission of
radio energy to or from an earth orbit satellite or celestial body.



      SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.  The showing of the
female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its
highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition
shall include the entire lower portion of the human breast, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by
a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



      SETBACK.  The minimum required distance between a structure and
a property line(s) of a parcel of land or other established reference point.



      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial
establishment, that as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration: a place where two or more persons may congregate,
associate, or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities”.
The definition of SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER or any sexually oriented businesses
shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.



      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  This term is synonymous with ADULT
ORIENTED BUSINESS and means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture
theater, adult video store, escort agency, semi-nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center. (Chapter 113 Sexually Oriented Businesses of the City of
San Luis City Code).



      SIGN.  See §§ 152.255 through 152.262.



      SITE BUILT DWELLING.  A structure or dwelling constructed on the
site by craftsmen utilizing materials delivered to the site. The structure
shall consist of footings and foundations poured in place and solidly
attached to the walls. Roofing materials, interior and exterior finishes
shall be applied on the site. All construction shall be in conformance with
all uniform codes in force at the time of construction. This definition does
not include relocated site built homes.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Human genitals in a state of sexual
arousal.



         (a)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or



         (b)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.



      SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.



         (a)   Any one of the following offenses: prostitution or
promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or
display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child;
possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent
exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity
relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to
those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or
countries;



         (b)   For which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two
or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses
occurring within any 24 month period.



         (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing
with the applicant.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the following:



         (a)   The fondling of another person’s genitals, pubic
region, anus, or female breasts;



         (b)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or



         (c)   Excretory functions as part of, or in connection
with, any of the activities set forth in subdivisions (a) through (b) above.



      STABLE, COMMERCIAL.  A stable of horses, mules, or ponies, which
are bred, hired, shown or boarded on a commercial basis and for compensation.
This facility may offer equestrian lessons and may include a show arena and
viewing stands.



      STABLE, PRIVATE.  A detached accessory building for the keeping
of horses, mules, or ponies owned by the occupants of the premises and not
kept for remuneration, hire or sale.



      STREET.  An arterial street, collector street or local street.



      STREET, ARTERIAL.  An arterial street which is identified as a
principal arterial street or minor arterial street as classified in the San
Luis General Plan. The ARTERIAL STREETS carry most of the trips entering and
leaving the urban area, control access, have signalized intersections and
restricted parking.



      STREET, COLLECTOR.  A major collector street or minor collector
street as classified in the San Luis General Plan. The COLLECTOR STREETS
provide the traffic movement from the neighborhoods or high-volume traffic
generating land uses to the arterial streets.



      STREET, LOCAL.  A local street permits direct access to abutting
lands, traffic movements within neighborhoods, and connections to the
collector and arterial street system.



      STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change in the supporting members of
a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders,
or any complete rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls.



      STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, which requires
location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground.



      SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT.  The increase in floor areas occupied
by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas on the date this chapter
(Chapter 113 Sexually Oriented Businesses of the City of San Luis City Code).



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS (WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS).  See §§ 152.315
through 152.322.



      TENANT IMPROVEMENTS.  The alteration of interior space.



      TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS.  Any of the following:



         (a)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or



         (b)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or



         (c)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other
similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the
business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the
death of the person possessing the ownership or control.



      TRAVEL PLAZA/TRUCK STOP.  Any building, premises, or land in
which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the
maintenance, servicing, storage, or repair of commercial vehicles is
conducted or rendered, including the dispensing of motor fuel or other
petroleum products directly into motor vehicles and the sale of accessories
or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles. A TRAVEL PLAZA may
also include overnight accommodations and restaurant facilities primarily for
the use of truck crews.



      USE.  The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied
or maintained.



      USE PERMIT.  An authorization with appropriate stipulations by
the City Council, as set forth in this chapter, for the development or use of
any property that is subject to such a requirement.



      YARD.  An open area at grade level between a building and the
adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a
structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.



      YARD, FRONT.  An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a
main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the
street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of
the lot.



      YARD, REAR.  An open space on the same lot with a main building
between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot extending
the full width of the lot. The REAR YARD shall always be opposite the front
yard.



      YARD, SIDE.  An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a
main building situated between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line
or a front line shall be deemed a side lot line. An interior SIDE YARD is
defined as the side yard adjacent to a common lot line.



      ZONE.  A district classification established by The Zoning
Ordinance of the City of San Luis that limits or permits various and specific
uses.



      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  The staff/official responsible for the
enforcement and interpretation of the zoning ordinance.



      ZONING CLEARANCE.  The approval by the Zoning Administrator of a
plan that is in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of San Luis.



      ZONING DISTRICT.  A zone area in which the same zoning
regulations apply throughout the district.



      ZONING ORDINANCE.  The Zoning Ordinance of the City of San Luis.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Ord. 368, passed 10-11-2017)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.025  CITY COUNCIL.



   The Mayor and City Council (“Council”) shall have the following
powers and duties, pursuant to the terms of this chapter:



   (A)   To hear, review and consider recommendations of the Planning
and Zoning Commission on zoning applications and appeals, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   To initiate, hear, review and adopt amendments to the zoning
district map after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter;



   (C)   To initiate, hear, review and adopt amendments to the text of
this chapter after the recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;



   (D)   To initiate, adopt, and amend the General Plan; including the
text, maps and exhibits, and all elements of the General Plan, after
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter; and



   (E)   To take such action not expressly delegated exclusively to the
Zoning Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Board of
Adjustment as the City Council may deem desirable and necessary to implement
the provisions of this chapter and the General Plan.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.026  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established, pursuant to
Arizona Revised Statutes A.R.S. §§ 9-461.01 et seq., a planning agency
known as the City of San Luis Planning and Zoning Commission
(“Commission”).



   (B)   Powers. The Commission is the planning agency for the city and
has the powers to enable it to fulfill its planning function, in accordance
with the Arizona Revised Statutes. The Commission shall provide an advisory
function to assist the City Council in making decisions pertaining to
amendments to the General Plan and this chapter, and applications for
development approval. In no event is the Commission authorized to render a
final decision approving, denying, or conditionally approving a change in the
zoning ordinance or General Plan, or to render a final decision on an
application for development approval; except as otherwise authorized in this
section of the ordinance.



   (C)   Duties. In addition to any authority granted to the Commission
by Arizona law, this chapter or by other ordinances of the city, the
Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   To hold public hearings when necessary or when required
by law;



      (2)   To initiate, hear, review, and make recommendations to
the City Council regarding applications for amendments to the General Plan or
area specific plans, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. On an
annual basis, review and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council
concerning the General Plan as well as plans for the development of any land
outside the city’s planning area, which in the opinion of the Commission,
is substantially related to the planning of the city;



      (3)   To make recommendations to the City Council on all
matters concerning or relating to the creation of zoning ordinances, the
zoning district map, the boundaries thereof, the appropriate regulations to
be enforced therein, and amendments of this chapter, and to undertake any
other activities usually associated therewith and commonly known as
“planning and zoning”;



      (4)   To initiate, hear and review applications for amendments
to either the zoning district map and/or the text of this chapter, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter;



      (5)   To serve as the advisory body to the City Council on
such matters as applications for protected development rights plans,
subdivision final plats, and any other permit or review process in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter;



      (6)   To hear, review and make recommendations to the City
Council on conditional use permits;



      (7)   To hear, review and decide on subdivision preliminary
plats in accordance with the provisions of the city’s subdivision
ordinance; and



      (8)   To confer and advise with other town, city, county,
regional, or state planning agencies and commissions.



   (D)   Membership. The Commission shall consist of seven members, all
residents of the city, who shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure
of, the City Council.



   (E)   Term of office. The term of office of the members of the
Commission shall be four years, with the terms of members so staggered that
the terms of no more than three members shall expire on January 31 in any
one-year. The incumbent Commissioner shall continue to serve, after their
term of office has expired, until a successor has been appointed. In the
event of a death, resignation, or removal from the Commission, a resident
appointed by the City Council shall fill the vacancy, for the un-expired term.



   (F)   Nonattendance. Three successive unexcused absences from any
regular or special meeting shall be grounds for termination at the will and
pleasure of the City Council without the necessity of a hearing or notice,
and such action shall be final and the position shall thereupon be declared
vacant.



   (G)   Organization.



      (1)   Officers. A member must have served on the Commission
for a period of one year prior to being eligible to serve as an officer. The
Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its own
members at its first meeting in January each year. The chairperson shall
preside at all meetings and shall take such actions as necessary to preserve
order and the integrity of all proceedings before the Commission. The
vice-chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson in the
latter’s absence or disability.



      (2)   Meetings. Meetings of the Commission shall be open to
the public. Public input shall be permitted in public meetings on matters
before the Commission. The minutes of the proceedings, showing the vote of
each member and records of its examinations and other official actions, shall
be kept and filed in the office of the City Clerk as a public record.



      (3)   Quorum. Four members of the Commission shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business. No matter may be considered by the
Commission unless there are four or more members present who are
eligible/qualified to vote on the matter. The affirmative vote of the
majority of the members present shall be required to pass a motion. If a
member has been present for the entire presentation of an issue that member
may abstain from voting only because they have a conflict of interest. If a
member has a conflict of interest, he/she shall declare the conflict of
interest prior to the presentation and shall abstain from all discussion and
deliberation on the matter in question.



      (4)   Rules and regulations. The Commission may make and
publish by-laws to govern its proceedings and to provide for its meetings.
The by-laws are to be reviewed by the City Attorney and approved by the City
Council.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Am. Ord. 344, passed 1-27-2016)



§ 152.027  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established, pursuant to A.R.S.
§§ 9-462.06 et seq., a City of San Luis Board of Adjustment (“Board”).
In lieu of appointing a separate Board of Adjustment, the Mayor, with the
consent of the City Council, may establish the City Council as the Board of
Adjustment.



   (B)   Powers and duties. In addition to any authority granted to the
Board of Adjustment by Arizona law, the Board shall have the following powers
and duties:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged that
there is an error in an order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning
Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter. This power shall include
the power to reverse, affirm, or modify, wholly or partly, any order,
requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator properly appealed to the
Board, and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as is
necessary;



      (2)   To hear and decide requests for variances from the terms
of this zoning ordinance, only if, because of special circumstances
applicable to the property, including its size, shape, topography, location,
or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance will deprive
such property of privileges enjoyed by other property of the same
classification in the same zoning district. Any variance granted is subject
to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not
constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations
upon other properties in the same zoning district in which such property is
located;



      (3)   A variance from the terms of this chapter may only be
granted, upon the presentation of evidence demonstrating that the specific
requirements established by state statutes have been satisfied:



         (a)   There exists special circumstances or conditions
regarding the land or building for which the variance or adjustment is
sought, which do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the same
zoning district;



         (b)   The above special circumstances or conditions are
preexisting and are not created or self-imposed;



         (c)   The variance is necessary for the preservation of
substantial property rights. Without a variance the property cannot be used
for purposes otherwise allowed in the same zoning district and the variance
or adjustment, as granted, is the minimum adjustment that will accomplish
this purpose; and



         (d)   The granting of the adjustment will not be
materially detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity, to
adjacent property, or to the neighborhood or the public welfare;



      (4)   The Board of Adjustment may not:



         (a)   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any
zoning classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of
the zoning ordinance, provided the restrictions in this paragraph shall not
affect the authority to grant variances pursuant to state statutes; or



         (b)   Grant a variance if the special circumstances
applicable to the property are self-imposed by the property owner.



   (C)   Membership. The Board shall consist of seven members who shall
be residents of the city. All members shall be appointed by, and serve at the
pleasure of, the City Council.



   (D)   Term of office. Whenever the City Council is not serving as
the Board, the term of office of the members of the Board shall be four
years, with the terms of members so staggered that the terms of no more than
three members shall expire on January 1 in any one year. The incumbent member
shall continue to serve, after their term of office has expired, until a
successor has been appointed. In the event of a death, resignation, or
removal from the Board, the City Council shall fill the vacancy for the
un-expired term.



   (E)   Nonattendance. Three successive unexcused absences from any
regular meeting shall be grounds for termination at the will and pleasure of
the City Council without the necessity of a hearing or notice, and such
action shall be final and the position shall thereupon be declared vacant.



   (F)   Organization of Board of Adjustment.



      (1)   Chairpersons. Whenever the City Council is serving as
the Board, the Mayor and Vice Mayor shall serve as the chairperson and
vice-chairperson respectively. Otherwise, the Board shall elect a chairperson
and a vice-chairperson from the members of the Board at the first meeting
held in each calendar year. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings,
administer oaths and take evidence. The vice-chairperson shall perform the
duties of the chairperson in the latter’s absence or disability.



      (2)   Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment will be
called as needed by the Chair of the Board. Meetings of the Board shall be
open to the public and public input shall be taken at the discretion of the
chairman. The minutes of the proceedings, showing the votes of each member
and records of it examinations and other official actions, shall be kept and
filed in the office of the City Clerk as a public record.



      (3)   Quorum. Four members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. No matter may be considered by the
Board unless there are four or more members present who are
eligible/qualified to vote on the matter. The affirmative vote of at least
the majority of the quorum present and voting shall be required to pass a
motion. If a member has been present for the entire presentation of an issue
that member may abstain from voting only because they have a conflict of
interest. If a member has a conflict of interest he/she shall declare the
conflict of interest prior to the presentation and shall abstain from all
discussion and deliberation on the matter in question.



      (4)   Rules and regulations. The Board may make and publish
by-laws to govern its proceedings and to provide for its meetings. The
by-laws are to be reviewed by the City Attorney and approved by the City
Council.



   (G)   Appeals of Board of Adjustment decision. A person aggrieved by
a decision of the Board of Adjustment or an officer or department of the city
affected by a decision of the Board may at any time within 30 days after the
Board has rendered its decision, file a complaint for special action in
Superior Court to review the Board’s decision.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.028  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Establishment. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462 the staff position
of Zoning Administrator is hereby established for the general and specific
administration of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator is charged with the
enforcement of this chapter. During any period that the position of Zoning
Administrator is vacant, the City Manager or his/her designated
representative shall perform the duties of the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   Powers. The Zoning Administrator shall possess all powers of a
Zoning Administrator under this chapter and Arizona Law and shall perform
such duties as are set forth under the direction of the City Manager.



   (C)   Duties of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator
shall have the following duties:



      (1)   To establish rules, procedures and forms to provide for
processing of applications or requests for action under the provisions of
this chapter;



      (2)   Accomplish all administrative actions required by this
chapter, including the giving of notice, scheduling of hearings, preparation
of reports, receiving and processing appeals, and the acceptance and
accounting of fees, as provided in other provisions of this chapter;



      (3)   To review and either approve or reject applications for
temporary use permits, site plan reviews, minor lot splits, and minor
variances as provided in other provisions of this chapter;



      (4)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.06(A), and if delegated by
the Council to act in the capacity as Hearing Officer, to hear and decide on
matters within the jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment;



      (5)   To provide advice and recommendations to the Planning
and Zoning Commission, the Board of Adjustment, and the City Council with
respect to applications and requests for approvals and permits required by
this chapter;



      (6)   To assure that any development or use proceed only in
accordance to the terms, conditions, or requirements as established by the
city’s board(s), Commission or Council as a term, condition, or requirement
of development and/or permit approval;



      (7)   To direct such inspections, observations and analysis of
any and all erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use
of buildings, structures or land within the city as is necessary to fulfill
the purposes and procedures set forth in this chapter. No building shall be
occupied until such time as the Zoning Administrator has issued a letter of
compliance with this chapter or countersigned the certificate of occupancy as
issued by the Building Official;



      (8)   To take such action as is necessary for the enforcement
of this chapter with respect to any violations of the chapter;



      (9)   Interpret the zoning ordinance to the public, city
departments, and other branches of government, subject to the supervision of
the City Manager and general or specific policies established by the City
Council;



      (10)   Undertake preliminary discussions with and provide
non-legal advice to applicants requesting zoning adjustment action;



      (11)   Determine the location of any district boundary shown
on the zoning map adopted as part of this chapter when such location is in
dispute;



      (12)   The Zoning Administrator may, due to the complexity of
any matter, unless otherwise noted herein, refer a permit application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation;



      (13)   Determine other permitted uses and conditional uses
consistent with the purpose of each specific zoning district;



      (14)   The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall be
responsible for conducting the “citizen review” meetings when required by
§ 152.040(C); and



      (15)   To allow an opportunity for staff input and proper
evaluation, all requests for action by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or
Board of Adjustment, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. All
requests shall be in a form required by the Zoning Administrator and in a
manner provided in this chapter or in rules or regulations approved by
resolution of the City Council.



   (D)   Limitations of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator may not make any changes in the terms of the zoning ordinance.



   (E)   Appeals.



      (1)   Any person aggrieved or affected by a decision of the
Zoning Administrator may appeal to the Board of Adjustment, by filing a
written request with the Zoning Administrator. Upon receiving a written
appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment
all papers and pertinent data related to the appeal.



      (2)   An appeal under this section must be filed within ten
working days from the date the Zoning Administrator has notified the
applicant, in writing, of his/her decision. If no appeal is filed within the
time specified the decision of the Zoning Administrator shall be final.



      (3)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal to the Board of
Adjustment stays all proceedings in the matter appealed from, unless the
Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board that, based on the facts stated,
a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon such
certification, proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order
granted by the Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the
Zoning Administrator. Proceedings shall not be stayed if the appeal requests
relief, which has previously been denied by the Board except pursuant to a
special action in Superior Court as provided for in state law.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



ZONING PROCEDURES



§ 152.040  GENERAL PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application process. The purpose of this chapter is to provide
procedures for the various requests for amendments to the text of this
chapter, amendments to the official zoning map(s), use permits, variances and
appeals, site plan review, specific area plans, and General Plan amendments.
The specific procedures followed in reviewing the various applications
differ. The procedures for all applications have three common elements: (1)
submittal of a completed city application, including required fee payment
along with appropriate information; (2) review of the submittal by
appropriate city staff, agencies, commission, and boards; and (3) action to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. In order to have
an application accepted by the city the applicant shall progress through the
following steps.



      (1)   Pre-application conference. The applicant may be
required to meet with the Zoning Administrator to discuss the nature of the
proposed application, the specific submittal requirements, the procedure for
action, and the standards for evaluation of the application.



      (2)   Sketch plan. The applicant shall provide the Zoning
Administrator with a sketch plan at the time of the pre-application
conference. A sketch plan shall, at a minimum, depict the boundaries of the
property being considered and a tentative development proposal for the
property.



      (3)   Formal submittal. The applicant shall submit all of the
required materials to the Zoning Administrator. Only complete
applications/submittal packages shall be accepted.



   (B)   Notice provisions. The notice requirements for each type of
application for development approval are prescribed in the individual
sub-sections of this chapter. When the Zoning Administrator determines that a
development application/submittal package is complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause the public notice of the hearing to be made at the
expense of the applicant.



   (C)   Citizen review process. In accordance with A.R.S. § 9-462.03,
prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing, all rezoning and
specific plan application(s) that require a public hearing must first be
presented to the public at a “citizen review” public meeting. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for conducting the citizen review meeting.
The meeting shall be held at least one week prior to the scheduled Planning
and Zoning Commission meeting at which the application will be presented. The
purpose of the citizen review meeting is to provide adjacent landowners and
other potentially affected citizens an opportunity to ask questions and
express any issues or concerns that they may have with the proposed rezoning
or specific plan application prior to the public hearing. The city will mail
notice of the meeting which shall state the date, time, and place of the
meeting and shall include a general explanation of the application.



   (D)   Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold public hearings, at their regular or special meetings,
to receive and review public input on those items required by this chapter.
On those items where the Commission has review authority only, the Commission
shall make a recommendation to the City Council that the Council: 1) approve;
2) approve with conditions; or 3) deny the application. The Commission’s
recommendations and actions shall be based on consideration of the following
evidence and analysis including, but not limited to, all of the following:



      (1)   Conformance with this chapter, and adopted city
standards and policies;



      (2)   Compliance with the City of San Luis General Plan and
other adopted specific area plans;



      (3)   Staff recommendations;



      (4)   Outside reviewing agency input;



      (5)   Public input and testimony received during the citizen
review session and at the Commission hearing; and



      (6)   Overall effects of the proposal on the neighborhood,
area, and community-at-large.



   (E)   City Council. The City Council shall hold public hearings to
act upon those items as required by this chapter at their regular or special
meetings. The City Council shall decide whether or not to: 1) approve; 2)
approve with conditions; or 3) deny an application. Action on those items
heard will be based on consideration of evidence presented including, but not
limited to, all of the following:



      (1)   Planning and Zoning Commission recommendations;



      (2)   Conformance with this chapter, and adopted city
standards and policies;



      (3)   Compliance with the City of San Luis General Plan, and
other adopted specific area plans;



      (4)   Staff recommendations;



      (5)   Outside reviewing agency input;



      (6)   Public input and testimony received at the Commission
hearing as well as the Council’s hearing; and



      (7)   Overall effects of the proposal on the neighborhood,
area, and community-at-large.



   (F)   Scope of action. The reviewing body may take any action on the
application that is consistent with the notice given, including approval of
the application, conditional approval of the application or denial of the
application. The reviewing body may allow amendments to the application if
the effect of the amendments is to allow a less intense change than that
requested on the original application or to reduce the impact of the
development or to reduce the amount of land involved from that indicated in
the notices of the hearing. The reviewing body shall not, in any case, permit
a greater amount of development, or a use falling in a different general use
category, or a larger land area than indicated in the original application,
or a greater variance than was indicated in the notice.



   (G)   Records. The city shall provide for minutes to be written and
retained, shall record the evidence submitted, all staff and advisory board
reports and/or recommendations, and shall include a summary of the
consideration and the action of the Commission, Board, and Council. All such
records shall be public records, open for inspection at reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice. Public records are to be retained in accordance with
A.R.S. public retention requirements.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Ord. 379, passed 2-28-2018)



§ 152.041  NOTIFICATION FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   (A)   Notification of public hearing(s) required for zoning text
amendments and zoning amendments (rezoning) shall be subject to notice
requirements as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-462.04 and herein described. Any
changes to Arizona law notice requirements shall have control over this
provision in the manner of providing notice. Notice of the date, time, and
place of the hearing including a general explanation of the matter to be
considered and including a general description of the area affected shall be
given at least 15 days before the hearing in the following manner:



      (1)   The notice shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation published or circulated in the city, or if
there is none, it shall be posted on the affected property in such a manner
as to be legible from the public right-of-way and in at least ten public
places in the city. A posted notice shall be printed so that the following
are visible from a distance of 100 feet: (1) the word “zoning,” (2) the
present zoning district classification, (3) the proposed zoning district
classification and (4) the date and time of the public hearing.



      (2)   In proceedings involving rezoning of land, which abuts
other municipalities or unincorporated areas of the county or a combination
thereof, copies of the notice of public hearing shall be transmitted to the
planning agency of such governmental unit abutting such land. In addition to
notice by publication, the city may give notice of the hearing in such other
manner as it may deem necessary or desirable.



      (3)   In proceedings that are not initiated by the property
owner involving rezoning of land which may change the zoning classification,
notice by first class mail shall be sent to each real property owner, as
shown on the last assessment of the property, of the area to be rezoned. In
all rezoning proceedings, notice by first class mail shall be sent to all
property owners, as shown on the last assessment of the property, within 300
feet of the property to be rezoned.



      (4)   In proceedings involving one or more of the following
proposed changes or related series of changes in the standards governing land
uses, notice shall be provided in the manner prescribed by division (A)(5) of
this section:



         (a)   A 10% or more increase or decrease in the number
of square feet or units that may be developed.



         (b)   A 10% or more increase or reduction in the
allowable height of buildings.



         (c)   An increase or reduction in the allowable number
of stories of buildings.



         (d)   A 10% or more increase or decrease in setback or
open space requirements.



         (e)   An increase or reduction in permitted uses.



      (5)   In proceedings governed by division (A)(4) of this
section, the city shall provide notice to real property owners pursuant to at
least one of the following notification procedures:



         (a)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail to each
real property owner, as shown on the last assessment, whose real property is
directly governed by the changes;



         (b)   If the city issues utility bills or other mass
mailings that periodically include notices or other informational or
advertising materials, the city shall include notice of such changes with
such utility bills or other mailings; or



         (c)   The city shall publish such changes prior to the
first public hearing on such changes in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city. The changes shall be published in a “display ad” covering not
less the one-eighth of a full page.



      (6)   If notice is provided pursuant to divisions (A)(5)(b) or
(c) of this section the city shall also send notice by first class mail to
persons who register their names and addresses with the city as being
interested in receiving such notice. The city may charge a fee not to exceed
five dollars per year for providing this service and may adopt procedures to
implement this provision.



      (7)   Notwithstanding the notice requirements set forth in
division (A)(5) of this section, the failure of any person or entity to
receive notice, whether through no fault of the city, applicant or USPS,
shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the actions of the
city for which the notice was given.



   (B)   Notification for conditional use permits shall also follow the
requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-462.04 as described above.



   (C)   Notification for variance requests shall follow the
requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-462.06.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.042  ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT AND ZONING MAP CHANGES.



   (A)   Purpose. In accordance with the provisions of Arizona law, the
City Council may from time to time adopt text amendments to this chapter
and/or amend the official zoning map(s). Any person, city staff, Commission
or City Council may bring about amendments to the text of the zoning
ordinance. Only the landowner, city staff, Commission or City Council may
bring about amendments to the zoning map.



   (B)   Pre-application. Before the city accepts any applications, the
petitioner may schedule and attend a pre-application meeting. The purpose of
the pre-application meeting is to discuss, in general, the procedures and
requirements for either a zoning text amendment or a zoning change (rezoning)
pursuant to these regulations.



   (C)   Application. All applications shall be filed on a form
provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by the required
fee and all required materials as outlined in this chapter and/or on the
application. Depending upon the specifics of the amendment or rezoning,
additional materials or studies may be required by the city in order to
adequately review the application.



   (D)   Initiation of ordinance text amendment. Any person may request
an amendment of the text of the ordinance, after a pre-application meeting is
held, by filing a completed application and submitting the required fee with
the city. The application must state the exact section of this chapter
proposed for amendment, the proposed substitute wording, and the reasons for
requesting the amendment. Graphic material should also be submitted if it
would assist in understanding the benefits of the amendment.



   (E)   Initiation of a zoning map change (rezoning). An owner of real
property within the city, or that owner’s authorized representative, may,
upon proof of ownership, apply for a change in zoning district boundaries
(rezoning) for that landowner’s property. The Commission or the City
Council, on its own motion at a public meeting, may initiate such amendments.
In the case where the rezoning application filed by a private property owner
includes other property, in addition to that owned by the petitioner, the
application shall include the signatures of the real property owners
representing at least 75% of the land in the area proposed to be changed.



   (F)   Submittal requirements. All zoning map changes (rezoning)
applications shall comply with the submittal requirements outlined herein and
those on the application:



      (1)   A map showing the particular property or properties for
which the rezoning application is being requested and the adjacent
properties, buildings and structures, land uses, and public streets and ways
within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries thereof.



      (2)   A detailed land use/development plan at a scale of one
inch equals 100 feet (1"=100 ft.) which at a minimum shall include the
following:



         (a)   A site plan drawn to scale and in such a manner as
to indicate clearly and precisely what is planned for the subject property
including the location and arrangement of all proposed uses;



         (b)   The location, arrangement and dimensions of all
proposed lots;



         (c)   Topography showing existing and proposed grades
and drainage systems, and natural and manmade features with indication as to
which are being retained and which are to be altered or removed;



         (d)   All buildings and structures existing and proposed;



         (e)   Proposed block layout, street system, street
dedications, improvements and utility plans;



         (f)   The traffic and the pedestrian circulation system,
including the location and width of all streets, driveways, entrances to
parking areas and parking structures, walkways and bicycle paths;



         (g)   Off-street parking facilities including number of
spaces and dimensions of parking area, loading bays and service access drives
and landscaping for the parking areas;



         (h)   The amount of open space provided, the location
and type of open space, the proposed reservation for parks, parkways,
playgrounds, recreation areas, pedestrian access and other open space; and



         (i)   Proposed landscaping including; size, type and
location; the native vegetation that will be salvaged; walls and fences;
outdoor lighting; signs; and outdoor storage and activities.



      (3)   The city reserves the right to waive some of the above
submittal material if found to be unnecessary for a particular application.
Conversely, the city reserves the right to require additional information and
material, and to require the submission of studies in order to adequately
review the request. Additional submittal requirements may be required for an
overlay zoning district or a planned unit development zoning district and, if
applicable, may be found in the specific chapter addressing these types of
developments herein.



   (G)   Procedures. All zoning map changes (rezoning) and text
amendment applications shall be processed in the manner outlined herein.



      (1)   A pre-application conference may be scheduled and
attended by the applicant with the Zoning Administrator to discuss the
proposal.



      (2)   The petitioner shall submit a completed application, the
required fees, and all materials and studies related to the development plan
or the proposed text amendment.



      (3)   Once the Zoning Administrator has determined that the
application package is complete and all necessary information has been
submitted, the application will be forwarded to the appropriate reviewing
agencies and city departments for comments and a public hearing will be
scheduled.



      (4)   As a prerequisite to the Commission public hearing, the
application must first be presented to the public at the “citizen review”
meeting, conducted by the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the
provisions outlined in § 152.040(C). The citizen review meeting is only
required for applications involving a zoning ordinance that changes any
property from one zone to another, that imposes any regulation not previously
imposed or that removes or modifies any such regulation previously imposed,
and/or an application for a specific plan.



      (5)   The Commission, in accordance with the requirements of
A.R.S. § 9-462.04, shall conduct a public hearing. Notification of the
public hearing shall be provided as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-462.04 and §
152.041.



      (6)   The Commission shall render a decision in the form of a
written recommendation for: 1) approval, 2) approval with conditions, or 3)
denial of the petitioned rezoning or zoning text amendment. The
recommendation shall then be forwarded to the Mayor and Council unless
withdrawn in writing by the applicant.



      (7)   The City Council shall: 1) approve, 2) approve with
conditions, or 3) deny the rezoning or zoning text amendment request.
Approval of a petition to rezone land may not be enacted as an emergency
measure and the rezoning shall not become effective for at least 30 days
after City Council approval.



      (8)   When an application for rezoning is accompanied by an
application for a conditional use permit or subdivision plat approval, both
applications may be processed and reviewed concurrently. If the proposed
rezoning is not in compliance with the City of San Luis General Plan - Land
Use Plan, an application for an amendment to the Land Use Plan shall be
submitted by the applicant in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-461.06, the City of
San Luis General Plan, and § 152.048.



   (H)   Protest. A super majority of City Council votes,
three-fourths, as prescribed by A.R.S. § 9-462.04, shall be required if a
protest petition is filed in accordance with the statute. The protest
petition shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk at or before noon on
the date of the City Council hearing.



   (I)   Subsequent applications. In the event that an application for
amendment is denied by the City Council or that the application is withdrawn
after the Commission hearing, the Commission shall not accept another
application for the same amendment within 12 months of the original hearing
unless agreed to by a super majority three-fourths vote of the Commission.



   (J)   Reversion of zoning. The city may approve a change of zone
conditioned upon a schedule for development of the specific use or uses for
which rezoning is requested. If at the expiration of this period the property
has not been improved for the use for which it was conditionally approved,
the city, after notification by certified mail to the owner and applicant who
requested the rezoning, may schedule a public hearing before the City Council
to take administrative action to extend, remove or determine compliance with
the schedule for development or take legislative action to cause the property
to revert to its former zoning classification.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.043  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Purpose. Conditional uses are those uses which are generally
compatible with the land uses permitted by right in a zoning district, but
which require individual review of their location, design and configuration
and the imposition of conditions in order to ensure the appropriateness of
the use at a particular location within a given zoning district.



   (B)   Pre-application. Before the city shall accept any
applications, the applicant may schedule and attend a pre-application
meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to discuss, in
general, the procedures and requirements for a conditional use permit
pursuant to these regulations.



   (C)   Application.



      (1)   Only those uses that are enumerated as conditional uses
in a zoning district, as set forth in this chapter, shall be authorized by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. A conditional use permit shall not be
required for a use allowed as a permitted use in a given zoning district. No
conditional use shall be established until a site plan has been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   All applications shall be filed on a form provided by
the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by the required fee and all
required materials as outlined in this chapter and/or on the application.
Depending upon the specific circumstances of the use additional materials may
be required by the city in order to adequately review the application.



   (D)   Submittal requirements. All conditional use permit
applications shall comply with the submittal requirements outlined in §
152.042(F) and those on the application.



   (E)   Procedures. All conditional use permits shall be processed in
the same manner and in accordance with the procedures outlined in §
152.042(G).



   (F)   Approval criteria. As may be specified within each zoning
district, uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit shall be
permitted only after review and approved by the Commission and only if the
applicant demonstrates that:



      (1)   The proposed conditional use shall be in compliance with
all regulations of the applicable zoning district, design standards, or
general provision requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the
proposed use shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort
and general welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding land
nor be noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke
or gas;



      (3)   The proposed use shall not be materially injurious to
properties or improvements nor diminish or impair property values in the
immediate vicinity;



      (4)   The proposed use will be served by ingress and egress
routes that minimize traffic congestion, shall not burden the existing and
anticipated traffic conditions including parking facilities on adjacent
streets and land, and will be served by adequate public utilities;



      (5)   The proposed use shall not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted by
right in the zoning district and shall be in compliance with the City of San
Luis General Plan adopted by the city;



      (6)   The proposed use is necessary or desirable or provides a
service or facility that contributes to the general well being of the area;
and



      (7)   The proposed use shall not create more adverse impacts
on existing uses in the surrounding areas than those which reasonably might
result from development of the site with a use that is permitted by right in
the zoning district.



   (G)   Validity limit.



      (1)   Approval shall become effective immediately.



      (2)   The conditional use permit shall become null and void if
the use permit has not been exercised and the use established within 12
months of the date of approval. A conditional use permit is exercised when
the use has been established or when a building permit has been issued,
construction commenced, and the building permit remains valid.



      (3)   If such use is abandoned or discontinued for a period of
24 consecutive months, it may not be re-established unless reauthorized by
the Commission.



      (4)   Amendments to conditional use permits shall be processed
in the same manner as the original permit, except that minor amendments may
be authorized by the Zoning Administrator.



      (5)   If an application is denied, the denial shall constitute
a finding that the applicant has not shown that the conditions required for
approval do exist. No application for a conditional use permit which has been
denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from
the date of the order of denial, unless agreed to by a super majority
three-fourths vote of the Commission.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.044  TEMPORARY USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Purpose. The temporary use permit is a mechanism by which the
city may allow a use to locate within the city on a short-term basis and by
which it may allow seasonal or transient uses not otherwise allowed.
Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a temporary use permit.
Permissible temporary uses are those delineated within the individual zoning
districts of this chapter. Prior to conducting or establishing a temporary
use, a temporary use permit must be approved and secured from the City Zoning
Administrator.



   (B)   Pre-application. Before the city shall accept any
applications, the applicant may schedule and attend a pre-application
meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to discuss, in
general, the procedures and requirements for a temporary use permit pursuant
to these regulations.



   (C)   Application.



      (1)   All applications shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on a form provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the
required fee and all required materials as outlined in this chapter and/or on
the application. Depending upon the specific circumstances of the temporary
use additional materials may be required by the city in order to adequately
review the application. Only complete applications shall be accepted.



      (2)   Every temporary use permit issued shall be applicable
only to the specific use, specific person, entity or organization, and to the
specific property for which it is issued.



      (3)   Approval of the temporary use permit by the city does
not waive any other county or state approvals that may be required.



   (D)   Submittal requirements. All temporary use permit applications
shall comply with the submittal requirements as outlined on the application
form obtained from the city and shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days prior to the
desired start date of the temporary use permit.



   (E)   Procedures.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application in
accordance with the criteria outlined below in division (F) of this section.
The Zoning Administrator shall solicit review comments in accordance with
general review procedures.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall not approve or modify and
approve an application for a Temporary Use Permit unless the following
criteria, specific regulations, and time limitations are met.



      (3)   If the Zoning Administrator denies the temporary use
permit, the applicant may appeal the Administrators’ decision to the Board
of Adjustment.



   (F)   Approval criteria. The Zoning Administrator or, upon appeal,
the Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to require such reasonable
conditions as necessary to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare and to ensure that the use, value and qualities of the neighborhood
surrounding the proposed location will not be adversely affected. Approval
shall be based on the review of the following criteria:



      (1)   Traffic. The location of the temporary use and any
temporary structure is such that adverse effects on surrounding properties
will be minimal with regards to the type of traffic generated, the amount of
traffic generated, or the impact upon the traffic circulation in the area.



      (2)   Parking and access. Adequate off-street parking will be
provided to serve the use without displacing the required off-street parking
spaces or loading areas of the principal permitted use on the site. The
entrance and exit drives will be designed to prevent traffic hazards and
nuisances.



      (3)   Signage. Signage for temporary uses shall only be
displayed within the time frame for which the temporary use permit is valid
and only with a sign permit issued in accordance with this chapter.



      (4)   Number on parcel. Only one temporary use permit shall be
permitted per parcel or lot at any given time.



   (G)   Validity limit.



      (1)   The temporary use permit shall be valid for the use for
which the permit was granted for the length of time indicated on the permit
as long as the use is in compliance with the conditions of approval and other
applicable ordinances.



      (2)   A temporary use permit for a temporary structure shall
be limited to a period of time not to exceed six months from the date of
approval unless otherwise outlined in this chapter. The temporary use permit
may be renewed provided that the property owner submits satisfactory evidence
to the Zoning Administrator that the need for such temporary structure
continues to exist.



      (3)   In no case, shall the termination date of a temporary
use permit be automatically extended as a result of a delay on the
applicant’s part to comply with the conditions stipulated in the temporary
use permit.



      (4)   Time extensions for a temporary use permit shall be
processed in the same manner as the original permit.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.045  VARIANCES AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Purpose. The Board of Adjustment may decide appeals of
administrative interpretations and decisions as well as authorize a departure
from the terms of the zoning regulations but not to the permitted uses.



   (B)   Pre-application. Before the city accepts any applications; the
petitioner may schedule and attend a pre-application meeting. The purpose of
the pre-application meeting is to discuss, in general, the procedures and
requirements.



   (C)   Application. A request for variance shall be made by filing an
application with the Zoning Administrator and paying the required application
fee. The application shall be accompanied by a development plan showing such
information as the Zoning Administrator may reasonably require for purposes
of this chapter. The plans shall contain sufficient information for the Board
to make a proper decision on the matter. In all cases, the application shall
address all of the following hardship criteria:



      (1)   There exist special circumstances or conditions
regarding the land or building referred to in the application, which do not
apply to other properties in the zoning district;



      (2)   The above special circumstances or conditions are
preexisting and are not created or self-imposed by the owner or applicant;



      (3)   The variance is necessary for the preservation of
substantial property rights. Without a variance the property cannot be used
for purposes otherwise allowed in this zoning district; and



      (4)   The authorizing of the variance will not be materially
detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent
property, or to the neighborhood or the public welfare.



   (D)   Variance requests.



      (1)   A variance is not a right. It may be granted to an
applicant only if the applicant establishes compliance with all of the
hardship criteria established in A.R.S. § 9-462.06 and in division (C) of
this section.



      (2)   Pursuant to state statutes, the Board may not:



         (a)   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any
zoning classification or zoning district; or



         (b)   Grant a variance if the special circumstances
applicable to the property are self-imposed by the property owner.



   (E)   Appeal of decision. In an appeal to the Board regarding an
administrative decision or interpretation, the Board’s review shall be
limited to determining whether the decision or interpretation by the Zoning
Administrator was in accordance with the intent and requirements of this
chapter. Accordingly, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
modify the order, requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Public hearing. Notice of the hearing at which the variance or
appeal will be heard, shall be provided in compliance with A.R.S. § 9-462.06
and § 152.041.



   (G)   Validity limit. Rights and privileges established by the
granting of a variance shall be exercised within 12 months following the date
of approval unless the Board specifies a different time limit at the time the
variance is granted. A variance that is not exercised within the time limits
specified shall become null and void.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.046  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the site plan review is to promote the
safe, functional and aesthetic development of property and to ensure that all
new non-residential, multiple residential, commercial and industrial
structures and the associated; utilities, streets, parking, circulation
systems, lighting, signage, drainage and landscaping are developed in
conformance with the standards of this chapter, and in compliance with the
City of San Luis General Plan. The site plan review shall consider the
proposed development and the relationship of the project to adjacent
developments and the community. No building permit shall be issued until
approved by the Zoning Administrator and then such issuance shall only be in
accordance with the plans and stipulations as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (B)   Pre-application. Before the city accepts any applications, the
applicant may schedule and attend a pre-application meeting. The purpose of
the pre-application meeting is to discuss, in general, the procedures and
requirements for the site plan review pursuant to these regulations.



   (C)   Application.



      (1)   The administrative site plan review shall be required
for all development and construction within the following Zoning Districts
within the City of San Luis; except for interior tenant improvements:



         (a)   All non-residential uses in single residence zones.



         (b)   “R-2" multiple residence zone (any development
over four units);



         (c)   “R-3" multiple residence zone;



         (d)   “C-1" neighborhood commercial zone;



         (e)   “C-2" community commercial zone;



         (f)   “M-U” mixed use zone;



         (g)   “L-I” light industrial zone;



         (h)   “H-I” general industrial zone;



         (i)   “MH” manufactured home zone (manufactured home
parks only);



         (j)   “RV” recreational vehicle zone (recreational
vehicle parks only); and



         (k)   All “overlay” zones (“AP” , “FP”,
“AO” and “P”).



      (2)   Site plan review shall also be required for any public
or quasi-public facility, community facility, or places of public assembly
regardless of the zoning district in which they are proposed to be located.



      (3)   If the proposed development requires a zoning change
(rezoning) or a conditional use permit, the approved site plan shall be
submitted with the rezoning or use permit application and considered
concurrently. For proposed developments which do not require rezoning or a
use permit, the site plan must be approved prior to submittal for a building
or grading permit.



      (4)   All applications shall be filed on a form provided by
the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by the required fee and all
required materials as outlined in this chapter and/or on the application.
Depending upon the specific circumstances of the development additional
materials may be required by the city in order to adequately review the
application.



   (D)   Submittal requirements. All site plan review applications
shall comply with the submittal requirements outlined in § 152.042(F) and
those on the application.



   (E)   Procedures.



      (1)   All site plan review applications shall be reviewed and
approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator unless rezoning or a
conditional use permit is required.



      (2)   All projects subject to site plan review must be
reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator, or by the Council if in
conjunction with a rezoning or conditional use permit, prior to submitting
for building plan review.



      (3)   All site plan review applications, for which rezoning or
a conditional use permit is also required, shall be submitted along with the
appropriate applications and processed in accordance with § 152.042(G).



   (F)   Scope of action.



      (1)   Approval shall become effective immediately if no other
actions are required. If the site plan review is in conjunction with a
request for rezoning, the approval of the petition to rezone the land may not
be enacted as an emergency measure and the rezoning along with the site plan
shall not become effective for at least 30 days after City Council approval.



      (2)   A site plan approval pursuant to these provisions shall
run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership
of the site or structure that was the subject of the application.



      (3)   Any amendments or modifications to an approved site plan
shall be processed in the same manner as the original application, except
that minor amendments, such as but not limited to color changes, material
changes, changes in building height or reduction in square footage etc, may
be authorized by the Zoning Administrator.



      (4)   A “certificate of occupancy” shall not be issued if
development activities do not conform to the approved site plan.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.047  GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose. In accordance with the provisions of Arizona law, the
City Council may update and amend the City of San Luis General Plan. Such
amendments or changes may be initiated by the City Council, Planning and
Zoning Commission, city staff or by a property owner or his/her designated
representative.



   (B)   Pre-application. Before the city accepts any applications, the
applicant may schedule and attend a pre-application meeting. The purpose of
the pre-application meeting is to discuss, in general, the procedures and
requirements for the General Plan Amendment pursuant to these regulations and
the City of San Luis General Plan.



   (C)   Application. All applications shall be filed on a form
provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by the required
fee and all required materials as outlined in this chapter and/or on the
application. Depending upon the specifics circumstances of the amendment
additional materials may be required by the City in order to adequately
review the application.



   (D)   Procedures. There are two types of amendments to the General
Plan: minor amendments and major amendments. All applications for any type of
General Plan Amendment shall be processed and public hearings shall be held
in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-461.06, and §§ 152.040(C) and 152.042(G),
and those provisions prescribed in the City of San Luis General Plan.



      (1)   A “major amendment” to the General Plan must be
filed prior to June 15th of every year in order to be heard at the one City
Council hearing designated each year to review major amendments to the
General Plan. Major Amendments shall require an affirmative vote of at least
two-thirds of the City Council.



      (2)   A “minor amendment” to the General Plan may be
processed throughout the year and/or in conjunction with a development
application.



   (E)   Approval criteria. In determining whether the proposed General
Plan amendment shall be approved, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council shall assure that the proposed amendment meets all of the following
criteria:



      (1)   The development pattern contained in the existing San
Luis General Plan - Land Use Plan does not adequately provide appropriate
optional sites for the use or change proposed in the amendment;



      (2)   The amendment constitutes an overall improvement to the
San Luis General Plan and is not solely for the good or benefit of a
particular landowner or owners at a particular point in time;



      (3)   The amendment will not adversely impact the community as
a whole or a portion of the community by:



         (a)   Significantly altering acceptable existing land
use patterns;



         (b)   Requiring additional and more expensive
improvements to roads, sewer, or water delivery systems than are needed to
support the prevailing land uses and which, therefore, may impact
developments in other areas;



         (c)   Adversely impacting existing or previously planned
uses through increased traffic generated by the proposal on existing systems;
or



         (d)   Affecting the livability of the area or the health
and safety of the residents.



      (4)   The amendment is consistent with the General Plan’s
overall intent, vision, goals and objectives as well as being compliant with
other adopted plans, codes, and ordinances.



   (F)   Burden of proof. It shall be the burden of the party
requesting the General Plan amendment to prove that the change constitutes an
improvement to the General Plan. It shall not be the burden of the city to
provide a reason that an amendment should be denied.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.048  MINOR VARIANCE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the minor variance procedure is to
allow for up to a maximum 20% variation from a development standard or
dimension requirement of the zoning code where a practical difficulty,
unnecessary hardship, or a result inconsistent with the general purposes of
the zoning code would occur from its strict, and literal interpretation, and
enforcement.



   (B)   Application. An application, on a form provided by the city
and signed by the property owner, shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator along with the following:



      (1)   Specify the minor variance(s) that is being requested;



      (2)   Include plans and other pertinent information;



      (3)   Include the reasons for granting the variance request as
they pertain to the hardship criteria outlined in § 152.045(C); and



      (4)   Written acknowledgment to the notification of the
requested minor variance(s) from each adjacent property owner, even if
separated by a public right-of-way.



   (C)   Procedures. At an open meeting the Zoning Administrator shall
consider the minor variance(s) request as permitted by § 152.028(C)(3).



   (D)   Action. The Zoning Administrator, upon finding that the
variance request does not exceed a 20% reduction or increase in a development
standard or dimension required by this code and can determine that the
request complies with the four hardship criteria established in §
152.045(C), may approve the minor variance(s).



   (E)   Appeal of decision. In the event the Zoning Administrator
approves, approves with conditions or denies an application for a minor
variance(s) filed pursuant these regulations any person may appeal that
decision in writing, including any required appeal fee, within 15 days of the
decision and request that the minor variance be placed on the agenda of the
next regularly scheduled Board of Adjustment meeting.



   (F)   A minor variance may not. Grant a variance to allow a less
restrictive use or other use not permitted in the applicable district. A
minor variance request must be compatible with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter and the General Plan upon which it is based, so that the
spirit of this chapter and the General Plan shall be observed, public safety
and welfare secured, and substantial justice done not only to the applicant
but to others who might be affected by the granting of the minor variance.



Table No. 1



Land Use Procedure(s) Summary



 


Requested Action

 

Public Notice/ Citizen Review

 

Zoning Administrator

 

Planning & Zoning Commission

 

City Council

 

Board of Adjustments





General Plan amendments
 

Yes/No

 

Reviews & recommends

 

Recommendation only

 

Decision making

 





General Plan annual review
 

No/No

 

Reviews & recommends

 

Recommendation only

 

Decision making

 





Property rezoning requests
 

Yes/Yes

 

Reviews & recommends

 

Recommendation only

 

Decision making

 





Ordinance text amendments
 

Yes/No

 

Reviews & recommends

 

Recommendation only

 

Decision making

 





Site plan review
 

No/No

 

Decision making

 



 



 





Conditional use permits
 

Yes/No

 

Reviews & recommends

 



 



 





Decision making
 

Temporary use permits

 

No/No

 

Decision making

 



 





Appeal of Zoning Administrator decisions
 

No/No

 



 



 



 

Decision making



Variances requests
 

Yes/No

 

Reviews & recommends

 



 



 

Decision making



Minor variance requests
 

No/No

 

Decision making

 



 



 





Minor Lot divisions
 

No/No

 

Decision making

 



 



 





Preliminary plats
 

No/No

 

Reviews & recommends

 

Decision making

 



 





Final plats
 

No/No

 

Reviews & recommends

 

Recommendation only

 

Decision making

 





Protected development rights plans
 

Yes/No

 

Reviews & recommends

 

Recommendation only

 

Decision making

 







 



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP




§ 152.060  PURPOSE.



   The City of San Luis is hereby zoned and divided into zoning districts
and overlay districts. The purpose of establishing these districts is:



   (A)   To implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the City
of San Luis General Plan;



   (B)   To conserve and promote the public health, safety and general
welfare;



   (C)   To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the
city and to insure logical and orderly growth and development of the physical
elements of the city;



   (D)   To conserve and enhance the economic, social, cultural and
aesthetic values of the city; and



   (E)   To protect, maintain, and improve the integrity and character
of the established neighborhoods, regulate new development, and improve the
city’s overall quality of life.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.061  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Zoning districts. In accordance with the requirements of the
Zoning Enabling Act (A.R.S. § 9-462.01(B)) that zoning regulations be by
districts, the City of San Luis, as shown on the zoning map(s) accompanying
this chapter and incorporated herein by this reference, is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts and overlay districts:



      (1)   Single residence zoning districts: (§§ 152.075 through
152.078).



         (a)   “RA-10” Rural Area - minimum ten
acres/dwelling unit.



         (b)   “SR-5” Suburban Ranch - minimum five
acres/dwelling unit.



         (c)   “SR-2” Suburban Ranch - minimum two
acres/dwelling unit.



         (d)   “R1-35” Low Density - minimum 35,000 square
feet/dwelling unit.



         (e)   “R1-20” Low Density - minimum 20,000 square
feet/dwelling unit.



         (f)   “R1-12” Medium Density - minimum 12,000 square
feet/dwelling unit.



         (g)   “R1-8” Medium Density - minimum 8,000 square
feet/dwelling unit.



         (h)   “R1-6” Medium Density - minimum 6,000 square
feet/dwelling unit.



      (2)   Multiple residence zoning districts: (§§ 152.090
through 152.092).



         (a)   “R-2” Medium-High Density Residential -
maximum ten dwelling units/acre. Single detached dwelling units shall not be
permitted in such district from and after March 1, 2016.



         (b)   “R-3” High Density Residential -maximum 20
dwelling units/acre. Single detached dwelling units shall not be permitted in
such district from and after March 1, 2016.



      (3)   Commercial zoning districts: (§§ 152.105 through
152.108).



         (a)   “C-1” Neighborhood Commercial.



         (b)   “C-2” Community Commercial.



         (c)   “MU” Mixed Use.



      (4)   Industrial zoning districts: (§§ 152.120 through
152.122).



         (a)   “L-I” Light Industrial.



         (b)   “H-I” General Industrial



      (5)   “R-PUD” Residential Planned Unit Development (§§
152.135, 152.136).



      (6)   “MH” Manufactured Home Zoning District (§§ 152.150
through 152.154).



      (7)   “RV” Recreational Vehicle Zoning District (§§
152.165 through 152.168).



      (8)   Open space zoning districts: (§§ 152.180 through
152.182).



         (a)   “OSC” Open Space Conservation.



         (b)   “OSR” Open Space Recreational.



      (9)   Overlay zoning districts: (§§ 152.195 through 152.199).



         (a)   “AP” Airport Overlay.



         (b)   “FP” Floodplain Overlay.



         (c)   “AO” Aesthetic Overlay.



         (d)   “P” Public Overlay.



   (B)   Additional districts. Additional zoning districts may be added
from time to time upon the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission to the City Council. Proposed changes to the zoning district
regulations or the official zoning map, including the addition of new
districts, may be submitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, city
staff, City Council, or any other interested party.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Am. Ord. 347, passed 1-27-2016)



§ 152.062  ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The locations and boundaries of zoning districts shall be
designated on a map or maps entitled zoning map(s) of the city and the map(s)
and all notations, references and other information shown thereon, shall be
as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth by
the map(s) were all fully described herein.



   (B)   The zoning map(s), dated and signed by the Mayor and City
Clerk, shall be located in the office of the Zoning Administrator and a copy
shall be kept on file with the City Clerk. Any changes thereto shall be
clearly shown on the zoning map(s) when officially adopted by the City
Council.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.063  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Where uncertainty exists concerning the boundaries of any
zoning district shown on the zoning map(s), the following rules shall apply:



      (1)   Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as
approximately following street or alley lines or the centerlines thereof,
such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundaries;



      (2)   Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that
they approximately follow property lines, such property lines shall be
construed to be zoning district boundaries;



      (3)   Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as
approximately following the line of any stream or other waterway, the center
of such stream or waterway shall be construed to be zoning district
boundaries;



      (4)   If zoning district boundary lines are fixed by
dimensions shown on the zoning map(s), such dimensions shall govern;



      (5)   In cases where the above-described lines are not used,
the zoning district lines shall be determined by using the scale of the
zoning map; and



      (6)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is
vacated by the City Council as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3)(e), the
zoning districts adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way
shall be considered as extended to the center of such vacation and all areas
included in the vacation shall then be subject to all appropriate regulations
of those zoning districts. Upon motion by the City Council, such vacated
public way may be designated as all or part of adjacent districts.



   (B)   Any dispute as to the boundary or location of property within
a zoning district shall be resolved in accordance with §§ 152.040 through
152.048.



   (C)   Conditions imposed by special ordinance in conjunction with
amendments to the zoning map(s) are referenced to separate files maintained
in the office of the Zoning Administrator and are hereby made a part of the
zoning map(s).



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.064  ESTABLISHING CITY ZONING IN ANNEXED AREAS.



   (A)   Pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 9-462 et seq., San Luis may enact an
ordinance authorizing county zoning to continue in effect until municipal
zoning is applied to land previously zoned by the county and annexed by the
municipality, but in no event for longer than 12 months after the annexation.



   (B)   When annexing an area, the city may adopt City of San Luis
zoning classifications that permit densities and uses no greater than those
permitted by the county immediately before the annexation. Subsequent changes
in zoning of the annexed territory shall be made according to existing
procedures established by the city for the annexing of land.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




SINGLE RESIDENCE ZONING DISTRICTS




§ 152.075  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS - SINGLE RESIDENCE ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The single residence districts are designed to
provide for a range of single-dwelling neighborhoods. The purpose of these
districts is to protect the stability of existing land uses, existing
neighborhoods, and to encourage new residential developments that encompass
the many lifestyles and areas of the city. It is also the intent of these
districts to accommodate the needs of single residence neighborhoods by
providing for associated, limited, non-residential uses. The single residence
districts are further delineated in the following categories:



      (1)   “RA-10” Rural Area Residential;



      (2)   “SR-5”, “SR-2” Suburban Ranch Residential;



      (3)   “R1-35”, “R1-20” Low Density Residential; and



      (4)   “R1-12”, “R1-8” and “R1-6” Medium Density
Residential. Lots of less than 6,000 square feet per dwelling unit shall not
be permitted from and after March 1, 2016.



   (B)   Review process. All non-residential construction within any
single residence zoning district shall require site plan review by the Zoning
Administrator prior to the applicant’s submittal for building or grading
permits. All applications for site plan review shall comply with the
submittal requirements outlined in § 152.046. The required fee shall
accompany all applications.



   (C)   Development standards. The development regulations required
for each specific single residence zoning districts are outlined in Table No.
3 contained herein. These standards provide certainty to property owners,
developers, and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.



   (D)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 shall apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage proposed shall comply with §§
152.255 through 152.262.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Am. Ord. 347, passed 1-27-2016)



§ 152.076  “RA-10” RURAL AREA RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to conserve and
preserve farms and agricultural related activities and resources. The intent
is to protect areas that have prime agricultural soils and existing or
desired agricultural uses from incompatible land uses and urban encroachment
and foster orderly growth in rural areas. This district is appropriate where
rural development with minimal public facilities and services is desired or
programmed, and in conjunction with the airport overlay zoning district.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “RA-10” Zoning District.



      (1)   One single residential detached dwelling unit per lot of
record.



      (2)   Farms/ranches and related farming/ranching activities
for the production of crops and/or raising of animals but not including:
dairies; concentrated animal feeding operations; swine, ratites or poultry
farms. Farm and ranch uses shall be in compliance with the following
standards:



         (a)   Application of pesticides shall comply with the
buffer requirements of A.R.S. § 3-365 as it relates to schools, day cares
and adjacent residential uses;



         (b)   Animals must be contained and the containment must
be within the buildable area of the lot. Only pasture and grazing activity
may occur outside of the buildable area of the lot;



         (c)   Ranch uses may include the following equine
activities: boarding, breeding, training, and the sale of animals owned by
the rancher;



         (d)   All activity and pasture areas shall be grassed,
sprinkled or treated with regularly tilled organic soil mix for dust
suppression; and



         (e)   All feeding areas and the structures used to house
or cover the animals shall conform to the yard setback regulations of Table
No. 3.



      (3)   Farm/ranch headquarters office to conduct business
related to farming and ranching operations.



      (4)   Private or commercial apiaries in accordance with all
applicable state regulations.



      (5)   Private or commercial aquaculture.



      (6)   Plant nurseries and greenhouses for the propagation,
cultivation and wholesale distribution of plants produced on the premises;
without retail sales.



      (7)   Roadside produce stands for the sale of farm/ranch
products produced on the premises.



      (8)   Storage of agricultural related equipment used on the
premises and temporary storage of agricultural products used and/or produced
on the premise.



      (9)   Kennels for the boarding or lodging, breeding, or
training of small domesticated animals, such as dogs and cats, provided the
animals are kept within the confines of an exercise area and a
sound-attenuated kennel. Animals shall not run at large and shall not number
more than five animals/acre with a total of no more than 50 animals under any
circumstance. A specific plan for the physical containment and location of
waste storage and/or disposal, which minimizes odor and fly impacts on
adjacent lots or parcels, must be provided. All kennels shall comply with
city and/or state licensing requirements.



      (10)   One guest house may be permitted on the same lot as a
principal residence, provided the guest house complies with the following
standards:



         (a)   The guesthouse must conform to all minimum
density, area, building and yard regulations as that of the principal
structure;



         (b)   The guesthouse shall be located in the buildable
area of the lot;



         (c)   A single common driveway shall serve both the
principal residence and the guesthouse;



         (d)   The guesthouse may not exceed 50% of the gross
square footage of the livable area of the primary structure;



         (e)   The guesthouse must be connected to all of the
primary structure’s electric, water and gas meters;



         (f)   The guesthouse may not be used for any commercial
or non-residential uses; and



         (g)   A guesthouse may not be used for rental purposes.



      (11)   Public and private parks.



      (12)   Public and private open space preserves.



      (13)   Public or private utility installation and services
including storage facilities, booster stations, lift stations, wastewater
treatment plants, and generating plants but not including business offices.



      (14)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses as prescribed in
§§ 152.210 through 152.226.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “RA-10” Zoning District.



      (1)   Secondary residential dwellings, in conjunction with a
farm, to meet the residential needs of farm employees provided it complies
with the following standards:



         (a)   The residential units for farm employees shall not
be used for any commercial or non-residential uses, leased to non-farm
employees and/or otherwise used for income purposes; and



         (b)   A recreational vehicle may be used for accessory
agricultural living purposes provided it is placed only within the buildable
area of the lot, and shall not be occupied for more than four months out of
any 12 month period.



      (2)   Agricultural processing, including cotton ginning and
compressing, grist milling services, seed milling, corn shelling services,
produce packing, and other contract sorting, grading and packing services.



      (3)   Retail sales in conjunction with a plant nursery or
greenhouse for the sale of plants propagated or cultivated on the premise.



      (4)   Retail operations such as, but not limited to, u-pick
facilities, farmers market, restaurant, and butcher shop for the sale of
farm/ranch products generally produced on the premises provided the site has
appropriate access, parking, and public facilities.



      (5)   Commercial riding stables, boarding stables, and/or
commercial ranch only after it has been found to be in compliance with the
following standards:



         (a)   An attendant must be in residence on the property
of any commercial ranch;



         (b)   All livestock structures, containment areas of
facilities used for the stabling, storing, showing or training of livestock
and for temporary manure storage shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from
any property line and at least 100 feet from any other residences. Normal
setbacks apply to all other structures and uses;



         (c)   In order for there to be shows or other activities
the site must have immediate access to a major or collector city street.
Adequate parking for daily activities and additional parking, as determined
by the Zoning Administrator, must be provided for shows or other special
events;



         (d)   All livestock turnout areas and pens shall be
enclosed with fences at least five feet in height. The design of these
enclosures shall be shown on drawings submitted with the conditional use
permit application;



         (e)   A specific plan for the physical containment and
location of manure storage and/or disposal, which minimizes odor and fly
impacts on adjacent lots or parcels, must be provided. The spreading and
tilling of manure into the soil of the paddock, pasture or arena areas may be
considered manure disposal;



         (f)   The applicant must provide a specific program for
fly control in barn and stable areas that minimizes the attraction and
breeding of flies.



         (g)   All activity and pasture areas shall be grassed,
sprinkled or treated with regularly tilled organic soil mix for dust
suppression;



         (h)   With the exception of the principal residence and
its accessory structures, upon revocation of the commercial ranch conditional
use permit or abandonment of the operation, all structures shall be removed;



         (i)   Failure to maintain any of the standards described
above is grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit; and



         (j)   In the review for a commercial riding stables,
boarding stables, and/or commercial ranch, the City may also consider
lighting, landscaping, hours of operation, signage, plan of operation, and
neighborhood impact.



      (6)   Veterinarian hospitals and clinics for both large and
small animals and the associated corrals, pens and kennels used for the
keeping of animals while under veterinary care.



      (7)   Kennels for the boarding or lodging, breeding, or
training of small domesticated animals, such as dogs and cats, provided the
animals are kept within the confines of an exercise run and a
sound-attenuated kennel. Animals shall not run at large and shall not number
more than four animals/acre with a total of no more than 80 animals under any
circumstance. A specific plan for the physical containment and location of
waste storage and/or disposal, which minimizes odor and fly impacts on
adjacent lots or parcels, must be provided. All kennels shall comply with
city and/or state licensing requirements.



      (8)   Cemeteries, crematoriums, columbaria and mausoleums
including associated on-site mortuary.



      (9)   Large outdoor amusement facilities and/or cultural
events, such as but not limited to, rodeo grounds, fairgrounds, race tracks,
stadiums, amusement parks and crop mazes.



      (10)   Guest ranch and/or dude ranch operations provided that
the following standards shall apply:



         (a)   No more than four bedrooms per residence may be
used for the business;



         (b)   No more than two adult persons per room; and



         (c)   One off-street, non-tandem parking space per
bedroom.



      (11)   Public schools (K-12).



      (12)   Private schools, including charter schools, with a
curriculum substantially the same as customarily offered in public schools.



      (13)   Religious Institutions.



      (14)   Publicly owned or operated library, museum, fire
station, police station.



      (15)   Public or private detention and correctional facilities
and only after it has been found to be in compliance with all applicable
federal and state regulations.



      (16)   Wireless communication towers and antennas as approved
in accordance with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



      (17)   Medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location, subject to the requirements found in § 152.225 Medical Marijuana
Uses.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “RA-10” Zoning Districts. Temporary uses
such as revivals, carnivals, circus, auctions, holidays or seasonal boutiques
or tree lots with appropriate dust control abatement.



   (E)   Design standards - “RA-10” Zoning District.



      (1)   The residence shall have a permanent foundation and a
garage or carport the design and materials of which shall be compatible with
the main structure. Front porches and courtyards are strongly encouraged.



      (2)   For all non-residential and non-farm/agricultural uses,
a walkway from the street to the front entry is strongly encouraged.



      (3)   For all non-residential and non-farm/agricultural uses,
the mechanical equipment, whether ground mounted or roof mounted, shall be
screened from public view and designed to appear as an integral part of the
building. The mechanical equipment screening shall be included in the overall
building height. Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective.
Electrical meters, service components, and SES cabinets shall be screened
from public view and designed to appear as an integral part of the building.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.077  “SR-5” AND “SR-2” SUBURBAN RANCH RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these zoning districts is to foster
orderly growth in the rural transitional or fringe areas. Large lot
residential uses, with emphasis on preserving the character of the farming
community, would be most appropriate so that small agricultural land uses and
the keeping of a limited number of horses and farm animals can occur without
negatively impacting surrounding residential properties. The intent of this
district is to provide a pastoral character and home sites that create an
open environment and provide a transitional land use buffer between the more
intense agricultural uses of the rural zoning districts and the more urban
land uses of the low and medium density zoning districts.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “SR-5” and “SR-2” zoning districts.



      (1)   One single detached dwelling unit per lot of record.



      (2)   Limited farm/ranch activities and uses such as corrals,
barns, stables, and other similar structures, for the keeping of horses and
other agricultural animals but not including a commercial ranch or
agricultural crop production for a commercial purpose. All agricultural
animal uses shall be in compliance with the standards outlined above in §
152.076(B)(2)(b) through (e).



      (3)   Plant nurseries and greenhouses for the propagation,
cultivation and distribution of plants produced on the premises.



      (4)   Public and private parks.



      (5)   Home occupations as prescribed in §§ 152.210 through
152.226.



      (6)   Public and private utility installations for gas,
electric, water, wastewater or communications and including booster stations
and lift stations.



      (7)   One guest house may be permitted on the same lot as a
principal residence, provided the guest house complies with the standards
outlined in § 152.076(B)(10).



      (8)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses as prescribed in
§§ 152.210 through 152.226.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “SR-5” and “SR-2” zoning districts.



      (1)   Public schools (K-12).



      (2)   Private schools, including charter schools, with a
curriculum substantially the same as customarily offered in public schools.



      (3)   Religious institutions.



      (4)   Bed and breakfast operations provided that the following
standards shall apply:



         (a)   No more than four bedrooms per residence may be
used for the business;



         (b)   No more than two adult persons per room; and



         (c)   One off-street, non-tandem parking space per
bedroom.



      (5)   Amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas.



      (6)   Wireless communication towers and antennas as approved
in accordance with the requirements of § 152.315 through 152.322.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “SR-5” and “SR-2” zoning districts.



      (1)   Model homes or temporary sales office pertaining to the
sale of homes being constructed in the immediate subdivision. In the review
for a model home or sales office, the city may consider lighting,
landscaping, hours of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood
impact. Approval may be granted for a two year period, or until all lots in
the subdivision are sold, whichever occurs first.



      (2)   Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the
construction of the homes and public improvements within the immediate
subdivision.



      (3)   Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus,
auctions, holidays or seasonal boutiques or tree lots with appropriate dust
control abatement.



   (E)   Design standards - “SR-5” and “SR-2” zoning districts.



      (1)   All new residential developments (subdivisions) shall be
subject to all requirements set forth in the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance.



      (2)   The residential structure should have a strong
relationship to the neighborhood street. A walkway from the street to the
front entry is strongly encouraged.



      (3)   Housing should foster a sense of neighborhood among
nearby residents and a sense of community through linkage with surrounding
neighborhoods.



      (4)   Propane tanks, water filters and similar mechanical or
utility equipment shall be installed at ground level or wall mounted and
shall be screened from public view and designed to appear as an integral part
of the building.



      (5)   The residence shall have a permanent foundation and a
garage or carport the design and materials of which shall be compatible with
the main structure.



      (6)   Front porches and courtyards are strongly encouraged.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.078  “R1-35”, “R1-20”, “R1-12”, “R1-8” and “R1-6”
LOW AND MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   “R1-35” and “R1-20” low density residential
zoning districts. The purpose of these zoning districts is to provide for low
density single residence development in areas where adequate public
facilities and services are available. The intent of these districts is to
encourage a large lot neighborhood environment where more amenities can be
provided privately on the individual lots.



      (2)   “R1-12”, “R1-8” and “R1-6”medium density
residential zoning districts. The purpose of these zoning districts is to
provide for detached single residence development on urban sized lots in
areas where adequate public facilities and services are available. The intent
of these districts is to encourage a traditional neighborhood environment
where amenities and open space are provided more on a neighborhood basis
rather than on the smaller individual lots. Lots of less than 6,000 square
feet per dwelling unit shall not be permitted from and after March 1, 2016.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “R1-35”, “R1-20”, “R1-12”,
“R1-8” and “R1-6”zoning districts.



      (1)   One single-dwelling unit per lot of record.



      (2)   New duplex unit or an attached two unit condominium on a
corner lot provided the lot and the dwelling units meet the following
standards:



         (a)   The area of the corner lot is 8,000 square feet or
larger in size; and



         (b)   Each dwelling unit must have its address and main
entrance oriented towards a separate street frontage.



      (3)   Public and private parks and playgrounds.



      (4)   Public and private open space preserves.



      (5)   Public and Private recreational amenities and facilities.



      (6)   Public and private utility installations for gas,
electric, water, wastewater or communications including booster stations and
lift stations.



      (7)   Child care, home-based. Home-based child care shall
comply with the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations
for licensing.



      (8)   Home occupations as prescribed in §§ 152.210 through
152.226.



      (9)   Assisted living facilities and group care homes for the
elderly and handicapped, provided that:



         (a)   No such home is located on a lot that is within
1,200 feet of another group home for the handicapped and elderly care;



         (b)   No such home contains more than six residents;



         (c)   Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services; and



         (d)   Such home is licensed with, and administratively
approved by the city, as to compliance with the standards of this chapter.



      (10)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses as prescribed in
§§ 152.210 through 152.226.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “R1-35”, “R1-20”, “R1-12”,
“R1-8” and “R1-6” zoning districts.



      (1)   One accessory dwelling unit on a residential lot
provided the lot and the accessory dwelling unit meets the following
standards:



         (a)   The area of the lot is 8,000 square feet or larger
in size;



         (b)   The accessory dwelling unit may not exceed 50% of
the gross square footage of the livable area of the primary dwelling unit;



         (c)   The addition of the accessory dwelling unit may
not cause the lot to be split; rather the lot remains as one lot under the
same ownership as that of the primary dwelling unit;



         (d)   The accessory dwelling unit shall be located in
the buildable area of the lot.



         (e)   A single common driveway shall serve both the
principal residence and the accessory dwelling unit; and



         (f)   The accessory dwelling unit must be connected to
all of the primary structure’s utilities; with the exception of phone and
cable services.



         (g)   The accessory dwelling unit may not be used for
any commercial or non-residential uses.



      (2)   Commercial retail use provided the lot meets the
following standards:



         (a)   The minimum area of the lot must be 8,000 square
feet or larger;



         (b)   The lot must be a corner lot with frontage onto a
roadway that is designated in the San Luis General Plan – Transportation
Element as an arterial or collector roadway;



         (c)   The building shall comply with all setback and
development standards of the residential zoning district; and



         (d)   The building size and permitted uses shall be
limited to those allowed in the “MU” Zoning District as outlined in §
152.108.



      (3)   Public schools (K-12).



      (4)   Private schools, including charter schools, with a
curriculum substantially the same as customarily offered in public schools.



      (5)   Religious institutions.



      (6)   Publicly owned or operated library, museum, fire
station, police station.



      (7)   Amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas.



      (8)   Wireless communication towers and antennas as approved
in accordance with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “R1-35”, “R1-20”, “R1-12”,
“R1-8” and “R1-6” zoning districts.



      (1)   Model homes or temporary sales office pertaining to the
sale of homes being constructed in the immediate subdivision. In the review
for a model home or sales office, the city may consider lighting,
landscaping, hours of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood
impact. Approval may be granted for a two year period, or until all lots in
the subdivision are sold, whichever occurs first.



      (2)   Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the
construction of the homes and public improvements within the immediate
subdivision.



      (3)   Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus,
auctions, holidays or seasonal boutiques or tree lots in conjunction with
appropriate dust control abatement.



      (4)   Garage sales are limited to four consecutive days
conducted no more frequently than three times per year per residential
location. Sales of this nature occurring beyond these limits are prohibited.



   (E)   Design standards - “R1-35”, “R1-20”, “R1-12”,
“R1-8” and “R1-6” zoning districts.



      (1)   All new residential developments (subdivisions) shall be
subject to all requirements set forth in the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance.



      (2)   The residential structure should have a strong
relationship to the neighborhood street. A walkway from the street to the
front entry is strongly encouraged.



      (3)   Housing should foster a sense of neighborhood among
nearby residents and a sense of community through linkage with surrounding
neighborhoods.



      (4)   Propane tanks, water filters and similar mechanical or
utility equipment shall be installed at ground level or wall mounted and
shall be screened from public view and designed to appear as an integral part
of the building.



      (5)   The residence shall have a permanent foundation and a
garage or carport the design and materials of which shall be compatible with
the main structure.



      (6)   Front porches and courtyards are strongly encouraged and
should provide a pedestrian connection, other than the driveway, to the
street.



      (7)   All residential developments, at the time of subdivision
development and on a subdivision basis, within the “R1-35”, “R1-20”,
“R1-12”, “R1-8” and “R1-6” zoning districts shall provide the
minimum net acreage of open space as delineated in Table No. 2 herein. Net
acres shall be defined as the total acres exclusive of the area required for
arterial or collector street right-of-way dedications, any commercial or
industrial lands, and school/public site reservations.



TABLE No. 2



Open Space Requirements – Single Residence Zoning Districts



(see Open Space definitions in § 152.013)



 

Zoning District
 
Open Space Percentage





“RA-10”

 

0%




“SR-5”

 

0%




“SR-2”

 

0%




“R1-35”

 

2%




“R1-20”

 

2%




“R1-12”

 

5%




“R1-8”

 

5%




“R1-6”

 

5%





 



TABLE No. 3



Development Standards – Single Residence Zoning Districts



 


Zoning District

 

Minimum Lot Size (ac./sq ft)

 

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

 

Maximum Bldg. Height (feet)

 

Minimum Yard Setback (feet)

 

Maximum Lot Coverage




Front

 

Garage Entrance

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear





“RA-10”
 

10 acres

 

330

 

35(b)

 

50

 

40

 

30 & 30

 

50

 

50

 

10%



“SR-5”
 

5 acres

 

220

 

35(b)

 

40

 

40

 

30 & 30

 

40

 

40

 

15%



“SR-2”
 

2 acres

 

120

 

35(b)

 

30

 

30

 

30 & 30

 

30

 

40

 

20%



“R1-35”
 

35,000 sf

 

100

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

15 & 15

 

30

 

40

 

30%



“R1-20”
 

20,000 sf

 

100

 

30

 

25

 

20

 

10 & 10(c)

 

15

 

30(c)

 

40%



“R1-12”
 

12,000 sf

 

80(a)

 

30

 

20

 

18

 

7 & 7(c)

 

10

 

25(c)

 

45%



“R1-8”
 

8,000 sf

 

70(a)

 

30

 

20

 

18

 

7 & 7(c) & 5(d)

 

10

 

20(c)

 

50%



“R1-6”
 

6,000 sf

 

60(a)

 

30

 

20

 

18

 

7 & 7(c)

 

10

 

10(c)

 

50%





 



(a)   Lot width on corner lots shall be increased by five feet.



(b)   Accessory agricultural buildings may be permitted additional height
in accordance with regulations in §§ 152.210 through 152.226.



(c)   Increased setbacks for institutional uses allowed by C.U.P. shall be
increased one foot for every two foot of building height, but in no case less
than 20 feet.



(d)   Five foot setbacks shall be permitted in a R1-6 District where the
construction beyond a seven foot setback are constructed with no less than
two hour fire resistive construction.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Am. Ord. 347, passed 1-27-2016; Am. Ord. 372,
passed 11-21-2017)




MULTIPLE RESIDENCE ZONING DISTRICTS




§ 152.090  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – MULTIPLE RESIDENCE ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the multiple residence districts is to
provide for a range of different types and densities of multiple residential
developments in locations which are suitable and appropriate, taking into
consideration existing conditions, future land use needs, and the
availability of public services. It is intended that these districts
accommodate a variety of dwelling types, including apartments, townhouses or
patio homes, duplexes, and condominiums. These dwelling units shall be
multiple residence dwellings and no detached single dwelling units shall be
permitted effective as of March 1, 2016. Reference to "R-2" and "R-3" zoning
districts shall not include detached single dwelling units from and after
March 1, 2016. For all lots created prior to March 1, 2016 in a multiple
residence district specifically for detached single residence dwelling units,
all such detached single dwelling units shall be developed to the design
standards of an "R1-6" zoning district. No detached single residence dwelling
unit shall be built on a lot not specifically designed for detached single
dwelling units. The multiple residence districts are further delineated in
the following categories:



      (1)   “R-2” Medium-High Density Residential.



      (2)   “R-3” High Density Residential.



   (B)   Review process. All new development (residential and
non-residential ) shall require site plan review, by the Zoning
Administrator, prior to the applicant’s submittal for building or grading
permits. All applications for site plan review shall comply with the
submittal requirements outlined in § 152.046. The required fees shall
accompany all applications.



   (C)   Development standards. The development regulations for each of
the multiple residence zoning districts are outlined in Table No. 5. These
standards provide certainty to property owners, developers, and neighbors
about the limits of what is allowed.



   (D)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 shall apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage shall comply with §§ 152.255
through 155.262.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      (5)   Landscape regulations. The landscaping shall comply with
§§ 152.295 through 152.300.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Am. Ord. 347, passed 1-27-2016)



§ 152.091  “R-2” MEDIUM-HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to allow for a
variety of building types, including duplex, townhouses, and apartments with
varied project amenities. The “R-2" shall provide a balance of housing
opportunities to serve the needs of the residents of San Luis. The intent of
this district is to permit higher density urban development with a mixture of
uses of a similar intensity. Dwelling units shall be a multiple residences
dwelling. No detached single residence dwelling unit shall be permitted from
and after March 1, 2016. For all lots created for single detached residence
dwelling units prior to March 1, 2016, all such single detached dwelling
units shall be developed to the design and development standards of an
“R1-6” zoning district.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “R-2” Zoning District.



      (1)   Attached or detached single residence dwellings,
including townhouses, provided the maximum density does not exceed ten
dwelling units per acre. No single detached residence dwelling units shall be
permitted effective as of March 1, 2016. For lots for single detached
residence units created prior to March 1, 2016 in a multiple residence zoning
district, all single detached dwelling units shall be developed to the design
and development standards of an “R1-6” zoning district.



      (2)   Multiple residential developments (maximum of ten
dwelling units per acre).



      (3)   Public and private utility installations, but not
including business offices, repair or storage facilities, wastewater
treatment plants, booster stations, and generating plants.



      (4)   Child care, home-based. Home-based child care shall
comply with the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations
for licensing.



      (5)   Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped,
provided that:



         (a)   No such home is located on a lot that is within
1,200 feet of another group home for the handicapped and elderly care;



         (b)   No such home contains more than 20 residents;



         (c)   Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services; and



         (d)   Such home is licensed with, and administratively
approved by the city, as to compliance with the standards of this chapter.



      (6)   Home occupations as prescribed in §§ 152.210 through
152.226.



      (7)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses as prescribed in
§§ 152.210 through 152.226.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “R-2” Zoning District.



      (1)   Public schools (K-12).



      (2)   Private schools or charter schools, with a curriculum
substantially the same as customarily offered in public schools.



      (3)   Religious institutions.



      (4)   Bed and breakfast operations provided that the following
standards shall apply:



         (a)   No more than four bedrooms per residence may be
used for the business;



         (b)   No more than two adult persons per room; and



         (c)   One off-street, non-tandem parking space per
bedroom.



      (5)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “R-2” Zoning District.



      (1)   Temporary sales office pertaining to the sale of
dwelling units being constructed in the immediate development. In the review
for a sales office, the city may consider lighting, landscaping, hours of
operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood impact. Approval may
be granted for a two year period, or until all units in the development are
sold, whichever occurs first.



      (2)   Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the
construction of the residential units or buildings and public improvements
within the immediate development.



      (3)   Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus,
auctions, holidays or seasonal boutiques or tree lots with appropriate dust
control abatement.



   (E)   Site design standards - “R-2” Zoning District. Multiple
residential developments and buildings should complement and enhance the
built environment of the surrounding residential structures and neighborhood
through the creative and imaginative application of architecture, landscape
and site design standards.



      (1)   All new residential developments (subdivisions) shall be
subject to all requirements set forth in the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance.



      (2)   Parking areas, if other than a driveway, that are
adjacent to the required front yard shall be screened by a decorative wall or
landscape berm or combination thereof to a height not to exceed three feet in
order to adequately screen the parked vehicles.



      (3)   Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened
with a six foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse areas shall be located such
that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or parking area, or
cannot be viewed from a public street.



      (4)   Mechanical equipment and similar utility devices,
whether ground level or roof mounted, shall be screened from public view and
designed to appear as an integral part of the building. The mechanical
equipment screening shall be included in the overall building height.
Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective. Electrical
meters, service components, and SES cabinets should be screened from public
view and designed to appear as an integral part of the building.



      (5)   All multiple residence developments having more than ten
dwelling units shall include a recreational amenity for the residents use at
the rate of one amenity per ten dwelling units. Examples of such amenities
include, but are not limited to, swimming pool, tot lot, sport court, ramada
with picnic tables and barbeque grill. The area utilized by the recreational
amenity may be calculated as part of the overall open space required for the
development.



      (6)   Every unit is encouraged to be developed with either a
private patio or balcony a minimum of 150 square feet in size. If this
private useable outdoor open space is provided it may be calculated as part
of the overall open space required for the development.



      (7)   All multiple residential buildings shall provide covered
parking in accordance with §§ 152.240 through 152.244. The required covered
parking canopy shall provide motion sensor/detector light fixtures which are
to be placed under the parking shade canopy.



      (8)   All multi-story buildings are encouraged to incorporate
360º architecture. A variety of massing and building heights, and stepping
rooflines is strongly encouraged. Straight rooflines should be minimized by
using offsets, differing heights, stepping, or different orientations to
produce more variety within a development. Roof material shall not be wood
shake shingles.



      (9)   Reflective building materials are prohibited. Mirrored
surfaces or any treatment that changes ordinary glass into a mirrored surface
are prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including roof materials, shall be
chemically treated to be non-reflective.



      (10)   The building materials of a project shall be durable,
require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding
developments. The city strongly encourages all new buildings to meet LEED
(Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certification standards.



   (F)   Open space standards - “R-2” Zoning District.



      (1)   All new multiple residential developments, including but
not limited to; apartments and condominiums shall be required to provide open
space, provide buffering to adjacent developments, and provide landscaping.



      (2)   Open space shall be required for each development, as
delineated in Table No. 4, regardless of whether it is a residential or
non-residential development. Open space does not include parking areas.



      (3)   Open space may be left as landscaped open space or may
be developed with recreational amenities for the use and enjoyment of the
residents.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Am. Ord. 347, passed 1-27-2016; Am. Ord. 372,
passed 11-21-2017)



§ 152.092  “R-3” HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for
high-density attached residential development and destination tourism uses
within designated activity centers where adequate public facilities and
services are available. It is intended that this district accommodate
multi-story residential and tourist developments incorporating unique design
and exceptional amenities. Detached single residence dwelling units shall not
be permitted from and after March 1, 2016.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “R-3” Zoning District.



      (1)   Multi-residential developments (maximum of 20 dwelling
units per acre).



      (2)   Cemeteries, crematoriums, columbaria and mausoleums
including associated on-site mortuary.



      (3)   Tennis courts and golf courses including clubhouses
located thereon and unlighted driving ranges but not including miniature golf
courses.



      (4)   Public and private utility installations, but not
including business offices, repair or storage facilities, wastewater
treatment plants, booster stations, and generating plants.



      (5)   Child care, home-based. Home-based child care shall
comply with the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations
for licensing.



      (6)   Home occupations as prescribed in §§ 152.210 through
152.226.



      (7)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses as prescribed in
§§ 152.210 through 152.226.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “R-3” Zoning District.



      (1)   Public schools (K-12).



      (2)   Private schools, charter schools, or boarding school
with a curriculum substantially the same as customarily offered in public
schools.



      (3)   Religious institutions.



      (4)   Child care center, provided that:



         (a)   The facility provides the required outdoor play
area; and



         (b)   The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services.



         (c)   Detached single residence dwelling units shall not
be permitted from and after March 1, 2016.



      (5)   Resorts, but not hotels or motels, provided that the
following standards shall apply:



         (a)   Each development shall have a minimum area of 20
acres;



         (b)   Each development shall provide a restaurant
on-site;



         (c)   The resort shall provide outside recreational
amenities, such as but not limited to, golf, horseback riding, tennis or
swimming; and



         (d)   The resort development may include meeting rooms
or a conference center, health club and spa facilities, beauty and retail
shops accessible only from within the primary resort building.



      (6)   Time-share developments.



      (7)   Assisted living facilities, nursing homes, congregate
care facilities, convalescent homes and homes for the aged provided that the
following standards shall apply:



         (a)   A minimum of 25 square feet of useable outdoor
open space shall be required per bed and may be calculated as part of the
overall open space required for the development; and



         (b)   The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services.



      (8)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “R-3” Zoning District.



      (1)   Temporary sales office pertaining to the sale of
dwelling units being constructed in the immediate development. In the review
for a sales office, the city may consider lighting, landscaping, hours of
operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood impact. Approval may
be granted for a two year period, or until all units in the development are
sold, whichever occurs first.



      (2)   Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the
construction of the residential units or buildings and public improvements
within the immediate development.



      (3)   Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus,
auctions, holidays or seasonal boutiques or tree lots when uses are located
on property with appropriate dust control abatement.



   (E)   Site design standards - “R-3” Zoning District. Multiple
residential developments and construction should complement and enhance the
built environment of the surrounding residential structures and neighborhood
through the creative and imaginative application of architecture, landscape
and site design standards.



      (1)   All new residential developments (subdivisions) shall be
subject to all requirements set forth in the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance.



      (2)   Parking areas, if other than a driveway, that are
adjacent to the required front yard shall be screened by a decorative wall or
landscape berm or combination thereof to a height not to exceed three feet in
order to adequately screen the parked vehicles.



      (3)   Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened
with a six foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse areas shall be located such
that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or parking area, or
cannot be viewed from a public street.



      (4)   All multiple residence developments having more than ten
dwelling units shall include a recreational amenity for the residents use at
the rate of one amenity per ten dwelling units. Examples of such amenities
include, but are not limited to, swimming pool, tot lot, sport court, ramada
with picnic tables and barbeque grill. The area utilized by the recreational
amenity may be calculated as part of the overall open space required for the
development.



      (5)   Every unit is encouraged to be developed with either a
private patio or balcony a minimum of 150 square feet in size. If this
private useable outdoor open space is provided it may be calculated as part
of the overall open space required for the development.



      (6)   All multiple residential buildings shall provide covered
parking in accordance with §§ 152.240 through 152.244. The required covered
parking canopy shall provide motion sensor/detector light fixtures which are
to be placed under the parking shade canopy.



      (7)   Mechanical equipment and similar utility devices,
whether ground level or roof mounted, shall be screened from public view and
designed to appear as an integral part of the building. The mechanical
equipment screening shall be included in the overall building height.
Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective. Electrical
meters, service components, and SES cabinets should be screened from public
view and designed to appear as an integral part of the building.



      (8)   All multi-story buildings shall incorporate 360º
architecture. A variety of massing and building heights, and stepping
rooflines is strongly encouraged. Straight rooflines should be minimized by
using offsets, differing heights, stepping, or different orientations to
produce more variety within a development. Roof material shall not be wood
shake shingles.



      (9)   Reflective building materials are prohibited. Mirrored
surfaces or any treatment that changes ordinary glass into a mirrored surface
are prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including roof materials, shall be
chemically treated to be non-reflective.



      (10)   The building materials of a project shall be durable,
require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding
developments. The city strongly encourages all new buildings to meet LEED
(Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certification standards.



   (G)   Open space standards – “R-3” Zoning District.



      (1)   All new multiple residential developments, including but
not limited to; apartments and condominiums shall be required to provide open
space, provide buffering to adjacent developments, and provide landscaping.



      (2)   Open space shall be required for each development, as
delineated in Table No. 4, regardless of whether it is a residential or
non-residential development. Open space does not include parking areas.



      (3)   Open space may be left as landscaped open space or may
be developed with recreational amenities for the use and enjoyment of the
residents.



TABLE No. 4



Open Space Requirements – Multiple Residence Zoning Districts



(see Open Space definitions in § 152.013)



 


Zoning District

 

Open Space Percentage




“R-2”

 

5%




“R-3”

 

5%




 



TABLE No. 5



Development Standards – Multiple Residence Zoning Districts



 


Zoning District

 

Minimum Lot Size (Sq Ft)

 

Min. Area/DU Total Density

 

Minimum Lot Width (Feet)

 

Maximum Bldg. Height (Feet)

 

Minimum Yard Setback (Feet)

 

Maximum Lot Coverage




Front

 

Garage Entrance

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear




R-2

 

4,000 (e)

 

4,000 (e) 10 du/ac

 

40 (a)(e)

 

35 (d)

 

20

 

18

 

7(b)(c)(f)

 

10

 

10 (b)

 

50%




R-3

 

4,000

 

2,000/du 20 du/ac

 

30 (a)

 

60

 

20

 

18

 

10 (b)(c)(f)

 

10 (b)

 

10 (b)

 

50%




 



(du)   means dwelling units.



(ac)   means acre.



(a)   Lot width on corner lots shall be increased by five feet.



(b)   Or one-half the height of the building measured at the property
line, whichever is the greater (except for single residence dwellings).



(c)   Projections into required setbacks are not allowed.



(d)   For attached single residence dwellings shall be limited to a height
of 20 feet.



(e)   Lots for attached townhouses may be reduced to 2,500 square feet and
30 feet minimum lot width.



(f)   Applies only to the perimeter units of an attached unit product.



(Am. Ord. 347, passed 1-27-2016)




COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS




§ 152.105  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS - COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The commercial zoning districts are designed to
provide a range of commercial land uses. The purpose of these districts is to
provide for commercial development in locations, which are suitable and
appropriate, taking into consideration existing conditions, future land use
needs, the availability of public services, and the goals and objectives of
the City of San Luis General Plan. It is intended that these districts
accommodate a variety of uses including professional office, neighborhood
retail and services, general retail and services, and mixed use
commercial/residential. The Commercial Districts are further delineated in
the following categories:



      (1)   “C-1” Neighborhood Commercial.



      (2)   “C-2” Community Commercial.



      (3)   “MU” Mixed Use.



   (B)   Criteria for establishment. The minimum land area required to
establish “C-1” or “C-2” zoning shall be one acre or if adjoining a
parcel/lot that is similarly zoned commercial.



   (C)   Review process. All commercial development and construction
shall require site plan review, by the Zoning Administrator, prior to the
applicant’s submittal for building or grading permits. All applications for
site plan review shall comply with the submittal requirements outlined in §
152.046. The required fee shall accompany all applications.



   (D)   Development standards. The development regulations for each of
the commercial zoning districts are outlined in Table No. 7. These standards
provide certainty to property owners, developers, and neighbors about the
limits of what is allowed.



   (E)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 shall apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage shall comply with §§ 152.255
through 152.262.



      (4)   Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      (5)   Landscape regulations. The landscaping shall comply with
§§ 152.295 through 152.300.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.106  “C-1” NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide a
location for well designed small scale retail shops and services in
convenient locations to meet the daily needs of families in the immediate
residential neighborhood. It is intended that this district accommodate a
restricted range of uses that must be compatible with and integrated into the
adjoining residential neighborhood. Residential uses shall be incidental to
the primary commercial development.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “C-1” Zoning District. Uses shall be
restricted to a maximum building size of 4,000 square feet and limited to:



      (1)   Residential units, when located above the first floor or
behind the commercial frontage and incidental to the primary commercial
development. The residential use shall be excluded when calculating the
maximum building size;



      (2)   Child care centers, provided that:



         (a)   The facility provides the required outdoor play
area; and



         (b)   The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services;



      (3)   Personal and household services, including but not
limited to; apparel, clothing alteration, seamstress shop, shoe repair shops,
beauty and barber shops, jewelry and watch repair, small appliance repairs,
bank or credit union (without drive-thru window), travel agency, launderette,
and dry cleaners (without processing), therapeutic massage, printing and copy
shop, florist and catering service;



      (4)   Retail stores, including but not limited to; the sale of
stationery, cards, gifts, bookstore, bakery, delicatessen, candy shop, coffee
house, ice cream shop, art supply shop, photo shop, pet shop, and tobacco
store;



      (5)   Professional, administrative and general offices;



      (6)   Medical, dental, chiropractic and clinical offices
(excluding laboratory or pharmacy facilities);



      (7)   Art galleries, art studios for the production and
teaching of fine art, music schools, karate and dance studios, and
photography studios;



      (8)   Music store, video store, and bicycle shop;



      (9)   Convenience market without the sale or dispensing of
gasoline;



      (10)   Café, restaurants, and taverns; excluding drive-in and
drive-through facilities and live entertainment;



      (11)   Club or lodge;



      (12)   Vocational schools: including but not limited to barber
or beauty, business, dramatic, handicraft, painting or sculpture;



      (13)   Grocery store, fruit or vegetable store, butcher shop
(no slaughtering), hardware store, general retail or variety store; and



      (14)   Religious institutions.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “C-1” Zoning District.



      (1)   Retail uses over 4,000 square feet but under 25,000
square feet.



      (2)   Mixed use neighborhood center for permitted retail,
service or office use; each business tenant space not to exceed 4,000 square
feet with the total center not to exceed 25,000 square feet with no
drive-through window facilities.



      (3)   Live entertainment and outdoor dining associated with a
café, restaurant, and/or tavern; excluding drive-in and drive-through
facilities.



      (4)   Parking lot for passenger vehicles only; but not for
overnight parking.



      (5)   Banks with drive-thru facilities if the bank is located
along an arterial street.



      (6)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “C-1” Zoning District. Holiday or
seasonal sales activities such as; pumpkin sales lots and Christmas tree
sales lots. Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a temporary use
permit. Seasonal lots may need additional zoning clearance and/or a building
permit. A temporary residential use of a travel trailer by the seasonal
tenant may be permitted on-site for security purposes for the seasonal sales
activity provided it is located within the buildable area of the lot.
Appropriate dust control abatement shall be provided.



   (E)   Site design standards - “C-1” Zoning District.



      (1)   Link structures to the public sidewalk where possible
with hard surfaced pavement and landscaping.



      (2)   Outdoor patios, display areas and seating areas are
encouraged in order to add to the pedestrian environment at the street.



      (3)   The required off-street parking spaces should be located
in the rear or to the side of the structures rather than in the front to
avoid the interruption to the rhythm of the established streetscape and to
maximize the business visibility from public streets. The required off-street
parking may only be located in front of the structure through approval of a
conditional use permit.



      (4)   Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened
with a six foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse containers shall be located
such that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or parking area,
or cannot be viewed from a public street. If the refuse containers can only
be located in a highly visible location then latching gates, for screening
the containers, at the opening to the enclosure shall be required.



      (5)   Mechanical equipment and similar utility devices,
whether ground level or roof mounted, shall be screened from public view and
designed to appear as an integral part of the building. The mechanical
equipment screening shall be included in the overall building height.
Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective. Electrical
meters, service components, and SES cabinets shall be screened from public
view and designed to appear as an integral part of the building.



   (F)   Recommended architectural standards - “C-1” Zoning
District.



      (1)   All exterior elevations (360° architecture) should
provide architectural detailing; not just the front elevation.



      (2)   Exterior building design, as well as architectural
details related to color, patterning, finish, type and application of
materials and building form should be coordinated for all elevations of a
building to achieve harmony and continuity of design on all elevations.



      (3)   The building materials of a project should be durable,
require low maintenance, and be of a substantial quality. The city strongly
encourages all new buildings to meet LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design) certification standards.



      (4)   Roof access should be from within the building.



      (5)   Subtler, less intense colors should be used on larger,
more plain-looking buildings, while the use of a greater variety and
intensity of color should be reserved for smaller structures. The use of
accent colors is encouraged to provide a festive and lively streetscape.
Color should be used to accent entryways and special architectural features
of a building.



      (6)   Full roof architecture utilizing simple and varied roof
forms is encouraged for all new commercial development; while long,
continuous mansard roofs, false mansard roofs, large expanses of flat roofs
and veneer (false-front) parapets are discouraged. Parapet walls should be
designed and constructed in a manner to appear as a solid, three-dimensional
form rather than a veneer.



   (G)   Open space standards - “C-1” Zoning District. Open space
shall be required for all new developments, based on the net area of the
development, as delineated in Table No. 6. The required on-site parking
areas/lot and the required parking lot landscaping shall not be calculated as
open space. However, building setbacks, street frontage and on-site retention
areas may be calculated as open space if those areas are landscaped.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.107  “C-2” COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this Zoning District is to provide a
location for general business and commercial uses. The intent of this
district is to allow for larger and more intense commercial uses to satisfy
the broader retail and business needs of the community at-large while
providing for a broad range of commercial activities.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “C-2” Zoning District. Uses shall be
restricted to a maximum building size of 50,000 square feet and limited to:



      (1)   Those uses permitted by right in the “C-1”
Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District;



      (2)   Child care centers, provided that:



         (a)   The facility provides the required outdoor play
area; and



         (b)   The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services;



      (3)   Medical, dental, and clinical offices including
laboratories and associated pharmacy facilities;



      (4)   Conference center or community center;



      (5)   Small-animal hospitals or clinics, confined to a
completely enclosed sound-attenuated building with no outdoor kennels or
exercise runs;



      (6)   Mortuaries; excluding crematories;



      (7)   Professional, administrative, general office uses and
governmental facilities and offices;



      (8)   Community service agency facilities and offices;



      (9)   Drive-through window facilities;



      (10)   Bank and financial institutions with drive-through
windows and outdoor teller facilities;



      (11)   Restaurants (including drive-in and drive-through
facilities), taverns, bars, nightclubs, and outdoor dining (when ancillary to
restaurant use);



      (12)   Parking lot for passenger vehicles, taxicab stands;



      (13)   Dry-cleaning facility;



      (14)   Hotels and motels;



      (15)   Indoor entertainment and amusement facilities such as;
movie theaters, dance halls, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, skating rinks,
video and game arcade;



      (16)   Health club, fitness or exercise facility and tennis
and racket clubs;



      (17)   Household, sickroom or office equipment rental and
services;



      (18)   Car wash facilities, auto part stores, auto service
stations and convenience market with the sale or dispensing of gasoline;



      (19)   Outdoor display areas for the sale of new or used
automobiles, trucks, boats, trailers, and recreational vehicles and for the
rental of such vehicles provided all sales, repair and rental activities are
conducted within a building;



      (20)   General auto repair, including auto painting and body
repair, provided all repair operations are conducted within a building. May
include an outside vehicle storage area to be used only for vehicles under
repair which shall be screened from any street or surrounding property;



      (21)   Nurseries, flower and plant sales, provided all
incidental equipment and supplies including fertilizer and empty cans, are
kept within a completely enclosed building or within an area enclosed on all
sides by a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height and no goods,
materials or objects are stacked higher than the fence or wall;



      (22)   Mobile food vendors provided that such uses may not be
located within any portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks);



      (23)   Mobile vendors provided that such uses may not be
located within any portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks);
and



      (24)   Religious institutions.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “C-2” Zoning District.



      (1)   Those uses permitted by right in the “C-2” Community
Commercial Zoning District with a gross floor area greater than 50,000 square
feet.



      (2)   Large retail establishment with a gross floor area
greater than 25,000 square feet; provided the site has direct frontage onto a
roadway that is designated in the San Luis General Plan – Transportation
Element as a major arterial roadway or greater.



      (3)   Hospital and outpatient clinics.



      (4)   Public or private substance abuse, detoxification and
treatment centers, and recovery centers.



      (5)   Outdoor entertainment and amusement facilities such as;
drive-in theaters, game arcade, miniature golf, batting cages, go-cart tracks
and similar uses.



      (6)   Retail sales conducted outdoors as a primary use, such
as but not limited to; swap meets, flea markets and auctions.



      (7)   Parking lot for farm worker buses, tour buses and
semi-truck rigs; but not for the parking of semi-trailers.



      (8)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



      (9)   Medical marijuana dispensary, subject to the
requirements found in § 152.225 Medical Marijuana Uses.



      (10)   Mini-storage facility except that no outdoor open
storage will be allowed. A night watchman quarters, as a security provision,
may be an accessory use.



      (11)   Outdoor sales, displays, and vending machines only if
all of the following conditions are present:



         (a)   Products and services displayed outdoors are
customary, accessory, and incidental to those sold and displayed in a primary
business being conducted in a permanent building on the property.



         (b)   Outdoor sales and displays do not interfere with
pedestrian access ways, walk-ways, fire lanes, required parking spaces,
driveways, landscape areas, or traffic visibility at driveway entries and
street intersections.



         (c)   The combined outdoor sales and display areas do
not exceed 10% of the business's gross square footage.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “C-2” Zoning District.



      (1)   Holiday or seasonal sales activities such as; pumpkin
sales lots and Christmas tree sales lots. Permanent structures shall not be
permitted under a temporary use permit. Seasonal lots may need additional
zoning clearance and/or a building permit. A temporary residential use of a
travel trailer by the seasonal tenant may be permitted on-site for security
purposes for the seasonal sales activity provided it is located within the
buildable area of the lot. Appropriate dust control abatement shall be
provided.



      (2)   Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus and
auctions provided that the temporary uses do not displace required parking
for the permitted “C-2” uses. Appropriate dust control abatement shall be
provided.



   (E)   Site design standards - “C-2” Zoning District.



      (1)   All new multi-building commercial developments
(subdivisions) shall be subject to requirements set forth in the San Luis
Subdivision Ordinance.



      (2)   Parking areas adjacent to the required front yard shall
be screened by a decorative wall or landscape berm or combination thereof to
a height not to exceed three feet in order to adequately screen the parked
vehicles.



      (3)   Parking areas other than in front of the principal
building is strongly encouraged.



      (4)   Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened
with a six foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse containers shall be located
such that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or parking area,
or cannot be viewed from a public street. Projects which provide on-site
daily management and maintenance personnel (i.e. service stations and
convenience markets), and which have refuse enclosures at highly visible
locations, shall provide latching gates for screening the opening to the
enclosure.



      (5)   Equipment such as, but not limited to, vending machines
should be placed in an area designed for their use and situated in a manner
so as not to block vehicular or pedestrian traffic, reduce any required
parking, or block the sidewalk.



      (6)   Service and loading bays (car wash, automotive service,
tire, etc) should be oriented away from adjacent residential zoning district
and are encouraged to design these areas not to front onto the public street.



      (7)   Outside storage areas shall be screened from the public
street view and adjacent residences, office, and other commercial uses to a
height of at least six feet with a decorative wall; except for outdoor
landscape/garden centers. Materials shall not be stacked, piled, or stored in
such a manner as to project above the screen wall.



      (8)   Drive-through windows should not face the primary street.



      (9)   Link structures to the public sidewalk where possible
with pavement, landscaping, street furniture and canopies.



      (10)   A perimeter decorative wall, a minimum of six feet in
height, shall be required along and adjacent to the side or rear property
line of a commercial development that abuts a residential district whether
separated by an alley or not. Any access gates shall be constructed of opaque
material to provide effective site screening.



      (11)   The exterior side of perimeter walls shall be
decoratively treated to match the architectural style and design of the
commercial building.



      (12)   Building site details related to utility boxes,
transformers, generators, chiller farms, mailboxes, trash bins and air
conditioning units shall be integrated into the overall design of the
building and/or development and screened from view, yet remain accessible for
servicing.



      (13)   Mechanical equipment and similar utility devices,
whether ground level or roof mounted, shall be screened from public view and
designed to appear as an integral part of the building. The mechanical
equipment screening shall be included in the overall building height.
Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective. Electrical
meters, service components, and SES cabinets shall be screened from public
view and designed to appear as an integral part of the building.



   (F)   Recommended architectural standards – “C-2” Zoning
District.



      (1)   All exterior elevations (360° architecture) shall
provide architectural detailing; not just the front elevation.



      (2)   Exterior building design, as well as architectural
details related to color, patterning, finish, type and application of
materials and building form, shall be coordinated for all elevations of a
building to achieve harmony and continuity of design on all elevations.



      (3)   The building materials of a project shall be durable,
require low maintenance, and be of a substantial quality. The City strongly
encourages all new buildings to meet LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design) certification standards.



      (4)   Roof access shall be from within the building.



      (5)   Subtler, less intense colors should be used on larger,
more plain-looking buildings, while the use of a greater variety and
intensity of color should be reserved for smaller structures. The use of
accent colors is encouraged to provide a festive and lively streetscape.
Color should be used to accent entryways and special architectural features
of a building.



      (6)   Full roof architecture utilizing simple and varied roof
forms is encouraged for all new commercial development; while long,
continuous mansard roofs, false mansard roofs, large expanses of flat roofs
and veneer (false-front) parapets are discouraged. Parapet walls should be
designed and constructed in a manner to appear as a solid, three-dimensional
form rather than a veneer.



   (G)   Additional requirements for large retail establishments.



      (1)   All large retail establishments and commercial centers
with a building area over 50,000 square feet shall provide a pedestrian
shopping design with sidewalks, seating, trees, lighting, pedestrian scale
signage, and connectivity to and through the parking areas. At least one
significant pedestrian amenity, such as an outdoor seating area or a
courtyard shall be provided.



      (2)   Parking areas shall be distributed around the large
scale retail buildings in order to shorten the distance to other buildings
and public sidewalks and to reduce the overall scale of the paved surface. No
more than 50% of the off-street parking area for the entire property should
be located between the front façade of the principal building(s) and the
primary abutting street.



      (3)   Pedestrian walkways within the commercial centers shall
be differentiated from driving surfaces through a change of materials.



      (4)   All buildings on the same site shall be architecturally
unified. This provision shall apply to new construction, additions and
remodeling. Architectural unity means that buildings shall be related in
architectural style, color scheme, and building materials but that does not
mean identical.



      (5)   Flat, monolithic facades are not permitted. The building
façade shall incorporate both horizontal and vertical elements.



      (6)   Display windows, awnings, entry areas, and arcades must
total at least 60% of the large scale retail building facade length abutting
a public street.



      (7)   Storefronts with no windows and small doors are not
permitted.



      (8)   A variety of roof types are permitted. Distinct and
interesting rooflines instead of flat roofed structures shall be encouraged.
A substantial cornice should be used at the top of a parapet wall or roof
edge, providing a distinctive cap to the building facade.



      (9)   Large scale retail uses that have outdoor storage areas
shall incorporate the outdoor storage area into the architecture of the
primary building. Screening materials and colors shall be consistent with the
overall theme of the building.



   (H)   Open space standards – “C-2” Zoning District.



      (1)   Open space shall be required for all new developments,
based on the net area of the development, as delineated in Table No. 6. The
required on-site parking areas/lot and the required parking lot landscaping
shall not be calculated as open space. However, building setbacks, street
frontage and on-site retention areas may be calculated as open space if those
areas are landscaped.



      (2)   A commercial development, developed as a commercial
subdivision, shall provide the minimum net acreage, as delineated in Table
No. 6, on a subdivision basis through the subdivision process.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Ord. 338, passed 5-27-2015)



§ 152.108  “MU” MIXED USE ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide a
location for small scale, well designed, professional offices, personal
services, limited retail, and residential within a mixed use environment. It
is intended that this district accommodate a range of uses that encourages
and allows both residential and commercial development either as the primary
use or secondarily in either a vertical mixture or horizontal mixture if
attached, and as adjacent uses if detached.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “MU” Zoning District. Commercial uses
shall be restricted to a maximum tenant space size of 4,000 square feet.



      (1)   Professional, administrative and general offices.



      (2)   Residential units, either single or multi-residential in
nature, developed as either attached or detached units or in combination with
any other permitted use; excluding mobile homes and manufactured homes.



      (3)   Bed and breakfast establishments.



      (4)   Retail stores, including but not limited to, the sale of
apparel, stationery, cards, gifts, bookstore, bakery, delicatessen, candy
shop, coffee house, ice cream shop, art supply shop, photo shop and tobacco
store.



      (5)   Personal and household services, including but not
limited to, clothing alteration, dry cleaning (without processing),
laundromats, seamstress shop, beauty and barber shops, bank or credit union
(without drive-thru window), therapeutic massage, travel agency, printing and
copy shop, florist and catering service.



      (6)   Music store, video store, bicycle shop, sporting goods
store and apparel store.



      (7)   Restaurants and taverns and ancillary outdoor dining;
excluding drive-in and drive-through facilities.



      (8)   Child care centers, provided that:



         (a)   The facility provides the required outdoor play
area; and



         (b)   The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services.



      (9)   Art galleries, art studios for the production and
teaching of fine art, music schools and dance studios.



      (10)   Mobile food vendors provided that such uses may not be
located within any portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks).



      (11)   Mobile vendors provided that such uses may not be
located within any portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks).



      (12)   Religious institutions.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “MU” Zoning District.



      (1)   Assisted living facilities and group care homes for the
elderly and handicapped provided that:



         (a)   The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services; and



         (b)   The facility is licensed with, and
administratively approved by the City of San Luis, as to compliance with the
standards of this chapter and any city license and permit requirements.



      (2)   Drive-through window facilities for banks and financial
institutions.



      (3)   Wireless communication towers and antennas provided in
accordance with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



   (D)   Site design standards - “MU” Zoning District.







 



      (1)   Commercial activities should be conducted entirely
within the street frontage of the buildings and on the first floor of the
buildings.



      (2)   Residential uses are encouraged as a mixed use with the
office or service activities either within the same building provided they
are located behind the commercial frontage on the first floor or on the
second floor above the office or service uses or as adjacent stand alone uses.



      (3)   The structures should mirror the adjacent residential
structures in mass and design to be compatible with the diverse neighborhood.
Front porches and courtyards are strongly encouraged and should provide a
pedestrian connection, other than the driveway, to the street.



      (4)   Mechanical equipment and similar utility devices,
whether ground level or roof mounted, shall be screened from public view and
designed to appear as an integral part of the building. The mechanical
equipment screening shall be included in the overall building height.
Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective. Electrical
meters, service components, and SES cabinets should be screened from public
view and designed to appear as an integral part of the building.



   (E)   Recommended architectural standards - “MU” Zoning District.



      (1)   All exterior elevations (360° architecture) should
provide architectural detailing; not just the front elevation.



      (2)   Exterior building design, as well as architectural
details related to color, patterning, finish, type and application of
materials and building form, should be coordinated for all elevations of a
building to achieve harmony and continuity of design on all elevations.



      (3)   The building materials of a project shall be durable,
require low maintenance, and be of a substantial quality. The City strongly
encourages all new buildings to meet LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design) certification standards.



      (4)   The use of accent colors is encouraged to provide a
festive and lively streetscape. Color should be used to accent entryways and
special architectural features of a building.



      (5)   Full roof architecture utilizing simple and varied roof
forms is encouraged. Parapet walls should be designed and constructed in a
manner to appear as a solid, three-dimensional form rather than a veneer.



   (F)   Open space standards – “MU” Zoning District.



      (1)   A new mixed use development, developed as a subdivision,
shall provide the minimum net acreage, as delineated in Table No. 6, on a
subdivision basis through the subdivision process.



      (2)   The required on-site parking areas/lot may not be
calculated as open space. Building setbacks, street frontage and on-site
retention areas may be calculated as open space if those areas are
landscaped. Courtyards and outdoor seating areas, not associated with an
outdoor dining area, may also be calculated as open space.



TABLE No. 6



Open Space Requirements – Commercial Zoning Districts



(see Open Space definitions in § 152.013)



 


Zoning District

 

Open Space Required on an Individual Lot

 

Open Space Required for a Subdivision (minimum)




“C-1”

 

0%

 

3%




“C-2”

 

0%

 

3%




“MU”

 

0%

 

3%




 



TABLE No. 7



Development Standards - Commercial Zoning Districts



 

District
 
Min. District Size
 
Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
 
Lot Width (Feet)
 
Bldg. Height (Feet)
 
Minimum Yard Setback (Feet)
 
Lot Coverage


Front
 
Side
 
Street Side
 
Rear


C-1
 
1 acre
 
8,000
 
60
 
35
 
15
 
5 & 5 (a)
 
10
 
1 0
 
50% max


C-2
 
1 acre
 
8,000
 
60
 
60
 
15
 
5 & 5 (a)
 
10
 
10
 
50% max


MU
 
n/a
 
8,000
 
60
 
45
 
10 max
 
5 & 5 (a)
 
10 max
 
10
 
75% max



 



(a)   Zero lot lines may be applied if adjacent parcel is also zoned
commercial and the firewall regulations of the Building Code are met.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS




§ 152.120  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The industrial zoning districts are designed to
provide a range of industrial land uses. The purpose of these districts is to
provide for industrial development in locations, which are suitable and
appropriate, taking into consideration existing conditions, future land use
needs, the availability of public services, the general public’s health and
safety, and the goals and objectives of the City of San Luis General Plan. It
is intended that these districts accommodate a variety of uses including
corporate offices and garden industrial land uses to warehousing and heavy
manufacturing. The industrial districts are further delineated in the
following categories:



      (1)   “L-I” Light Industrial; and



      (2)   “H-I” General Industrial.



   (B)   Criteria for establishment. The minimum land area required to
establish “L-I” and “H-I” zoning shall be one acre and two acres
respectively or if adjoining a parcel/lot that is similarly zoned industrial.



   (C)   Review process. All industrial development and construction
shall require site plan review, by the Zoning Administrator, prior to the
applicant’s submittal for building or grading permits. All applications for
site plan review shall comply with the submittal requirements outlined in §
152.046. The required fee shall accompany all applications.



   (D)   Development standards. The development regulations for each of
the industrial zoning districts are outlined in Table No. 9. These standards
provide certainty to property owners, developers, and neighbors about the
limits of what is allowed.



   (E)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 shall apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage shall comply with §§ 152.255
through 152.262.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      (5)   Landscape regulations. All landscaping shall comply with
§§ 152.295 through 152.300.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.121  “L-I” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for
a mix of light manufacturing uses, office park, and limited open land uses in
an attractive business park setting with proper screening and landscaping;
all compatible with adjoining uses. It is intended that this district allow
for employment bases through the establishment of high quality, planned
industrial centers for corporate offices and indoor manufacturing uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “L-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   Laboratories for research and product development.



      (2)   Corporate offices/headquarters.



      (3)   Broadcasting stations and studios and publishing
facilities.



      (4)   Assembling, fabrication, handling and packaging,
treating, and renovating goods, merchandise, products and equipment,
excluding agricultural products, provided that such uses shall conform to the
following requirements:



         (a)   The primary use of the property is not the basic
processing and compounding of raw materials;



         (b)   All activities pertaining to the actual
manufacture or processing of the product involved shall be conducted entirely
within an enclosed building(s);



         (c)   All outdoor storage of material or equipment, as
ancillary to the primary use, shall occupy the rear one-half of the lot; and



         (d)   A masonry wall shall screen all outdoor storage of
materials or equipment.



      (5)   Limited retail commercial provided the product(s) sold
at retail are the product(s) which are assembled, fabricated, handled,
packaged, treated, or renovated as the primary use and the retail area does
not exceed 10% of the total gross floor area.



      (6)   Hospitals and outpatient clinics.



      (7)   Public or private substance abuse, detoxification and
treatment centers, and recovery centers.



      (8)   Agri-business and aquaculture business provided such
businesses are conducted within a completely enclosed building or under a
roofed structure that is screened from all adjacent properties and public
view.



      (9)   Mini-storage facility except that no outdoor open
storage will be allowed. A night watchman quarters, as a security provision,
may be an accessory use.



      (10)   RV and boat storage facility provided any outdoor
storage area is enclosed on all sides by a solid fence or wall at least six
feet in height.



      (11)   Welding shops, contractors offices and contractors
equipment yards provided the yard area is enclosed on all sides by a solid
fence or wall at least six feet in height and no supplies, products,
materials or equipment are stacked higher than the fence or wall.



      (12)   Product distributorships, wholesale and warehouse
facilities; excluding transfer facilities for general freight.



      (13)   Equipment sales and rental, farm equipment and supplies
stores.



      (14)   Outdoor display areas for the sale of new manufactured
homes provided all units within public view and for public display shall be
ground mounted, anchored and finished in a manner representative of the
actual finished product.



      (15)   Retail sales conducted outdoors as a primary use, such
as but not limited to; swap meets, flea markets and auctions.



      (16)   On-site child care center as an accessory use for the
permitted industrial business. The facility shall comply with the State of
Arizona Department of Health Services regulations for licensing.



      (17)   Mobile food vendors provided that such uses may not be
located within any portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks).



      (18)   Mobile vendors provided that such uses may not be
located within any portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks).



      (19)   Religious institutions.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “L-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   Travel plazas or truck stops subject to the following:



         (a)   The lot or parcel for the travel plaza/truck stop
use shall be no more than 500 feet from a state or federal highway
interchange or right-of-way;



         (b)   The minimum lot or parcel size shall be 20 acres;



         (c)   All off-site public roadway improvements,
including but not limited to: 1) right and left turn lanes and; 2) driveway
and access points shall be in compliance with the American Association State
Transportation and Highway Officials standards (AASTHO);



         (d)   On-site improvements, including but not limited
to: 1) turning radius; 2) drive aisle dimensions and; 3) parking stall
dimensional standards shall be in compliance with the AASTHO standards;



         (e)   Any fuel dispenser, perimeter of underground
storage tanks or pumps shall be a minimum of one hundred (100') feet from any
residential zoning district and at least forty (40') feet from any property
line or public right-of-way line;



         (f)   All vehicular parking along with the necessary
maneuvering areas, drive aisles and driveways shall be contained on the same
parcel or lot and shall be paved with asphalt or concrete to a sufficient
thickness to withstand repeated vehicular traffic;



         (g)   A 15 foot wide landscaped buffer area shall be
provided along all property lines. There shall be no parking permitted within
this buffer area;



         (h)   Outdoor lighting standards shall be fully
shielded, shall not exceed a height of 30 feet, and shall be in compliance
with the regulations of §§ 152.275 through 152.282;



         (I)   A masonry sound attenuation wall of at least six
feet shall be installed along all property lines that abut or are adjacent to
a residential zoning district or use;



         (j)   Semi-truck washes and/or semi-truck polishing,
semi-truck servicing, or semi-truck tires only when ancillary to an approved
travel plaza/truck stop. All truck washing and/or polishing shall be under a
canopied bay and all truck engine repairs shall be under a roofed structure
if such amenities are provided;



         (k)   A minimum of one toilet, one sink, and one hot
shower provided for men and one toilet, one sink, and one hot shower provided
for women, each designed for complete privacy, for each 20 truck parking
spaces provided or fraction thereof;



         (l)   A common use laundry facility shall be provided at
a ratio of one washer and one  dryer for each 20 truck parking spaces
provided or fraction thereof; and



         (m)   Parking stalls shall be in accordance to the
parking standards in §§ 152.240 through 152.244.



      (2)   Social health related services such as plasma centers,
charity dining services, homeless shelters, day labor hiring centers, rescue
missions, and other similar social service uses.



      (3)   Warehouse and transfer facilities for general freight.



      (4)   Public or private detention and correctional facilities
and only after it has been found to be in compliance with all applicable
federal and state regulations.



      (5)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



      (6)   Sexually oriented business. Subject to Chapter 113
Sexually Oriented Businesses of the City of San Luis City Code.



      (7)   Medical marijuana dispensary, subject to the
requirements found in § 152.225 Medical Marijuana Uses.



      (8)   Medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location, subject to the requirements found in § 152.225 Medical Marijuana
Uses.



      (9)   Refining, processing, or packaging of agricultural or
edible food products.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “L-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   A temporary asphalt and/or cement batch plant, or
construction equipment storage yard, when in conjunction with a state or
federal highway or public roadway project, provided they are not located
within the public right-of-way.



      (2)   Seasonal sale lots, such as but not limited to, pumpkin
and Christmas tree sales lots with appropriate dust control abatement.



   (E)   Site design standards - “L-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   All new industrial developments (subdivisions) shall be
subject to all requirements set forth in the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance.



      (2)   Parking areas adjacent to the required front yard shall
be screened by a decorative wall or landscape berm or combination thereof to
a height not to exceed three feet in order to adequately screen the parked
vehicles. All required front and street side yards shall be landscaped and
shall not be used for parking, maneuvering, product display or drive aisle
other than for the necessary points of ingress and egress.



      (3)   Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened
with a six foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse containers should be
located such that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or
parking area, or cannot be viewed from a public street. Refuse locations in
highly visible locations shall provide latching gates for screening the
opening to the enclosure.



      (4)   Building site details related to utility boxes,
transformers, generators, chiller farms, mailboxes, trash bins and air
conditioning units shall be integrated into the overall design of the
building and/or development and screened from view, yet remain accessible for
servicing.



      (5)   Service and loading bays should be oriented away from
adjacent residential zoning districts and should not front onto or be visible
from the public street.



      (6)   All activities not within an enclosed building and all
outside storage areas shall be screened from the public street view and
adjacent residential, office, and commercial uses with a minimum six feet
high solid wall or fence. Materials shall not be stacked, piled, or stored in
such a manner as to project above the screen wall.



      (7)   A perimeter decorative wall, a minimum of six feet in
height, shall be required along and adjacent to the side or rear property
line of an industrial development that abuts a residential district whether
separated by an alley or not. Any access gates shall be constructed of opaque
material to provide effective site screening.



      (8)   The exterior side of all perimeter walls shall be
decoratively treated to match the architectural style and design of the
industrial building/development.



      (9)   Mechanical equipment, electrical meter and service
components, and similar utility devices, whether ground level or roof
mounted, shall be screened from public view and designed to appear as an
integral part of the building. The mechanical equipment screening shall be
included in the overall building height. Mechanical equipment shall be
treated to be non-reflective.



   (F)   Recommended architectural standards - “L-I” Zoning
District.



      (1)   All exterior elevations (360° architecture) should
provide architectural detailing; not just the front elevation.



      (2)   Exterior building design, as well as architectural
details related to color, patterning, finish, type and application of
materials and building form, should be coordinated for all elevations of a
building to achieve harmony and continuity of design on all elevations.



      (3)   The building materials of a project shall be durable,
require low maintenance, and be of a substantial quality. The City strongly
encourages all new buildings to meet LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design) certification standards.



      (4)   The use of metal or corrugated metal should only be used
as an architectural accent or decorative element and not as the primary
building material.



      (5)   Mirrored surfaces or any treatment that changes ordinary
glass into a mirrored surface are prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including
roof materials, should be chemically treated to be non-reflective.



      (6)   Subtler, less intense colors should be used on larger,
more plain-looking buildings, while the use of a greater variety and
intensity of color should be reserved for smaller structures. Color should be
used to accent entryways and special architectural features of a building.



      (7)   Full roof architecture utilizing simple and varied roof
forms is encouraged for all new industrial development; while long,
continuous mansard roofs, false mansard roofs, large expanses of flat roofs
and veneer (false-front) parapets are discouraged. Parapet walls shall be
designed and constructed in a manner to appear as a solid, three-dimensional
form rather than a veneer.



   (G)   Open space standards - “L-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   Open space shall be required for all new developments,
based on the net area of the development, as delineated in Table No. 8. The
required on-site parking areas/lot and outdoor storage areas shall not be
calculated as open space. However, building setbacks, street frontage, and
on-site retention areas may be calculated as open space if those areas are
landscaped.



      (2)   An industrial development, developed as an industrial
subdivision, shall provide the minimum net acreage, as delineated in Table
No. 8, on a subdivision basis through the subdivision process.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Ord. 366, passed 7-12-2017)



§ 152.122  “H-I” GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for
areas of heavy and concentrated fabrication, manufacturing, processing and
open land uses appropriately screened and landscaped. It is intended that
this district provide adequate space for industrial operations and related
activities so that the economic base of the city may be strengthened and
employment opportunities expanded while protecting residential and commercial
land uses from objectionable encroachments and negative impacts.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “H-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   Those uses permitted in the “L-I” Light Industrial
Zoning District.



      (2)   Manufacturing and assembly of furniture, apparel, glass,
stone, clay, leather, plastic, metal or concrete products.



      (3)   Truss plant.



      (4)   Open storage yards for the storage of boats, trailers,
recreational vehicles, tour buses and farm worker buses provided that there
is no storage of abandoned, damaged, or junked boats, trailers, recreational
vehicles, or buses and that a six foot decorative wall screens the open
storage yard area.



      (5)   Heavy equipment repair, sales and rentals provided
equipment is stored in a transportable position.



      (6)   Farm equipment and implement repair, sales and rentals.



      (7)   Construction offices and construction equipment storage
yards provided that the construction equipment storage yards are screened
with an eight foot high solid masonry wall.



      (8)   Retail and wholesale lumber yard, including incidental
millwork.



      (9)   Bulk sales of landscape construction materials and rock
products.



      (10)   Public or private detention and correctional facilities
and only after it has been found to be in compliance with all applicable
federal and state regulations.



      (11)   Warehouse and transfer facilities for general freight.



      (12)   General aviation airports and related activities,
including heliports and crop dusting planes.



      (13)   Aircraft related uses, including air transport of goods
and materials, aviation lessons, and fixed base operations.



      (14)   Mobile food vendors provided that such uses may not be
located within any portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks).



      (15)   Mobile vendors provided that such uses may not be
located within any portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks).



      (16)   Religious institutions.



   (C)   Conditional uses – “H-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses, subject to the following
conditions or limitations:



         (a)   The proposed sexually oriented business shall not
be established, operated or maintained within 2,000 feet from any public park
or playground, school, day-care center, library, or religious or cultural
activity;



         (b)   The proposed sexually oriented business shall not
be established, operated or maintained within 2,000 feet from any other
sexually oriented business or any residential zone boundary;



         (c)   Advertisements, displays or other promotional
materials displaying or depicting “specified anatomical areas” or
“specific sexual activities” shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be
visible or audible to the public from adjacent streets, sidewalks or walkways
or from other areas outside the establishment; and all building openings,
entries and windows for sexually oriented businesses shall be located,
covered or screened in such manner as to prevent the interior of such
premises from being viewed from outside the establishment;



         (d)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as
a conforming use shall not be rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent
location of a residential district or residential use, public park or
playground, day-care center, place of worship or assembly, or school within
2,000 feet of the adult-oriented use;



         (e)   Such distances shall be measured between subject
lot lines at their closest proximity on an aerial view without regard for
intervening structures or topography; and



         (f)   A map showing the particular property or
properties for which the application is being requested and the adjacent
properties, buildings and structures, land uses, and public streets and ways
within a radius of 2,000 feet of the exterior boundaries thereof shall be
submitted along with the application for a conditional use permit.



      (2)   Recycling transfer stations or automated collection
centers, municipal or county landfills.



      (3)   Refining, processing, or packaging of organic matter,
raw agricultural products, or edible food products.



      (4)   Automobile wrecking and salvage yards, storage of junk
automobiles and trucks, storage and processing of scrap metals provided that
such uses shall conform to the following requirements:



         (a)   The property shall be screened from neighboring
properties and public view with an eight foot solid masonry wall; and



         (b)   No storage shall be visible above the wall.



      (5)   Hazardous waste and bio-hazardous medical waste
treatment facilities.



      (6)   Water and sewer treatment plants and utility generating
plants.



      (7)   Extractive industries, including the removal of sand,
rock, soil, gravel and including concrete or asphalt batch plants as an
accessory use and including smelting only after it has been found to be in
compliance with the following standards:



         (a)   No excavation or processing of excavated materials
shall be permitted within 30 feet to the exterior boundaries and within 150
feet to any residential zoned property or existing residence;



         (b)   Material shall be excavated in such a manner so as
to assure the convenient, efficient, and successful restoration of the land
and to hold to a minimum any adverse effects to adjacent and surrounding land
as a result of piling or storing the overburden material;



         (c)   Material shall be excavated in such a manner that
leaves a minimum of two feet of undisturbed sand, gravel, or soil over the
entire excavation tract to provide a water bearing strata for any ground
water; or more if the required geological report indicates that it is
necessary;



         (d)   The excavation operator shall maintain haul roads
within the premise covered by the permit and the perimeter public roads in a
dust-free condition;



         (e)   The hours of operation, unless otherwise specified
by the City, shall not be prior to 6:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. unless the
city grants special permission, for temporary expansion of the hours;



         (f)   Operations shall be conducted in such a manner
that excavated areas will not collect or permit stagnant water to remain
therein; and



         (g)   The required development plan shall indicate
compliance with the above standards and shall include the following
topographic information at a minimum of five foot contour intervals:



            1.   Pre-excavation contours;



            2.   Proposed excavation contours;



            3.   Degree of slope of banks for all excavations;



            4.   Location of any public facilities, irrigation
canals, ditches, or streambeds; and



            5.   Post excavation re-use and contours.



      (8)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



      (9)   Medical marijuana dispensary, as defined in this section
subject to the requirements found in § 152.225 Medical Marijuana Uses.



      (10)   Medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location, subject to the requirements found in § 152.225 Medical Marijuana
Uses.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “H-I” Zoning District. A temporary
asphalt and/or cement batch plant, or construction equipment storage yard,
when in conjunction with a state or federal highway or public roadway
project, provided they are not located within the public right-of-way.



   (E)   Site design standards - “H-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   All new industrial developments (subdivisions) shall be
subject to all requirements set forth in the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance.



      (2)   Parking areas adjacent to the required front yard shall
be screened by a decorative wall or landscape berm or combination thereof to
a height not to exceed three feet in order to adequately screen the parked
vehicles. All required front and street side yards shall be landscaped and
shall not be used for parking, maneuvering, product display or drive aisle
other than for the necessary points of ingress and egress.



      (3)   Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened
with a six foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse containers should be
located such that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or
parking area, or cannot be viewed from a public street. Refuse locations in
highly visible locations shall provide latching gates for screening the
opening to the enclosure.



      (4)   Building site details related to utility boxes,
transformers, generators, chiller farms, mailboxes, trash bins and air
conditioning units shall be integrated into the overall design of the
building and/or development and screened from view, yet remain accessible for
servicing.



      (5)   Service and loading bays should be oriented away from
adjacent residential zoning districts and should not front onto or be visible
from the public street.



      (6)   All activities not within an enclosed building and all
outside storage areas shall be screened from the public street view and
adjacent residential, office, and commercial uses with a minimum six feet
high solid wall or fence. Materials shall not be stacked, piled, or stored in
such a manner as to project above the screen wall.



      (7)   A perimeter decorative wall, a minimum of six feet in
height, shall be required along and adjacent to the side or rear property
line of an industrial development that abuts a residential district whether
separated by an alley or not. Any access gates shall be constructed of opaque
material to provide effective site screening.



      (8)   The exterior side of all perimeter walls shall be
decoratively treated to match the architectural style and design of the
industrial building/development.



      (9)   Mechanical equipment, electrical meter and service
components, and similar utility devices, whether ground level or roof
mounted, shall be screened from public view and designed to appear as an
integral part of the building. The mechanical equipment screening shall be
included in the overall building height. Mechanical equipment shall be
treated to be non-reflective.



   (F)   Recommended architectural standards - “H-I” Zoning
District.



      (1)   All exterior elevations (360° architecture) should
provide architectural detailing; not just the front elevation.



      (2)   Exterior building design, as well as architectural
details related to color, patterning, finish, type and application of
materials and building form, should be coordinated for all elevations of a
building to achieve harmony and continuity of design on all elevations.



      (3)   The building materials of a project shall be durable,
require low maintenance, and be of a substantial quality. The city strongly
encourages all new buildings to meet LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design) certification standards.



      (4)   The use of metal or corrugated metal should only be used
as an architectural accent or decorative element and not as the primary
building material.



      (5)   Mirrored surfaces or any treatment that changes ordinary
glass into a mirrored surface are prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including
roof materials, should be chemically treated to be non-reflective.



      (6)   Subtler, less intense colors should be used on larger,
more plain-looking buildings, while the use of a greater variety and
intensity of color should be reserved for smaller structures. Color should be
used to accent entryways and special architectural features of a building.



      (7)   Full roof architecture utilizing simple and varied roof
forms is encouraged for all new industrial development; while long,
continuous mansard roofs, false mansard roofs, large expanses of flat roofs
and veneer (false-front) parapets are discouraged. Parapet walls shall be
designed and constructed in a manner to appear as a solid, three-dimensional
form rather than a veneer.



   (G)   Open space standards - “H-I” Zoning District.



      (1)   Open space shall be required for all new developments,
based on the net area of the development, as delineated in Table No. 8. The
required on-site parking areas/lot and outdoor storage areas shall not be
calculated as open space. However, building setbacks, street frontage, and
on-site retention areas may be calculated as open space if those areas are
landscaped.



      (2)   An industrial development, developed as an industrial
subdivision, shall provide the minimum net acreage, as delineated in Table
No. 8, on a subdivision basis through the subdivision process.



TABLE No. 8



Open Space Requirements – Industrial Zoning Districts



(see Open Space definitions in § 152.013)



 


Zoning District

 

Open Space Required on an Individual Lot

 

Open Space Required for a Subdivision (minimum)




“L-I”

 

0%

 

3%




“H-I”

 

0%

 

3%




 



TABLE No. 9



Development Standards - Industrial Zoning Districts



 

District
 
Min. District Size
 
Lot Area (Sq Ft)
 
Lot Width (Feet)
 
Bldg. Height (Feet)
 
Minimum Yard Setback (Feet)
 
Lot Coverage


Front
 
Side
 
Street Side
 
Rear


L-I
 
1 acre
 
10,000
 
80
 
60
 
15
 
5(a)
 
10
 
10(b)
 
60% max


H-I
 
2 acre
 
20,000
 
100
 
60
 
15
 
5(a)
 
10
 
10(b)
 
60% max



 



(a)   If the property line or adjoining street abuts a residential zone
the setback shall be 20 feet.



(b)   If the property line or adjoining street abuts a residential zone
the setback shall be 25 feet.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Ord. 338, passed 5-27-2015)




PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT




§ 152.135  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – PUD ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD)
Zoning District is to provide both the city and the development community
greater flexibility when developing a project, than might otherwise be
permitted using conventional zoning, by establishing the associated
development standards appropriate to the specific PUD. The intent is to
encourage innovative design and to allow for a creative land use mix that
will promote a more economical and efficient use of the land and a
high-quality development reflective of the unique character and setting of
the City of San Luis. The PUD Zoning District may be used for residential and
mixed use projects. The Planned Unit Development District is further
delineated in the following categories:



      (1)   “PUD” Planned Unit Development.



   (B)   Criteria for establishment. PUD zoning districts are permitted
in accordance with the following provisions:



      (1)   Rezoning to the PUD requires simultaneous approval of a
specific plan of development;



      (2)   The minimum land area for a PUD Zoning District shall be
40 or more contiguous acres and shall be under one common ownership;



      (3)   Any PUD Zoning District shall provide a minimum of 5% of
the net acreage as open space regardless of the type of development or
density;



      (4)   The specific development standards for the PUD are to be
suggested by the developer with the final determination approved by the City
Council; and



      (5)   Compliance with the regulations of this chapter in no
way excuses a property owner or a developer from the requirements of the
Subdivision Ordinance if applicable.



   (C)   Review process. Requests for a PUD Zoning District shall
require review and approval of the rezoning in accordance with § 152.042.
Minor modifications to an approved PUD development plan may be authorized by
the Zoning Administrator without additional public hearings if such
modifications are consistent in concept and character with the approved PUD.
Major modifications of the approved PUD shall be reviewed and processed in
accordance with the procedures for rezoning in § 152.042. A modification
shall be considered a major modification if it causes any of the following:



      (1)   A change in the use or character of the development;



      (2)   An increase in the intensity of use;



      (3)   An increase in the overall project density;



      (4)   A change in traffic circulation or public utilities;



      (5)   A reduction in the overall percentage of approved open
space, a change in the location or type of open space, or a major change in
the type of amenities;



      (6)   A reduction of off-street parking and loading space; or



      (7)   A reduction in required pavement widths.



   (D)   Submittal requirements.



      (1)   Preliminary development plans. The following minimum
information is required in addition to the requirements of § 152.042:



         (a)   “Conceptual - design guidelines”, prepared by
a design team having professional competence in urban planning and a
registered Arizona professional civil engineer, shall be submitted for the
entire project and shall include a narrative and graphical description of the
development character, site planning, architecture, integration of the
development into its surroundings, and the landscaping that can be expected
from the development;



         (b)   A “preliminary landscape plan” for all on-site
and off-site, open space, trails, and retention area landscaping. This
preliminary plan should also include information on: landscaping in
compliance with §§ 152.295 through 152.300; the proposed plant palette; the
type and locations of paths and trails within and adjacent to the
development; the location and elevation of any proposed fencing and walls;
the location of any proposed street furniture or public art;



         (c)   A preliminary sign package, including the
location, size, illumination, number, design and type of the project signage;



         (d)   A “preliminary drainage report” that at a
minimum indicates or delineates: the boundaries of on-site and off-site
drainage areas; the proposed drainage patterns of the development and the
pre-existing patterns; run-off factor and run-off data; retention volume and
location of drainage easements. The City Engineer may request other data
necessary to review the proposed development;



         (e)   A preliminary traffic study, prepared by a
registered professional traffic engineer or civil engineer, that at a minimum
addresses on-site and off-site traffic flows, project impacts and mitigation
measures, anticipated trip generations, and level of service. The City
Engineer may request other data necessary to review the proposed development;
and



         (f)   A phasing plan/schedule. If the project is to be
developed in phases each phase shall be self-sufficient meeting the
requirements, standards and conditions applicable to the project as a whole.
Additionally, each phase of the project shall be self sufficient in regard to
facilities, utilities, and services.



      (2)   Final development plans. A final development plan may be
submitted in lieu of a preliminary development plan provided that the
necessary detailed plans are submitted. In addition to submitting the
material outlined in § 152.042, a final development plan submittal shall
include, at a minimum, but not limited to the following materials for review:



         (a)   All of the plans and reports required for a
preliminary development plan review as outlined in division (D)(1) of this
section;



         (b)   The final “project design guidelines”,
prepared by a design team having professional competence in urban planning
and a registered Arizona professional civil engineer, shall be submitted in
addition to specific site plans and building elevations. The projects’
design guidelines should further address the overall architectural theme,
architectural diversity, relationship of buildings to each other and the
land, wall and screening treatments, open space (both undisturbed and usable
open space), and the projects’ management mechanisms and development
CC&R’s;



         (c)   A “final landscape plan” shall include but not
be limited to a detailed list of plant species, plant sizes, and specific
quantities. The landscape plan shall depict specific plant locations, the
type and location of all walls and fencing, proposed location and material
types for paths and trails, identify the line of sight requirements, and any
other information deemed necessary by the city to adequately review the final
landscape plan;



         (d)   A comprehensive sign package that includes
information regarding the color(s), material(s), size, location, type of sign
(e.g. attached, freestanding, kiosk, window, shingle, and the like), letter
samples for all of the types of proposed signage and any other information
deemed necessary by the city to adequately review the comprehensive sign
package;



         (e)   A final drainage report that is a complete report
and not an addendum to the preliminary drainage report;



         (f)   A copy of an approved permit required pursuant to
Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act if one is required for the
development location; and



         (g)   If determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
necessary, a copy of the economic feasibility study or market analysis for
the proposed PUD development shall be submitted to and reviewed by the city.



   (E)   Validity. Approval of the “preliminary development plan”
is valid for a period of two years from the date of City Council approval.
Application for the “final development plan” must be submitted to the
city, along with the application fee and all required material list above,
within two years from the date of preliminary development plan approval or
the city may revoke the preliminary development plan. Revocation shall be
processed in accordance with the procedures established for rezoning as
outlined in § 152.042.



   (F)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 shall apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage shall comply with §§ 152.255
through 152.262.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      (5)   Landscape regulations. All landscaping shall comply with
§§ 152.295 through 152.300.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.136  “R-PUD” RESIDENTIAL PUD ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the “R-PUD” zoning district is to
provide both the city and the development community greater flexibility when
developing a new residential project. The intent is to allow for a creative
mix of different residential types, densities and housing choices and to
encourage and support the mixed use of residential with small scale, well
designed retail shops, professional offices and/or personal services in a
neighborhood setting and at a residential scale.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “R-PUD” Zoning District.



      (1)   Uses permitted as a matter of right in the low density
residential zoning districts (R1-35 and R1-20).



      (2)   Uses permitted as a matter of right in the medium
density residential zoning districts (R1-12, R1-8, R1-6, and R1-5).



      (3)   Uses permitted as a matter of right in the medium high
density residential zoning districts (“R-2”).



      (4)   Religious institutions.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “R-PUD” Zoning District.



      (1)   Uses permitted as a matter of right in the “MU”
Mixed Use Zoning District.



      (2)   Public schools (K-12).



      (3)   Private schools, including charter schools, with a
curriculum substantially the same as customarily offered in public schools.



      (4)   Publicly owned or operated library, museum, fire
station, police station.



      (5)   Assisted living facilities, nursing homes, congregate
care facilities, convalescent homes and homes for the aged provided that the
following standards shall apply:



         (a)   A minimum of 25 square feet of useable outdoor
open space shall be required per bed and may be calculated as part of the
overall open space required for the development;



         (b)   The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services.



      (6)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



   (D)   Temporary uses - “R-PUD” Zoning District.



      (1)   Model homes or temporary sales office pertaining to the
sale of homes being constructed in the immediate subdivision. In the review
for a model home or sales office, the city may consider lighting,
landscaping, hours of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood
impact. Approval may be granted for a two year period, or until all lots in
the subdivision are sold, whichever occurs first.



      (2)   Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the
construction of the homes and public improvements within the immediate
subdivision.



      (3)   Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus,
auctions, seasonal boutiques or tree lots with appropriate dust control
abatement.



   (E)   Design standards - “R-PUD” Zoning District.



      (1)   The “R-PUD” Zoning District shall not be used to
exceed the residential target densities, identified in the General Plan,
unless the developer provides creative site design, design innovation,
diversity of lot sizes and dwelling types, an affordable housing component,
additional open space or community amenities.



      (2)   Each “R-PUD” development shall provide, at a
minimum, two distinct variations to the residential densities and, depending
on the size of the development, more variation in density may be required.
Also each “R-PUD” development shall provide at least two distinct
“dwelling types” (dwelling types does not equate to changes in elevations
or floor plans).




MANUFACTURED HOME ZONING DISTRICT




§ 152.150  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – MH ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the “MH” Manufactured Home Zoning
District is to provide for a specific zone that will permit the placement and
regulate the permanent installation of manufactured homes for occupancy as
single residential dwellings within manufactured home subdivisions and/or
manufactured home park developments. The intent of these provisions is to
provide affordable and diversified housing opportunities within the city
while establishing and maintaining standards.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   A property owner seeking to develop a manufactured home
subdivision or a manufactured home park (land-lease) development shall submit
those materials outlined in § 152.042(E) and in the Subdivision Ordinance;
if applicable.



      (2)   A minimum of ten acres shall be required to establish
the “MH” Manufactured Home Zoning District.



      (3)   All manufactured homes shall be required to meet the
most current HUD Code standards, be certified under the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and comply with State
of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations and all the provisions
outlined in this Chapter and this chapter.



      (4)   A manufactured home shall not have been constructed more
than ten years prior to the date of application for building/installation
permit.



      (5)   The use of an RV, park model, or site built structure as
a residential dwelling is prohibited within the MH Zoning District.



      (6)   The storage of an abandoned and/or structurally damaged
manufactured home is prohibited.



   (C)   Review process. The development of a manufactured home park
shall require site plan review, by the Zoning Administrator, prior to the
applicant’s submittal for building or grading permits. Applications for
site plan review shall comply with the requirements outlined in § 152.046.
The development of a manufactured home subdivision shall be processed in
accordance with the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance. The subsequent placement
of the individual manufactured homes in either a MH subdivision or a MH park
development shall require a building placement permit for every MH unit. All
applications for a building placement permit shall comply with the
requirements outlined in § 152.152 and the current building codes adopted by
the city.



   (D)   Development standards. The development regulations for the
“MH” Manufactured Home Zoning District are outlined in Table No. 11.
These standards provide certainty to property owners, developers, and
neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.



   (E)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 shall apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage shall comply with §§ 152.255
through 152.262.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      (5)   Landscape regulations. All landscaping shall comply with
§§ 152.295 through 152.300.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.151  MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses (subdivisions). Permitted uses in the “MH”
Manufactured Home Zoning District, if developed as a MH Subdivision, shall be
only the following uses:



      (1)   One (1) single-dwelling manufactured home per lot;



      (2)   Public and private parks and playgrounds;



      (3)   Public or private golf courses and associated
recreational amenities and facilities;



      (4)   Public and private utility installations for gas,
electric, water, wastewater or communications including booster stations and
lift stations;



      (5)   Child care, home-based. Home-based child care shall
comply with the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations
for licensing;



      (6)   Home occupations as prescribed in §§ 152.210 through
152.226;



      (7)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses as prescribed in
§§ 152.210 through 152.226; and



      (8)   Religious institutions.



   (B)   Conditional uses (subdivisions). Conditional uses in the
“MH” Manufactured Home Zoning District, if developed as a MH subdivision,
shall be only the following uses:



      (1)   Publicly owned or operated fire station, police station;
and



      (2)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



   (C)   Site design standards (subdivisions).



      (1)   All subdivisions shall be designed and processed in
accordance with the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance.



      (2)   All manufactured home single-dwelling units subsequently
placed on the individual lots shall comply with all provisions outlined in
division (D) of this section  and shall require a building placement permit
(see § 152.153 for details).



      (3)   Public utilities, including water and sewer service,
shall be extended to each manufactured home lot. All utilities within the
development shall be located underground; and both the water and sewer
systems shall be connected to the public system serving the city.



      (4)   Manufactured home subdivisions shall be designed and
built with public streets.



      (5)   All manufactured home subdivisions, at the time of
subdivision development and on a subdivision basis, shall provide open space
as denoted in Table No. 10. Open space shall be calculated on net acres;
defined as the total acres exclusive of the area required for arterial or
collector street right-of-way dedications and public site reservations.



   (D)   Recommended architectural standards (subdivisions).



      (1)   The individual manufactured homes should be designed and
situated to assure similarity in exterior appearance, and in keeping with,
the architectural character of site built dwellings and the character of the
surrounding neighborhood in general.



      (2)   The residential structure should have a strong
relationship to the neighborhood street. A walkway from the street to the
front entry is strongly encouraged.



      (3)   Front porches and courtyards are strongly encouraged and
should provide a pedestrian connection, other than the driveway, to the
street.



      (4)   All buildings and/or structures in conjunction with a
permitted or conditional use, other than the single-dwelling manufactured
home, shall be of conventional (site-built) construction.



      (5)   Minimum width. The placement of a double-wide or 24 feet
wide unit, exclusive of any garage or carport area, is strongly encouraged on
an individual lot within a MH Subdivision.



      (6)   Grading. Unless the topography of a particular lot
precludes it, the manufactured home shall be installed no higher from grade
than 18 inches (from ground to frame) on the highest side; and not less than
12 inches on the low side. The building official is authorized to approve
minor deviations from the height requirement after inspection of the property
to determine such deviation is necessary because of lot conformity.



      (7)   Foundations. The manufactured home shall be pit set and
placed on an excavated foundation with permanent stem wall so that the home
appears to have a foundation wall similar in appearance and kind to
conventional site built homes. Such installation shall render the dwelling no
more portable than if it were constructed totally on-site.



      (8)   Exterior building materials. The exterior building
façade including the trim, doors, windows, roof fascias, and the like, shall
consist of wood, stucco, horizontal siding, brick, masonry veneer, or other
facsimile of a building material commonly used in site-built residential
construction; provided however, that metal siding, other than aluminum lap
siding, shall be prohibited. Patio covers and detached storage buildings
shall be exempt from this requirement.



      (9)   Roof structure and materials. All roof structures shall
be sloped and provide an eave projection of no less than six inches and no
greater than 24 inches. Unfinished galvanized steel, unfinished aluminum,
wood shake shingles, or fiberglass/asphalt shingles less than 325 pounds /100
square feet shall not be permitted.



      (10)   Mechanical equipment. All manufactured home running
gear, tongues, axles, and wheels must be removed at the time of installation.
Mechanical equipment such as electrical meter, coolers and air conditioning
units, service components, water filters, propane tanks, and similar devices,
whether ground level or wall mounted shall be screened from public view and
designed to appear as an integral part of the building.



      (11)   Garage or carports. The manufactured home shall have at
a minimum a single car garage or carport the design and materials of which
shall be compatible with the main structure.



      (12)   Accessory structures. Uncovered porches, decks, or
verandas are permitted on the side and rear of the home provided they meet
the setback requirements of this chapter.



      (13)   Steps. If the dwelling unit has steps leading to the
front entry the steps shall be attached to a permanent foundation and
designed and constructed to be an integral part of the exterior of the
dwelling unit.



      (14)   Anchor ties. The structure shall be anchored to the
ground, in accordance with approved manufactured home installation standards
for high wind areas.



      (15)   Additions. All additions and alterations shall be in
compliance with the current building code as adopted by the city or in
compliance with the most current HUD code standards and the housing
manufacture’s specifications; whichever is more restrictive.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.152  MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.



   (A)   Permitted uses (park developments). Permitted uses in the
“MH” Manufactured Home Zoning District, if developed as a MH Park
Development (land-lease), shall be only the following uses:



      (1)   One (1) single-dwelling manufactured home per designated
space;



      (2)   Parks and playgrounds;



      (3)   Golf courses and associated recreational amenities and
facilities;



      (4)   Public and private utility installations for gas,
electric, water, wastewater or communications including booster stations and
lift stations;



      (5)   Child care, home-based. Home-based child care shall
comply with the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations
for licensing;



      (6)   Religious institutions;



      (7)   Home occupations as prescribed in §§ 152.210 through
152.226; and



      (8)   Accessory buildings as prescribed in §§ 152.210
through 152.226.



   (B)   Conditional uses (park developments). Conditional uses in the
“MH” Manufactured Home Zoning District, if developed as a MH Park
Development, shall be only the following uses:



      (1)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322 despite ownership.



   (C)   Site design standards (park developments).



      (1)   All manufactured home parks shall require site plan
review in accordance with § 152.046  and may be reviewed concurrently with
the rezoning request.



      (2)   All units subsequently placed on the individual spaces
shall comply with all provisions outlined in division (D) of this section and
shall require a building placement permit (see § 152.153 for details).



      (3)   A solid perimeter wall, six feet in height, shall be
constructed around the entire manufactured home park development.



      (4)   No individual manufactured home space shall have direct
vehicular access to a public street outside of the park development.



      (5)   Public utilities, including water and sewer service,
shall be extended to each space within the park. All utilities within the
park development shall be located underground; and both the water and sewer
systems shall be connected to the public system serving the city.



      (6)   Manufactured home park developments shall be improved
with paved private streets built to city specifications.



      (7)   All manufactured home parks shall provide open space as
denoted in Table No 10. Open space shall be calculated on net acres; defined
as the total acres exclusive of the area required for adjacent arterial or
collector street right-of-way dedications, public site reservations and
private streets. Open space areas may include active recreational areas such
as community buildings, swimming pools, play areas or passive park space.



   (D)   Recommended architectural standards (park developments).



      (1)   Minimum width. The minimum width of the main portion of
the structure should be 14 feet (single-wide), exclusive of any garage or
carport area, as measured across the narrowest portion.



      (2)   Grading. Unless the topography of a particular lot
precludes it, the manufactured home should be installed no higher from grade
than 18 inches (from ground to frame) on the highest side; and not less than
12 inches on the low side. The building official is authorized to approve
minor deviations from the height requirement after inspection of the property
to determine such deviation is necessary because of lot conformity.



      (3)   Foundations. The manufactured home should be pit set or
ground set and placed on an excavated foundation with permanent stem wall so
that the home appears to have a foundation wall similar in appearance and
kind to conventional site built homes. Such installation shall render the
dwelling no more portable than if it were constructed totally on-site.



      (4)   Exterior building materials. The exterior building
façade including the trim, doors, windows, roof fascias, and the like, shall
consist of wood, stucco, horizontal siding, brick, masonry veneer, or other
facsimile of a building material commonly used in site-built residential
construction; provided however, that metal siding, other than aluminum lap
siding, shall be prohibited. Patio covers and detached storage buildings
shall be exempt from this requirement.



      (5)   Roof structure and materials. All roof structures shall
be sloped and provide an eave projection of no less than six inches and no
greater than 24 inches. Unfinished galvanized steel, unfinished aluminum,
wood shake shingles, or fiberglass/asphalt shingles less than 325 pounds /100
square feet shall not be permitted.



      (6)   Mechanical equipment. All manufactured home running
gear, tongues, axles, and wheels must be removed at the time of installation.
Mechanical equipment such as electrical meter, coolers and air conditioning
units, service components, and similar devices, whether ground level or wall
mounted shall be designed to appear as an integral part of the building.



      (7)   Garage or carports. The manufactured home shall have at
a minimum a single car garage or carport the design and materials of which
shall be compatible with the main structure.



      (8)   Accessory structures. Uncovered porches, decks, or
verandas are permitted on the side and rear of the home provided they meet
the setback requirements of this chapter.



      (9)   Steps. If the dwelling unit has steps leading to the
front entry the steps shall be attached to a permanent foundation and
designed and constructed to be an integral part of the exterior of the
dwelling unit.



      (10)   Anchor ties. The structure shall be anchored to the
ground, in accordance with approved manufactured home installation standards
for high wind areas.



      (11)   Additions. All additions and alterations shall be in
compliance with the current building code as adopted by the city or in
compliance with the most current HUD code standards and the housing
manufacture’s specifications; whichever is more restrictive.



      (12)   All buildings and/or structures in conjunction with a
permitted or conditional use, other than the single-dwelling manufactured
home, shall be of conventional (site-built) construction.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.153  BUILDING PLACEMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   The property owner seeking to place a manufactured home on
either an individual subdivision lot or in a space within a manufactured home
park (land-lease) development shall be required to obtain a manufactured home
building placement permit prior to the installation of the manufactured home.
As part of the building placement permit application to the Building
Department the owner shall submit the additional following materials for
review and approval:



      (1)   Complete site plan of the lot or space. If the
manufactured home is proposed to be placed in a manufactured home park, a map
of the park showing all existing spaces and points of access shall also be
required;



      (2)   Elevations or color photographs of all sides of the
structure;



      (3)   Roof slope (expressed in a ratio horizontal to vertical
feet) and roofing material description;



      (4)   Description of any proposed additions or alterations
including photographs where possible; and



      (5)   Description of the exterior finish including materials
and colors.



   (B)   The Manufactured home shall be reviewed for compliance with
the recommended architectural standards in either § 152.151(D) or §
152.152(D); whichever is applicable. Additionally, the manufactured home
shall be reviewed for compliance with the specific standards and conditions
of the zoning as approved by the City Council for the specific development.



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator may approve deviations from one or
more of the developmental or architectural standards provided herein on the
basis of finding that the materials to be utilized or the architectural style
proposed for the dwelling would be compatible and harmonious with existing
structures in the vicinity.



   (D)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that a manufactured
home is not in compliance with any of the architectural requirements of
either § 152.151(D) or § 152.152(D), the application may be referred to the
Board of Adjustment for final review.



   (E)   The Board of Adjustment shall consider the manufactured home
application and the Zoning Administrator’s report. If satisfied that all of
the criteria have been met, the Board may approve the application. If the
Board finds that any one of the stated criteria has not been met, the Board
may deny the application.



TABLE No. 10



Open Space Requirements – Manufactured Home Zoning District



(see Open Space definitions in § 152.013)



 


Zoning/Land Use

 

Open Space Required (minimum)




“MH” Subdivision

 

5%




“MH” Park

 

5%




 



TABLE No. 11



Development Standards – Manufactured Home Zoning District



 


Zoning (Use)

 

Min. District Size

 

Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)

 

Lot Width (Feet)

 

Bldg. Height (Feet)

 

Minimum Yard Setback (Feet)

 

Lot Coverage




Front

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear





MH (Subdivision)
 

10 acres

 

35,000

 

100

 

30

 

30

 

15 & 15

 

30

 

40

 

30% max.



MH (Subdivision)
 

10 acres

 

20,000

 

100

 

30

 

25

 

10 & 10 (a)

 

15

 

30 (a)

 

40% max.



MH (Subdivision)
 

10 acres

 

12,000

 

30

 

30

 

20

 

7 & 7 (a)

 

10

 

25 (a)

 

45% max.



MH (Subdivision)
 

10 acres

 

8,000

 

70

 

30

 

20

 

7 & 7 (a)

 

10

 

20 (a)

 

50% max.



MH (Subdivision)
 

10 acres

 

6,000

 

60

 

30

 

20

 

7 & 7 (a)

 

10

 

10 (a)

 

50% max.



MH (Subdivision)
 

10 acres

 

5,000

 

50

 

30

 

15

 

5 & 5 (a)

 

10

 

10 (a)

 

50% max.



MH (Park)
 

10 acres

 

3,000

 

40

 

30

 

15

 

5 & 5 (a)

 

10

 

10 (a)

 

50% max.





 



(a)   Increased setbacks for institutional or public uses allowed with a
C.U.P. shall be increased. In such cases setbacks shall be one (1) foot for
every two (2) foot of building height, but in no case less than twenty (20)
feet.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




RECREATIONAL VEHICLE ZONING DISTRICT




§ 152.165  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – RV ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the “RV” Recreational Vehicle
Zoning District is to provide for a specific zone that will permit
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions which are suitably developed for
the placement and occupancy of recreational vehicles for residential purposes
on rented, leased, or owned spaces with the necessary accessory uses and
amenities. The intent of these regulations is to enable the development of
unique, well-planned projects incorporating a variety of vehicle-based
housing for permanent or seasonal occupancy. It is also the intent of this
chapter to provide adequate regulations to preserve the residential character
of the development and to prohibit inappropriate and incompatible land uses.




   (B)   General provisions.   




      (1)   A property owner seeking to develop a recreational
vehicle park and/or subdivision shall submit those materials outlined in §
152.042(E) and those materials outlined in the Subdivision Ordinance; if
applicable.



      (2)   A minimum of five acres shall be required to establish
the “RV” Recreational Vehicle Zoning District.



      (3)   Manufactured homes or site-built dwelling units shall be
prohibited within the “RV” Zoning District; unless otherwise specified
herein.



      (4)   An RV park and/or RV subdivision may be advertised and
rented or sold under age specific restrictions for persons 50 years of age or
older in compliance with the provisions of the Arizona Fair Housing Act, the
Federal Fair Housing Act, and the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995 as
they may hereafter be amended.



   (C)   Review process. The development of a recreational vehicle park
shall require site plan review by the Zoning Administrator prior to the
applicant’s submittal for building or grading permits. Applications for
site plan review shall comply with the requirements outlined in § 152.046.
The development of a recreational vehicle subdivision shall be processed in
accordance with the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance. The subsequent placement
of a “park model” unit on a RV subdivision lot shall require a building
placement permit for the park model unit. All applications for a building
placement permit shall comply with the requirements outlined in § 152.168
and the current building codes adopted by the city.



   (D)   Development standards. The development regulations required
for recreational vehicle subdivision lots and parks are outlined in Table No.
13 contained herein. These standards provide certainty to property owners,
developers and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.



   (E)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage shall comply with §§ 152.255
through 152.262.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      (5)   Landscape regulations. All landscaping shall comply with
§§ 152.295 through 152.300.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.166  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   One recreational or park model vehicle on each approved
space.



      (2)   Manager’s office and residence; which may be of
conventional (site-built) construction.



      (3)   Recreation and social centers, which may be used for
dancing, crafts, hobbies, games, child care, meetings, banquets, theatrical
performances, movie viewing, and similar entertainment uses which are
intended and used as a resident amenity. Such facility shall be of
conventional (site-built) construction.



      (4)   Outdoor recreation facilities, such as parks, swimming
pools, ramadas, playground equipment, shuffleboard and tennis courts, putting
greens, and similar recreational uses.



      (5)   Designated areas for boat and recreational vehicle
storage; which are used solely by the residents of the park.



      (6)   Common use laundry facilities, maintenance building, and
security guard building; which may be of conventional (site-built)
construction.



   (B)   RV park - site design standards.



      (1)   There shall be a maximum density of 20 spaces per acre.



      (2)   A minimum of 5% of the net acres shall be required to be
in open space. The recreational and social center, outdoor recreational
facilities and perimeter landscaping areas may be calculated as part of the
required open space. Private streets and vehicle and boat storage areas shall
not be included when calculating required open space.



      (3)   Perimeter landscaping shall be provided in accordance
with §§ 152.295 through 152.300.



      (4)   A perimeter decorative solid wall, six feet in height,
shall be constructed around the entire RV park. Such wall shall be placed on
the interior side of the required perimeter landscape strip.



      (5)   RV park developments shall be improved with paved
private streets built to city specifications. Private streets shall be
maintained by the private owner of the RV park.



      (6)   No RV space within the park shall have direct access to
a public street outside of the development.



      (7)   Each lot/space shall have water and sewer hook-ups per
city approval.



      (8)   Each development must provide an adequate and easily
identifiable manager’s office and registration area. The location of the
office shall not interfere with the normal flow of traffic into and out of
the development.



      (9)   The minimum width of a RV space shall be 30 feet with a
separation between structures of six feet.



      (10)   Each designated space shall have an asphalt or concrete
pad 16 feet in width centered on the space for the parking of the RV. This
pad shall directly connect to the paved street system of the RV park. There
shall be no RV parking other than on the paved surface area within the
designated space. The length of the paved pad area, within each space shall
not be less than 45 feet in length.



      (11)   All awnings and pull-out sections of the RV shall be
contained within the space.



      (12)   Each RV unit shall be equipped with wheels, which
remain on the unit; however, the wheels may be blocked for stability.



      (13)   Restroom and shower facilities shall be provided
separately for men and for women. A common laundry facility shall be provided
at a ratio of one washer and one dryer for each 20 spaces or fraction thereof.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.167  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   One recreational vehicle or one park model on each
approved lot.



      (2)   Manager’s office and residence; which may be of
conventional (site-built) construction.



      (3)   Recreation and social centers, which may be used for
dancing, crafts, hobbies, games, child care, meetings, banquets, theatrical
performances, movie viewing, and similar entertainment uses which are
intended and used as a resident amenity. Such facility shall be of
conventional (site-built) construction.



      (4)   Outdoor recreation facilities, such as parks, swimming
pools, ramadas, playground equipment, shuffleboard and tennis courts, putting
greens, and similar recreational uses.



      (5)   Designated areas for boat and recreational vehicle
storage; which are used solely by the lot owners within the RV subdivision.



      (6)   Common use laundry facilities, maintenance building, and
security guard building; which may be of conventional (site-built)
construction.



      (7)   Detached storage building, subject to:



         (a)   Limited to a maximum area of 120 square feet;



         (b)   Limited to a maximum height of ten feet; and



         (c)   Must be located within the buildable area of the
lot or placed in the rear one-quarter of the lot setback a minimum of three
feet from the rear or side property line and separated from any part of the
recreational vehicle by at least six feet.



      (8)   Porches or decks, subject to:



         (a)   Only one per lot;



         (b)   Porches or decks may be covered but not
permanently enclosed; and



         (c)   Convenience electric outlets may be installed.



   (B)   RV subdivision - site design standards.



      (1)   There shall be a maximum density of 14 lots per acre.



      (2)   All subdivisions shall be designed and processed in
accordance with the San Luis Subdivision Ordinance.



      (3)   A minimum of 5% of the net acres shall be required to be
in open space. The recreational and social center, outdoor recreational
facilities and perimeter landscaping areas may be calculated as part of the
required open space. The interior public streets of the subdivision and
vehicle and boat storage areas shall not be included when calculating
required open space.



      (4)   A perimeter solid decorative wall, six feet in height,
shall be constructed around the entire RV subdivision. Such wall shall be
placed on the interior side of the required perimeter landscape strip.



      (5)   RV subdivisions shall be designed and improved with
public streets built to city standards.



      (6)   No RV lot within the subdivision shall have direct
access to a public street outside of the subdivision.



      (7)   Public utilities, including water and sewer service,
shall be extended to each lot. All utilities within the development shall be
located underground; and both the water and sewer systems shall be connected
to the public system serving the city.



      (8)   Each lot shall have an asphalt or concrete pad on the
lot for the parking of the RV or park model. There shall be no RV parking
other than on a paved surface on the individual lots.



      (9)   The RV unit or park model shall be equipped with wheels,
which remain on the unit; however, the wheels may be blocked for stability.



      (10)   The development standards for each lot shall be as
outlined in Table No 13.



TABLE No. 12



Open Space Requirements – Recreational Vehicle Zoning District



(see Open Space definitions in § 152.013)



 


Zoning/Land Use

 

Open Space Required




“RV” Subdivision

 

5%




“RV” Park

 

5%




 



TABLE No. 13



Development Standards – Recreational Vehicle Zoning District



 




 

Lot Size (Sq. Ft.)

 

Min. District Size

 

Lot Width (Sq. Ft.)

 

Lot Coverage (maximum)

 

Minimum Yard/Space Setback (Feet)




Front

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear



RV Park
 

3,000

 

5 acres

 

40

 

70% (a)

 

10

 

7 & 7

 

10

 

10



RV Subdivision
 

3,000

 

5 acres

 

40

 

70% (a)

 

10

 

7 & 7

 

10

 

10




 



(a)   Lot coverage shall include the area encumbered by the RV or Park
Model when parked on the lot and any porches, decks, or storage buildings.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




OPEN SPACE ZONING DISTRICTS




§ 152.180  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – OPEN SPACE ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the open space zoning districts are to
conserve and protect open spaces, desert washes and flood plains, prime
agricultural lands, and lands agreed to be left undeveloped through the plan
approval process. The primary purpose of designating these areas is to raise
the degree of assurance that designated open space for conservation and
recreational areas will remain open as well as to further the goals and
objectives of the San Luis General Plan. The open space districts are further
delineated in the following categories:



      (1)   “OSC” Open Space Conservation; and



      (2)   “OSR” Open Space Recreational.



   (B)   Development standards. The development regulations for each of
the open space zoning districts are outlined in Table No. 14. These standards
provide certainty to property owners, developers, and neighbors about the
limits of what is allowed.



   (C)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage shall comply with §§ 152.255
through 152.262.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      (5)   Landscape regulations. All landscaping shall comply with
§§ 152.295 through 152.300.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.181  “OSC” OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to conserve
natural or historic wetland areas, historic or archeological sites, open
space lands for passive recreation within the community, and to promote the
retention of the community’s agricultural heritage through preservation of
large, working farms or ranches in appropriate locations with spacious
buffering affording transition for the mitigation of negative impacts upon or
from agricultural operations.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “OSC” Zoning District.



      (1)   Growing and harvesting of field crops, trees, flowers
and vegetables.



      (2)   Nurseries for the propagation and growing of plants,
trees, bushes, flowers, and vegetables and other food crops; without an
on-site retail or wholesale component.



      (3)   Public or community gardens.



      (4)   Cemeteries, crematoriums, columbaria and mausoleums.



      (5)   Undeveloped natural land.



      (6)   Archaeological sites, historic sites, or habitat
management areas.



      (7)   A single dwelling in conjunction with the growing and
harvesting of field crops, trees, flowers and vegetables.



      (8)   A single dwelling for on-site security when in
conjunction with an archeological or historic site.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “OSC” Zoning District.



      (1)   A visitor center operated in conjunction with an
archaeological or historic site.



      (2)   Mortuary when in conjunction with an on-site cemetery,
crematorium, columbaria or mausoleum.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.182  “OSR” OPEN SPACE RECREATIONAL ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for
land uses in areas that are generally subject to periodic flooding or have
been set aside to serve recreational functions or to provide open space areas.



   (B)   Permitted uses - “OSR” Zoning District.



      (1)   Golf course, including clubhouse and driving range
located thereon, but not including miniature golf courses or stand-alone
practice driving ranges, operated for commercial purposes, when not
associated with a golf course.



      (2)   Public parks, including but not limited to, picnic
grounds, playgrounds, athletic playing fields, swimming pools, golf courses,
fairgrounds, and rodeo grounds.



      (3)   Paved or unpaved trails or pathway systems for use by
hikers, bicyclists, pedestrians and equestrians; including trailheads for
such uses.



      (4)   Manmade water features and watercourses, canals, dams,
and retention areas.



      (5)   Community activity centers, art centers and museums for
group assembly, display, and exhibition.



      (6)   Public or private arboretums, wildlife reserves or
sanctuaries.



      (7)   Utility services, but not including offices, treatment
plants, generating stations, sub-stations, switching or splitting stations.



      (8)   Single dwelling unit for on-site security.



   (C)   Conditional uses - “OSR” Zoning District.



      (1)   Retail operation when in conjunction with and accessory
to a permitted use including but not limited to; snack bars, restaurant, gift
shop, equipment sales or rental.



      (2)   Commercial riding and boarding stables provided the site
contains at least ten acres. Additional acreage may be required based on the
number of horses stabled thereon.



      (3)   Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



TABLE No. 14



Development Standard – Open Space Zoning Districts



 


District

 

Lot/Parcel Area

 

Bldg. Height (Feet)

 

Minimum Yard Setback (Feet)

 

Lot Coverage




Front

 

Side

 

Street  Side

 

Rear




OSC

 

20 acres

 

35

 

60

 

30

 

30

 

60

 

5% max




OSR

 

5 acres

 

35

 

60

 

30

 

30

 

60

 

5% max




 



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS




§ 152.195  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The overlay zoning districts shall be in addition to,
and shall overlay, all other zoning districts where it is applied, so that
any parcel of land lying in an overlay zoning district shall also lie



in one or more of the other zoning districts provided for by the San Luis
Zoning Ordinance. It is the intent of these overlay districts to regulate
land uses, conditional uses, design standards and development standards as
well as the specific submittal requirements and review criteria. The specific
Overlay Zoning Districts are as follows:



      (1)   Section 152.196 “AP” Airport Overlay Zoning District;



      (2)   Section 152.197 “FP” Floodplain Overlay Zoning
District;



      (3)   Section 152.198 “AO” Aesthetic Overlay Zoning
District; and



      (4)   Section 152.199 “P” Public Overlay Zoning District.



   (B)   Review process. All development and construction in each of
the overlay zoning districts shall require site plan review, by the Zoning
Administrator, prior to the applicant’s submittal for building or grading
permits. All applications for site plan review shall comply with the
submittal requirements outlined in § 152.046. The required fee shall
accompany all applications.



   (C)   Compliance with other provisions.



      (1)   General provisions. The general provisions in §§
152.210 through 152.226 shall apply.



      (2)   Parking regulations. The parking regulations in §§
152.240 through 152.244 shall apply.



      (3)   Signs. All signage shall comply with the regulations of
§§ 152.255 through 152.262.



      (4)   Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



      (5)   Landscape regulations. All landscaping shall comply with
§§ 152.295 through 152.300.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.196  “AP” AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this “AP” Airport Overlay Zoning
District is to recognize the impacts and hazards associated with the
operation of public and private airports. It is the intent of this overlay to
promote the public health and safety in the vicinity of the Rolle Airfield by
minimizing exposure to crash hazards and high noise levels generated by
airport operations and to encourage future development which is compatible
with the continued operations and planned future expansion of the airport. It
is the intent of this overlay district to regulate land uses, and specify
acoustical performance standards and height limitations in order to protect
lives and property and conversely to adequately protect Rolle Airfield to
ensure its success in meeting the long-range general aviation needs of San
Luis and the extreme southwestern Yuma County.



   (B)   General provisions – “AP” Overlay Zoning District.



      (1)   Not withstanding any other provision of this overlay
district, no use may be made of land or water within this overlay district in
such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals
or radio communication between the airport and the aircraft, make it
difficult for pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of
the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise materially endanger or
interfere with the landing, take off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to
use the airport; such as buildings with reflective glass or any type of
reflective/glare producing exterior, high intensity recreation type lights
(especially on high standards), smoke, antennas, landfills, garbage dumps,
incinerators, or high tension transmission lines.



      (2)   The Federal Aviation Regulations (F.A.R.) Part 77
Airspace Plan, the Airport Influence Area (AIA) map, and the 2020 Aircraft
Noise Exposure map, and other information contained in the “Rolle Airfield
Airport Master Plan”, dated March 2001 and amendments thereto as may from
time to time be made shall be and the same is hereby adopted as part of the
“AP” Airport Overlay Zoning District section of this chapter.



      (3)   Building heights within the boundaries of the “AP”
Airport Overlay Zoning District shall be as set forth in the Federal Aviation
Regulations (FAR) Part 77 Airspace Plan per the “Rolle Airfield Airport
Master Plan” dated March 2001 or as may be amended and the height
limitations of the underlying zoning district; whichever is more restrictive.



      (4)   The “AP” Airport Overlay Zoning District shall be
that area as defined as the “Airport Influence Area (AIA) per the “Rolle
Airfield Airport Master Plan” dated March 2001 or as may be amended by the
Yuma County Airport Authority (YCAA).



   (C)   Permitted uses –“AP” Overlay Zoning District.



      (1)   Airport structures and facilities that are necessary for
the operation of the airport and for the control of air traffic there from.



      (2)   Fixed base operators (FBO’s).



      (3)   Heliports, glider operations, skydiving operations and
grounds school training.



      (4)   Those uses permitted by right in the “OSC” Zoning
District.



      (5)   Those uses permitted by right in the residential
“RA-10” Zoning District; except for single residential and guesthouses,
wireless communication towers and antenna, wastewater treatment plants,
utility generating plants, farm/ranching accessory structures that exceed the
permitted height as set forth in the FAR Part 77 plan for Rolle Airfield.



      (6)   Those uses permitted by right in the “H-I” General
Industrial District; except broadcasting stations and studios, hospitals and
outpatient clinics.



      (7)   Public or private golf course, including clubhouse and
driving range located thereon; provided there are no water features on the
course. This does not permit or include miniature golf courses or stand-alone
practice driving ranges, operated for commercial purposes, when not
associated with a golf course.



      (8)   Public and private parks, including but not limited to,
picnic grounds, playgrounds, and athletic playing fields without playing
field light standards; provided there are no bodies of water or water
features within the parks.



      (9)   Public safety and law enforcement facilities.



   (D)   Conditional uses – “AP” Overlay Zoning District.



      (1)   Travel plazas or truck stops subject to the provisions
outlined in § 152.121(C)(1) of this chapter.



      (2)   Warehouse and transfer facilities for general freight.



      (3)   Public or private detention and correctional facilities
and only after it has been found to be in compliance with all applicable
federal and state regulations.



   (E)   Development regulations – “AP” Overlay Zoning District.



      (1)   Public disclosure of potential noise impacts. No person
shall sell, nor offer for sale, rent or lease any property unless and until
the prospective buyer or renter has been provided an avigational disclosure
and release form for the subject property, which the prospective buyer or
renter shall sign and file with the city. The disclosure statement shall
serve as notice of the fact that the property is within an airport overlay
area and that the property therein is subject to potential noise, vibration,
and impacts from the Rolle Airfield.



      (2)   Notification on plat or title. When a subdivision plat
or parcel split is required the following notice shall be placed on the plat
and/or recorded with the title: “These properties, due to their proximity
to the Rolle Airfield, are likely to experience aircraft over flights, which
could generate noise levels which may be of concern to some individuals. The
city, public and airport shall be held harmless from any damages caused by
noise, vibration, fumes, dust, fuel, fuel particles, or other effects that
may be caused by the operation of aircraft taking off, landing, or operating
on or near the airport, not including the physical impact of aircraft or
parts thereof.”



      (3)   Noise attenuation. The construction, alteration, moving,
partial demolition, repair and use of any building or structure within the
airport overlay area shall comply with the sound attenuation standards in
order to achieve an exterior to interior Noise Level Reduction (NLR) of 25
decibels. Certification of such NLR measures, by a registered engineer or a
registered architect, shall be required to be submitted along with the
application for a building permit.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.197  “FP” FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this “FP” Floodplain Overlay
District is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to
minimize both public and private losses due to flood conditions by
recognizing the impacts and hazards associated with flood conditions. It is
the intent of this overlay to promote the public health and safety by
minimizing the exposure of structures to potential flooding by encouraging
future development to be located outside of the floodway and that appropriate
uses and construction methods be utilized within the areas of the floodplain.



   (B)   General provisions – “FP” Overlay Zoning District.



      (a)   This overlay district shall apply to all areas, within
the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, that are designated as special
flood hazard areas (SFHA) by the “Flood Insurance Study for Yuma County,
Arizona (FIS)”, dated December 15, 1983 and/or identified by FEMA in the
specific Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for those lands within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the City of San Luis. The special flood hazard
areas (SFHA) along with the FIRM are the minimum areas of applicability of
this overlay zoning and may be supplemented by studies, amendments, and
revisions. A set of FIRM maps shall be retained by the city and shall be
available for inspection.



      (b)   If the Colorado River levee system is certified within
two years from the date of adoption of this chapter, and continue to remain
certified, then those areas protected by the levee system may be removed from
the floodplain regulations.



      (c)   The Yuma County Floodplain Administrator and the Yuma
County Flood Control District shall have regulatory powers over those lands
identified as SFHA and delineated in the FIRM for the city.



      (d)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the
terms outlined in the FIS for Yuma County, those of this overlay district and
other applicable regulations.



      (e)   The degree of flood protection required by the “FP”
Overlay Zoning District is considered minimum for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations of the Yuma County Flood
Control District. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. The “FP” Overlay
Zoning District does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This overlay district shall not create liability on the part
of the city or any officer or employee thereof, or the Yuma County Flood
Control District for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
overlay district or any administrative decision lawfully made herein.



   (C)   Permitted uses –“FP” Overlay Zoning District.



      (1)   Those uses permitted by right in the “OSC” and
“OSR” Zoning Districts.



      (2)   Those uses permitted by right in the residential zoning
districts of “RA-10" Zoning District: except for kennels for the boarding
or lodging, breeding, or training of small domesticated animals.



   (D)   Conditional uses – “FP” Overlay Zoning District. Those
uses permitted as conditional uses in the “RA-10" Zoning District; except
that the following uses shall not be permitted:



      (1)   Kennels for the boarding or lodging, breeding, or
training of small domesticated animals; and



      (2)   Cemeteries, crematoriums, columbaria and mausoleums
including associated on-site mortuary.



   (E)   Development regulations – “FP” Overlay Zoning District.



      (1)   In all areas of special flood hazard all new
construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and capable of
resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage and with methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be designed and constructed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within any and all service, mechanical, or utility equipment
components of the structure during conditions of flooding.



      (4)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
and shall be designed to direct flood waters around and away from proposed
structures. All lots shall have a building pad that is certified to be one
foot above the level of the base flood elevation.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.198  “AO” AESTHETIC OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The Aesthetic Overlay District is an overlay to the
underlying zoning district which may be used in combination with any zoning
district provided in this zoning code. The purpose of the Aesthetic Overlay
District is to enhance the community’s image and attractiveness through
creation of visually pleasing and inviting entryways of the city as well as
providing community focal points or areas where the design of the physical
improvements and landscape enhances the community’s appearance.



      (2)   This purpose is to be accomplished by:



         (a)   Creating review procedures that establish the
authority to review, recommend, and approve proposed physical design elements
within the viewshed and the general location of major transportation
corridors that are prominent entry points to the city;



         (b)   Focusing on community design principles that
result in creative, imaginative solutions, that establish high quality design
for specific areas of the city;



         (c)   Providing for site development that utilizes the
unique characteristics of the site (such as location, surroundings,
topography, or natural resources) and creates areas which are visually
attractive to both the occupants, tenants and the general public;



         (d)   Minimizing conflicts between automobiles,
pedestrians and bicycles; creating parking and loading/unloading areas which
are attractive and unobtrusive; and maintaining efficient vehicular
circulation;



         (e)   Providing safe and convenient access between and
within all development in the district; and



         (f)   Providing landscaping which visually enhances both
on-site and off-site development.



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   The Aesthetic Overlay District does not modify uses
permitted in existing zones, but allows that the district be superimposed
over existing zones with each use conforming to the development standards
required by the underlying zoning district. The provisions and regulations of
the Aesthetic Overlay District are in addition to all other provisions and
regulations of the zoning code that apply to the underlying zoning as
determined on the official zoning map of the city. Should provisions of the
Aesthetic Overlay District conflict with other provisions of the zoning code
or the Yuma General Plan, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.



      (2)   The Aesthetic Overlay District may be used in
combination with any zoning district provided in the zoning code.



   (C)   Design review procedure. The project design plan shall be
submitted and approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of
any construction or development permits.



   (D)   Property development standards.



      (1)   Walls and fences.



         (a)   Any decorative or screening walls or fences must
be either a masonry design or a well-foliaged plant wall.



         (b)   Chain link fencing, with or without slats, is not
an acceptable screening or fencing material for areas visible from a public
street. Razor wire, concertina wire or similar material shall not be used in
areas visible from a public street.



         (c)   Walls located on a property line shall provide a
minimum five-foot wide landscaping strip located along the exterior of the
walls. Landscaping within this strip shall meet the requirements stated in
Article 18 of this chapter.



      (2)   Landscaping.



         (a)   All landscaped areas, whether required or provided
voluntarily; shall meet the requirements stated in §§ 152.295 through
152.300.



         (b)   All landscape materials shall be allowed to grow
to their natural height and shape appropriate for that plant.



         (c)   Automatic irrigation (maximizing drip irrigation)
is required for all landscaped areas.



         (d)   Buildings shall be located so that the building
does not abut paved parking areas or drive aisles. A minimum five-foot wide
landscape strip shall be provided between parking areas or drive aisles and
the building. This landscape strip shall not be included in the calculation
of interior parking lot landscaping required in §§ 152.295 through 152.300.
Twenty-five percent (25%) of the square footage of the landscape strip
requirement may be used for pedestrian sidewalks. This landscape strip
requirement shall be waived for areas adjacent to the building that are
designed as access to loading dock(s) and delivery areas and that are
screened from view from public streets.



         (e)   Accessible pedestrian route(s) shall be provided
between public street sidewalks and accessible entrances to buildings on site.



      (3)   Signs.



         (a)   Project identification signs shall be placed on
monuments, building facades or on low profile walls.



            1.   Monument signs. To encourage design
flexibility, the maximum height of the sign may be lowered in order to
decrease required setback from the street. No signs shall be permitted within
visibility sight triangles. Low profile signs may be setback from the
property line as follows:



               Over 6 feet in height   12 foot setback



               4 feet to 6 feet      6 foot setback



               4 feet or less      3 foot setback



            2.   Signs shall be fully integrated with the
design of the building and the site development, reflecting the architecture
and the building materials. The means of integrating signs with the
architecture of the building shall be achieved through replication of
architectural embellishments, colors, building materials, texture, and other
elements found in the building design.



         (b)   Window signs shall not exceed two square feet in
area per tenant space and are limited to business identification, hours of
operation, address and emergency information.



         (c)   Window signs are prohibited above the ground level
floor of the building.



         (d)   Lettering or icons located on canopies or awnings
shall not exceed 5% of the total square footage of the canopy or awning
located on the particular facade on which the canopy or awning is attached.



         (e)   The following sign types are prohibited in the
Aesthetic Overlay District:



            1.   Animated signs;



            2.   Portable signs;



            3.   Revolving signs;



            4.   Flashing signs;



            5.   Banner signs;



            6.   Swinging signs;



            7.   Under-canopy signs;



            8.   Roof-mounted signs;



            9.   Internally-lit awning and canopy signs; and



            10.   Pole mounted signs.



      (4)   Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground. In
the event an above ground electrical transformer is located outdoors on any
site within the Aesthetic Overlay District, it shall be screened from view
with a landscaping and not located within any setback area. If the
transformer cannot be screened, it shall be located in an underground vault.
Exceptions to this requirement are as follows:



         (a)   Transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes,
meter cabinets and concealed ducts may be placed above ground, if they are
used solely in connection with the underground transmission or distribution
lines;



         (b)   Poles supporting street lights;



         (c)   If topography, soil or other physical conditions
prevent underground installation of utilities unreasonable or impractical,
the Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement; and



         (d)   The remodeling of existing structures, where the
cost of remodeling is less than 50% of the replacement cost of the existing
structure as determined for building permit fees shall be exempt.



      (5)   Parking structures.



         (a)   Parking lot landscaping shall be designed to
include tree varieties to provide shaded parking at growth maturity for a
minimum of 30% of the required parking stalls.



         (b)   A bike rack shall be provided for each building on
site.



      (6)   Lighting. Minimum standards for lighting for properties
located within the Aesthetic Overlay District are as follows:



         (a)   Aisles, passageways, and recesses related to and
within the building complex shall be illuminated with an intensity of a
minimum of one maintained foot-candle at the ground level and at seven feet
vertical between sunset and sunrise;



         (b)   Open parking lots shall be illuminated with a
minimum of one maintained foot-candle of light on the parking surface and at
seven feet vertical between sunset and sunrise;



         (c)   All exterior entrances shall be illuminated with a
minimum of five maintained foot-candles at ground level and at seven feet
vertical between the hours of sunset and sunrise, with a minimum 15-foot
radius from the center point of the entrance;



         (d)   Closed and covered parking structures and carports
shall be illuminated with a minimum of five maintained foot-candles at ground
level and at seven feet vertical between the hours of sunset and sunrise;
during daylight hours, the area shall be illuminated with a minimum of ten
foot-candles;



         (e)   Greenway trails, pathways, linear parks, multi-use
trails and similar facilities shall be illuminated with a minimum of
one-half  maintained foot-candle at ground level and at seven feet vertical
between sunset and sunrise; and



         (f)   Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and
vandal-resistant covers.



   (E)   Aesthetic Overlay District design guidelines. The Aesthetic
Overlay District design guidelines upon adoption by the City Council shall be
used in conjunction with this subchapter to provide guidance for the property
owners, tenants, and design professionals in the preparation of a project
design plan.



   (F)   Building permits based upon approved project design. Within
one year of approval of a project design by the Zoning Administrator, a
building permit may be granted for a site based upon the project design
approved by the Zoning Administrator. If more than one year has elapsed since
approval of the project design for that location, such design plan shall be
resubmitted to the Zoning Administrator to accept or modify the design
previously approved, prior to issuance of a building permit.



   (G)   Amendments to approved project design. Any substantial
amendment or modification to an approved project design shall be reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.199  “P” PUBLIC OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The principal purpose of the (P) Public Overlay
District is to allow those government activities which are necessary to serve
the public in particular locations of the city, and to distinguish them from
private uses. The (P) Public Overlay District is to provide an overlay
designation superimposed over existing zoning districts for those lands held
in public ownership by local, state, and federal agencies within the city
limits. It is intended that each public use conform to the development
standards required for all other uses permitted within the underlying zoning
district.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   The (P) Public Overlay District shall not apply to
publicly owned land leased to private concerns for use other than by a
political subdivision nor shall this district apply to privately owned land
which is leased to a government agency.



      (2)   In the event that a government agency disposes of its
property for which a Public Overlay District has been granted, such
designation shall automatically expire, and the underlying zoning
classification shall remain in effect.



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Open space, parks, fine arts center, convention center,
and public recreational facilities.



      (2)   Public schools and playgrounds.



      (3)   Governmental office buildings and grounds, including
service and maintenance facilities.



      (4)   Such public facilities as hospitals, libraries, museums
and similar public facilities.



      (5)   Municipal water production and storage facilities;
municipal sewage treatment plants; municipal facilities for the collection,
transfer, and disposal of solid wastes.



      (6)   Public safety and law enforcement facilities.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with §§ 152.315 through 152.322,
are permitted as an accessory use for a legally established nonresidential
principal use. Wall strapping of a personal wireless communications facility
is not permitted.



      (2)   Roof-mounted personal wireless communication facilities
are permitted on a publicly owned nonresidential building.



      (3)   The use of lattice tower structures for any personal
wireless communication facility is not permitted.



   (E)   Property development standards. To meet the purpose of the (P)
Public Overlay District, all uses shall meet the minimum development
standards as specified by the Zoning Ordinance for the underlying zoning
district or districts in which they are located.



   (F)   Procedure. An application for the (P) Public Overlay District
shall only be made by an agency of the local, state, or federal government,
in accordance with the procedures established in this zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 152.210  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish general development and
performance standards applicable to all zoning districts. The standards and
regulations set forth in this subchapter shall qualify or supplement, as the
case may be, the district regulations set forth elsewhere in this subchapter.
Any use that is not specifically allowed or not analogous shall hereby be
declared to be prohibited.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.211  USE RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses in any and all zoning districts
shall be only those uses listed under ‘permitted uses” for each of the
specific zoning districts; all other uses are prohibited. Permitted uses are
subject to all other applicable standards of this subchapter. No building
permit shall be issued for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the
city has not issued an approval.



   (B)   Conditional uses. Conditional uses in any and all zoning
districts shall be only those uses listed under “conditional uses” for
each of the specific zoning districts; all other uses are prohibited.
Conditional uses require review and approval of a conditional use permit in
accordance with § 152.043. Conditional uses are subject to all other
applicable standards of this subchapter and those requirements that may
reasonably be imposed by the City Council. No building permit shall be issued
for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the city has not issued an
approval.



   (C)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses in any and all zoning districts
shall be only those uses listed under “temporary uses” for each of the
specific zoning districts; all other uses are prohibited. Temporary uses
require review and approval of a temporary use permit, in accordance with §
152.044. Temporary uses are subject to all other applicable standards of this
chapter and those requirements that may be imposed by the Zoning
Administrator or Board of Adjustment. No building permit shall be issued for
a use not specifically mentioned and for which the city has not issued an
approval.



   (D)   Unspecified uses. Whenever a use is proposed which is not
listed as a “permitted uses”, “conditional uses” or “temporary
uses” within a zoning district, the applicant may submit an application for
an interpretation to the Zoning Administrator who may make an interpretation
concerning its applicability. In making an interpretation, the Zoning
Administrator shall be consistent with the purpose of each specific zoning
district and consider similar uses which are listed in the zoning ordinance.



   (E)   Zoning clearance. A zoning clearance is the verification by
the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designated representative, indicating
that the proposed building, structure, or use meets all the requirements of
this chapter at the time of building permit review if applicable. Zoning
clearances shall be required for all development and construction activities
addressed within this zoning ordinance. Any change in use shall also require
a zoning clearance.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.212  RE-DIVIDING OF RECORDED LOTS.



   (A)   No lot may be divided to create a lot not in conformance with
these regulations. No lot shall be divided or combined in any manner other
than through subdivision procedures as specified by the City of San Luis
Subdivision Ordinance.



   (B)   No lot may be reduced in area so as to cause any open space or
yard required by this chapter to be less in dimension than is required for
the Zoning District and lot in question.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.213  STREET DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All lots shall have frontage on a dedicated and accepted
public street connecting to the publicly dedicated and accepted street
system; except in the case of planned commercial shopping centers with
reciprocal cross access easements in place. The City Council may, through the
rezoning or subdivision plat approval process, allow private streets that are
designed and constructed per city private street standards.



   (B)   Except for lots abutting private streets, which have been
specifically approved by the City Council, a building permit shall not be
issued for a recorded lot which does not abut a dedicated and accepted public
street and the abutting street does not connect to the publicly dedicated and
accepted street system.



   (C)   Prior to the acceptance by the city of the dedication of a
public street, such street shall be designed, graded, and paved in accordance
with the provisions of all applicable street standards of the city.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.214  UNSUITABLE SITES.



   No land shall be used or structure erected if the City Engineer or the
city’s Consulting Engineer has determined, based on accepted engineering
principles and practices, that the land is unsuitable for such use or
structure by reason of potential flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate
drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, extreme topography, low percolation
rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility or any other feature or
features which may render such use or structure likely to be harmful to the
health, safety and general welfare of the community.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.215  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   Every activity, operation or land use shall comply with the following
performance standards regardless of the zoning district in which it is
located. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for insuring
compliance with these performance standards and shall invoke the provisions
for enforcement of compliance with these performance standards wherever there
is reasonable evidence that performance standards are being violated by such
activity, operation or use.



   (A)   Glare and heat. Any activity producing intense glare or heat
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as
not to create a nuisance or hazard along lot lines.



   (B)   Lighting. No light that flashes, revolves, or otherwise
resembles a traffic control signal shall be allowed in any area where such
light could create a hazard for passing vehicular traffic. All outdoor
lighting shall be installed, maintained, and utilized in conformance with
§§ 152.275 through 152.282.



   (C)   Fire and explosion hazards. All disposal of waste materials by
outdoor incineration on the premises is expressly prohibited. All storage of,
and other activities involving inflammable and explosive materials shall be
provided adequate safety devices against hazards of fire and explosion,
together with adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment and
devices standard in industry. All storage of inflammable or explosive
materials shall further comply with location requirements set forth by the
Fire Department or as established by this or other city codes and ordinances.



   (D)   Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground
vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not discernable, without
instruments, at any point beyond the site property line.



   (E)   Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air
pollution. No emission shall be permitted which can cause damage to health,
to animals, or vegetation, or other forms of property, or which can cause
excessive soiling.



   (F)   Liquids and solid waste. No materials (organic or inorganic),
compounds or chemicals, which can contaminate any water supply, interfere
with bacterial process in sewerage treatment or otherwise cause emission of
elements which are offensive or hazardous to the public health, safety,
welfare or comfort shall be discharged at any point into any public sewer,
private sewage disposal system or stream or into the ground, except in
accordance with the standards approved by the Arizona State Department of
Health and/or Environmental Quality or such governmental agency as may have
jurisdiction over such activities.



   (G)   Odors. No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter
shall be permitted in such quantities as to be offensive in such a manner as
to create a nuisance or hazard beyond the site property line.



   (H)   Noise. No use shall result in noise perceptible beyond the
boundaries of the immediate site of the use that exceed the levels which
engender annoyance or create an unhealthy environment for adjacent properties.



   (I)   Flooding. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted, or altered within any special flood hazard
areas (SFHA) that would create a public nuisance or create a hazard to life
or property. Encroachment into the floodway, or within any SFHA, shall be
prohibited including but not limited to, fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development. Encroachment into the floodway fringe of
the floodplain shall be limited and shall require certification by an Arizona
registered professional engineer stating that proposed encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.216  PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS.



   (A)   The space in any required yard shall be open and unobstructed,
except for the ordinary projections of chimney flues, awnings, open outside
stairways and balconies, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and
other architectural features provided such features shall not project further
than two feet into any required yard, and provided further that in no case
shall such projections be nearer than five feet to the property line.



   (B)   Bay windows, including their cornices and eaves, shall not
project into any required yard not more than two feet, provided the sum of
such projections on any wall does not exceed one-third the length of the wall
and provided that in no case shall such projections be nearer than five feet
to the property line.



   (C)   Mechanical equipment, such as air conditioners, may be
constructed within any side or rear yard in conformance with this chapter,
provided that in no case shall the mechanical equipment create an open side
yard area of less than five feet. This open clear area extends from the front
of the structure to five feet beyond the rear of the structure.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.217  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Building height. No building shall be erected, reconstructed,
or structurally altered to exceed the height limitations designated for the
zone in which such building or structure is located. Height regulations
established elsewhere in this chapter shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   In residential districts: church spires, belfries,
cupolas and domes not for human occupancy, public monuments, water towers,
and grain elevators or necessary mechanical appurtenances associated with
agricultural produce processing and accessory agricultural buildings provided
they do not exceed a height of 60 feet. Also noncommercial radio or
television antennas or wireless communication towers as approved in
accordance with the requirements of §§ 152.315 through 152.322.



      (2)   Chimneys in residential districts may be two feet above
the roofline of the residential structure, even if the roofline is at the
maximum building height.



      (3)   In industrial districts: chimneys, refrigeration
coolers, ventilation fans, elevator bulkheads, derricks, conveyors, grain
elevators, or other similar mechanical appurtenances and/or structures
necessary to operate and maintain the building provided they do not exceed
100 feet in height and are so located and constructed that if it should
collapse, its reclining length would still be contained on the property on
which it was constructed.



      (4)   The combined height of roof-mounted solar panels and
associated equipment and the structure upon which it is installed may exceed
the maximum building height of a zoning district by an additional six feet,
so long as the structure upon which the solar panels and associated equipment
are installed does not exceed the maximum building height of the zoning
district in which it is located.



   (B)   Height limitation on corner lots. Notwithstanding any other
provisions in any zoning district the height of any buildings, fences, walls,
retaining walls, gateways, ornamental structures, hedges, shrubbery and other
fixtures, and construction and landscape plantings on corner lots in all
zoning districts shall be limited as follows:



      (1)   Height shall not exceed two and one-half feet above the
established elevation of the intersecting streets for a distance of 25 feet
on local residential streets along the front and side lot lines and within
the triangle formed by the connection of these two lot lines and 33 feet on
collector and arterial streets along the front and side lot lines and within
the triangle formed by the connection of these two lot lines. (see Exhibit
No. 1)



Exhibit No. 1 - Clear Sight Triangle



(below example is for Local Street)







 



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.218  ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES.



   (A)   Accessory buildings or uses shall not be constructed or
established on a lot until construction of the principal building has been
actually commenced or the primary use established; except in the “RA-10”
Zoning District.



   (B)   Detached accessory buildings shall not be located in the
required front yard and may be built in the required rear yard but such
accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 30% of the required rear yard
and shall not be nearer than three feet to any side or rear lot line.



   (C)   Accessory buildings shall not be used for dwelling purposes
except for a guesthouse, an agricultural living quarters or if permitted
elsewhere in this chapter.



   (D)   All accessory buildings and accessory uses, such as but not
limited to; guesthouses, agricultural living quarters, barns and corrals,
garages, carports, and swimming pools shall require building permits and/or
zoning clearance and shall adhere to any applicable provisions elsewhere in
this chapter.



   (E)   Accessory buildings shall be setback a minimum of three feet
from the rear and interior side property lines. If located closer than six
feet to the principal dwelling then the accessory structure must be attached
to the principal dwelling through an integral roof structure a minimum of six
feet in width; except for owner assembled garden sheds under 120 square feet
in size.



   (F)   In the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall maintain
side yard setbacks from the street side lot line as required for the main
structure in that zone; and when a garage is entered from an alley, it shall
not be located nearer than ten feet to the alley line (which may be an
easement or a property line).



   (G)   Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height regulations of
the zoning district within any part of the buildable lot area, and shall not
exceed 20 feet in height in any required yard.



   (H)   All accessory buildings or uses, except for wells and related
well equipment shall have the same electrical meter as the principal building
or use unless the public utility determines that a separate meter is required
for safety reasons which shall be determined on a case-by-case basis.



   (I)   Cargo containers and semi-trailers as follows:



      (1)   Shall be prohibited in all residential and commercial
zoning districts as a principal or accessory building and/or use.



      (2)   May be permitted in all zoning districts, only for the
on-site storage of construction material when in conjunction with an active
building permit on-site, with an approved temporary use permit.



      (3)   May be permitted in all commercial and industrial zoning
districts, only for the on-site storage of holiday related materials when in
conjunction with a permanent use and with an approved temporary use permit.



      (4)   Sea containers may be permitted in the “OSR”,
“RA-10”, “L-I” and “H-I” zoning districts as an accessory
building for storage purposes only.



   (J)   Manufactured homes and/or recreational vehicles may not be
used as an accessory building in any district.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.219  FENCES AND WALLS.



   (A)   In all districts a fence or wall or hedge may be erected or
maintained at a height no greater than three feet, six inches (3'6") within
the required front or street side setback. In all residential districts the
maximum height of any fence or wall shall be six feet. Within the commercial
and industrial districts the maximum fence or wall height shall be eight feet
except that a fence or wall abutting a residential district shall not exceed
six feet in height. These height regulations shall not apply when fences or
walls of greater height are required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or
City Council in order to provide adequate screening as required by this
chapter. Utility companies, which are regulated by the Arizona Corporation
Commission, and schools, public and quasi-public institutions including
correctional facilities may be allowed increased fence heights due to
national or state standards.



   (B)   Every fence or wall shall be constructed in a workmanlike
manner and be of a conventional fencing material such as, but not limited to,
masonry, preformed concrete sections, treated wood, or wrought iron. Every
fence or wall shall be maintained in a condition of good repair and shall not
be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair, damage, or
unsightliness, and shall not be allowed to constitute a public or private
nuisance. Any such fence or wall that is, or has become, dangerous to the
public safety, health or welfare, or has become unsightly through improper
maintenance or neglect shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and the Zoning
Administrator may commence proper proceedings for the abatement of such
nuisance.



   (C)   Barb wire and concertina (razor) wire.



      (1)   Barbed wire may be used in the rural residential areas
zoned “RA-10" for agricultural purposes. Barbed wire is prohibited in all
other residential zoning districts.



      (2)   Concertina wire is prohibited; except as where provided
in division (C)(4) of this section.



      (3)   Barbed wire may be permitted in commercial and
industrial zoning districts for security purposes surrounding allowed outdoor
storage areas provided the barbed wire is located a minimum of six feet or
more above grade and angled inward.



      (4)   Barbed wire and/or concertina wire may be permitted
around public or quasi-public correctional/detention facilities when
necessary for the restraint of the occupants or for security purposes.



   (D)   Electrical fences shall be prohibited except around
agricultural public or quasi-public facilities when necessary for the
restraint of the occupants.



   (E)   All fences and walls shall be located entirely on the private
property of the person, firm or corporation constructing, or causing the
construction of any such fence or wall unless the owner of the adjoining
property agrees, in writing, that such fence or wall may be erected on the
division line of the respective properties.



   (F)   Corner lots and key lots.







 



      (1)   On a corner lot contiguous to a key lot a fence, wall,
or hedge over four feet in height, may be placed on the street side property
line except within a triangle measured from the front lot line of the key lot
extending ten feet along the common property line and ten feet measured from
the common property line extending along the street side property line of the
corner lot towards the front property line of the corner lot.



      (2)   On a key lot contiguous to a corner lot, a fence, wall,
or hedge not exceeding six feet in height may be erected along the property
line contiguous with the rear yard of the corner lot, but such fence, wall or
hedge shall not come closer to the front lot line of the key lot than ten
feet.



   (G)   An arched entry gate/feature, not exceeding a height of eight
feet or a width of eight feet, may be permitted within the front yard setback
provided it is an integral part of an approved front yard wall.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.220  SWIMMING POOLS.



   (A)   In all residential districts, contained bodies of water,
either above or below ground level, with the container being 18 or more
inches in depth and/or wider than eight feet at any point, measured
perpendicular to the long axis, shall conform to the location and fencing
requirements for swimming pools as outlined in this chapter and in A.R.S. §
36-1681. Irrigation and storm water retention facilities, and the water
features in public parks and golf courses are exempt from the fencing
requirements of this section.



   (B)   Any swimming pool along with incidental installations, such as
pumps and filters, shall be completely enclosed by a permanent fence, wall or
barrier to restrict access to the swimming pool from public property, from
adjoining private property, and directly from all dwelling units or guest
rooms of a hotel, motel or resort development located on the same premises as
the swimming pool.



   (C)   Swimming pools along with incidental installations, such as
heater, pump and filter or other mechanical equipment used in association
with a private swimming pool may be located in required yards, other than the
required front yard, provided such pool is set back from all lot lines a
minimum distance of five feet.



   (D)   The design, placement and access for all swimming pools shall
meet state statute. If there is a conflict, the state statute shall apply.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.221  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   A home occupation shall be considered a permitted accessory
use in all residential districts provided that they are operated and
maintained to not interfere with the peace, quiet, and dignity of the
property owners or neighbors (defined as those who live nearby where the
occupation can be seen or heard or other nuisance impacts detected), if it
complies with the following regulations:



      (1)   All home occupations shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to the use of the property and dwelling unit for dwelling
purposes. A valid city business license shall be maintained for the home
occupation use;



      (2)   Is conducted entirely from within the principal
residence, garage, or accessory building and shall not change the residential
character thereof. Carports and yards may not be used for home occupations.
Exceptions to this provision shall be made for swimming lessons or in-home
day care;



      (3)   No more than 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling
shall be devoted to the home occupation. Areas devoted to the home occupation
use shall maintain a residential appearance;



      (4)   There shall be no employees other than members of the
immediate family residing in the dwelling unit where the home occupation is
being operated;



      (5)   Deliveries and pickups shall not block traffic
circulation and shall occur only between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday;



      (6)   There shall be no external evidence of the activity such
as outdoor storage, displays, noise, dust, odors, fumes, vibration,
electrical interference or fluctuation, or other nuisances discernible beyond
the property lines;



      (7)   No signs signifying the business or any commercial
product or service are allowed;



      (8)   Customer/patron and shipping/receiving trip generation
shall not exceed five trips a day. Exceptions to this shall be allowed for
music and swim lessons and home child care providers provided traffic does
not disturb residential tranquility;



      (9)   No vehicle, used in conjunction with the home
occupation, with a payload rating of more than one ton, shall be stored on
the site. Outside storage of heavy equipment or material shall be prohibited;



      (10)   Storage of goods and materials necessary for the home
occupation shall not include flammable, combustible or explosive materials;
and



      (11)   The home occupation shall not use or create hazardous
waste.



   (B)   The following are some examples of uses, which would be
acceptable as home occupations, provided they comply with the above
regulations:



      (1)   Home offices with no client visits to the home permitted;



      (2)   Artists, sculptors, composers not selling their artistic
product to the public on the premises;



      (3)   Craftwork, such as jewelry making, pottery, woodworking,
and metal working with no sales permitted on the premises;



      (4)   Music lessons, swim lessons, and tutoring;



      (5)   Personal services such as: catering, seamstress services
and beauty or barber services with not more than two persons at any one time;



      (6)   Telephone answering, message services, word processing
and other computer applications;



      (7)   Child care as specified in §§ 152.075 through 152.078
and §§ 152.090 through 152.092;



      (8)   Door to door sales or party sales not on the premise of
the home occupation; and



      (9)   Personal dog kennels in a single family home in
accordance with Chapter 95 Animals of the City of San Luis City Code.



   (C)   A home occupation shall not include the following uses (this
list is not all inclusive):



      (1)   Medical, dental, or physical therapy;



      (2)   Motor vehicle repair, painting, storage, restoration or
conversion, engine repair or similar uses; except on a vehicle personally
owned by the resident;



      (3)   A permanent motor vehicle display for purposes of sale
or lease;



      (4)   Veterinarian office, animal grooming facilities, and
animal care, kennels or boarding facilities;



      (5)   Machine shop;



      (6)   Retail sales;



      (7)   Contractors’ shops or storage yards; or



      (8)   Body piercing and/or painting and tattoos.



   (D)   Complaints by citizens or local residents may be cause for
immediate termination of the home occupation use if appropriate measures
cannot be undertaken to mitigate the complaint or violations. All complaints
or violation of the above conditions shall be registered with, and reviewed
by, the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Ord. 368, passed 10-11-2017)



§ 152.222  OUTDOOR STORAGE AND JUNK AUTOMOBILES.



   (A)   With the exception of “retail sales displays” in an
approved commercial area, outdoor storage shall be screened from public view
by a solid masonry fence or a view obscuring fence with no storage visible
above the wall or fence. The presence of hazardous materials, not sold
on-site or used on-site in association with the permitted business, is
prohibited.



   (B)   Storage of licensed motor homes, farm trailers, boats, travel
trailers, camping trailers, utility trailers, or other such trailers may be
permitted in any residential zoning district provided that the owner of the
motor home, farm trailer, boat, travel trailer, camping trailer, utility
trailer, or other such trailer resides on the property to which it is stored.
Such vehicles if located or stored outside of a garage, carport or barn, must
be stored in the following manner:



      (1)   The vehicle/trailer shall be stored in the rear or side
yard but not in front yard setbacks;



      (2)   The vehicle/trailer shall be stored behind a view
obscuring gate/fence; and



      (3)   Placement in other than the rear or side yard for
loading and unloading purposes may be permitted for a period not to exceed 72
hours.



   (C)   In all residential zoning districts, junk automobiles shall be
stored in a completely enclosed building. In all other zoning districts, the
storage of junk automobiles is prohibited; unless otherwise permitted and
then only under the specific conditions outlined within this chapter.



   (D)   The parking or storage of any commercial vehicle having a
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) exceeding one and one-half tons, or a
tractor, semi-trailer, or bus is prohibited in any residential zoning
districts except in the “RA-10” Zoning District when in association with
a farming activity.



   (E)   Parking and storage of commercial vehicles may be permitted
within the screened storage area of an approved commercial or industrial use
or where otherwise permitted and then under the specific conditions outlined
within this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.223  DUMPING AND DISPOSAL.



   (A)   No person shall obstruct or reduce the capacity of any natural
or man-made water way within the City by filling or dumping any earth, stone
or other materials therein.



   (B)   The use of land for the storing, dumping, or disposals of
scrap iron, junk garbage, rubbish or other refuse, ashes, landscape wastes,
or industrial wastes or by-products shall be prohibited in every zoning
district except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.224  MOBILE VENDORS.



   (A)   Mobile food vendors shall obtain a county health certificate
prior to applying for a city business license.



   (B)   Mobile vendors shall not occupy any portion of the public
right-of-way including the sidewalk.



   (C)   The business license application shall include:



      (1)   The notarized written permission of the property owner;
and



      (2)   A site plan on 8-1/2 x 11 paper showing the seating area
(maximum 400 square feet), location of the unit, hours of operation and
access. Additional information may be required by the Building Safety
Division or the Fire Department.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.225  MEDICAL MARIJUANA USES.



   (A)   The minimum requirements of this section shall apply to all
“medical marijuana dispensary” and “medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation location” uses located in any zoning district.



   (B)   In addition to any other application requirements, an
applicant for any “medical marijuana dispensary” or “medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location” conditional use permit shall
provide the following:



      (1)   A notarized authorization executed by the property
owner, acknowledging and consenting to the proposed use of the property as a
medical marijuana dispensary or a medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location, as applicable;



      (2)   The legal name of the medical marijuana dispensary or
medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location;



      (3)   If the application is for a medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation location, the name and location of the medical marijuana
dispensary with which it is associated;



      (4)   The name, address, and birth date of each officer and
board member of the nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary;



      (5)   The name, address, birth date, and valid registry
identification card number of each nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary
agent;



      (6)   A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance
with A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(c);



      (7)   A notarized certification that none of the nonprofit
medical marijuana dispensary officers or board members has been convicted of
any of the following offenses:



         (a)   A violent crime as defined in A.R.S. §
13-901.03(B) that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the
person was convicted; or



         (b)   A violation of state or federal controlled
substance law that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the
person was convicted except an offense for which the sentence, including any
term of probation, incarceration or supervised release, was completed ten or
more years earlier or an offense involving conduct that would be immune from
arrest, prosecution or penalty under A.R.S. § 36-2811 except that the
conduct occurred before the effective date of that statute or was prosecuted
by an authority other than the state of Arizona;



      (8)   A notarized certification that none of the nonprofit
medical marijuana dispensary officers or board members has served as an
officer or board member for a medical marijuana dispensary that has had its
registration certificate revoked;



      (9)   A floor plan showing the location, dimensions and type
of security measures demonstrating that the medical marijuana dispensary or
medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location will be secured,
enclosed, and locked as required by law; and



      (10)   A scale drawing depicting the property lines and the
separations from the nearest property boundary of the parcel containing the
medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location to the property boundary of the parcel containing any
existing uses listed in division (E) of this section. If any of the uses are
located within 50 feet of the minimum separation, the drawing, showing actual
surveyed separations, shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor.



   (C)   A medical marijuana dispensary shall have operating hours not
earlier than 9:00 a.m. and not later than 5:00 p.m.



   (D)   A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation location shall:



      (1)   Be located in a permanent building and may not be
located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle;



      (2)   Not have drive-through service;



      (3)   Not emit dust, fumes, vapors or odors into the
environment;



      (4)   Not provide offsite delivery of medical marijuana;



      (5)   Prohibit consumption of marijuana on the premises;



      (6)   Not have outdoor seating areas; and



      (7)   Display a current City of San Luis business license
applicable to medical marijuana uses.



   (E)   A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation location shall meet the following minimum separations,
measured in a straight line from the boundary of the parcel containing the
medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location to the property boundary of the parcel containing any
existing uses listed below.



      (1)   Two thousand (2,000) feet from any other medical
marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location.



      (2)   Two thousand (2,000) feet from a residential substance
abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other residential drug or alcohol
rehabilitation facility.



      (3)   One thousand (1,000) feet from a public, private,
parochial, charter, dramatic, dancing, music, learning center, or other
similar school or educational facility that caters to children.



      (4)   One thousand (1,000) feet from a childcare center.



      (5)   One thousand (1,000) feet from a public library or
public park.



      (6)   One thousand (1,000) feet from a church.



   (F)   A medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location
not associated with a medical marijuana dispensary is prohibited, and only
one medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
permitted for the single medical marijuana dispensary with which it is
associated.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.226  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   Sexually oriented businesses within the city are regulated through
Chapter 113 Sexually Oriented Businesses in the City of San Luis City Code.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




PARKING REGULATIONS




§ 152.240  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum standards for
the provisions of adequate off-street parking, loading and maneuvering spaces
for the uses permitted by this chapter in a manner which is safe, efficient,
convenient and visually attractive. These regulations shall apply to new
construction and expansion of or changes to existing uses permitted by this
chapter. The regulations set forth in this chapter shall supplement any
zoning district regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.241  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All required parking and loading spaces and maneuvering areas
shall be provided on the same parcel or lot as the principal structure
wherever possible. A contiguous lot may be used for parking purposes if
incorporated into the development site for the use of providing the required
parking and the lot is properly zoned for parking purposes. A notarized
letter of agreement shall be provided.



   (B)   All vehicular egress from parking lots to public right-of-way
shall be by forward motion only, except in residential districts.



   (C)   The required parking spaces for commercial and industrial uses
shall not be located in the front yard setback or a side yard setback when
adjacent to a residential zoning district.



   (D)   No part of any vehicle may overhang into a public sidewalk or
within five feet of a street curb where no sidewalk exists.



   (E)   Tandem arrangement of required parking spaces is prohibited;
except in single residential zoning districts. For purposes of this
provision, “tandem arrangement” shall mean parking spaces arranged one
behind the other, such that one car will be unable to exit the parking space
if a second car has parked in the tandem space behind it.



   (F)   The parking, keeping, or storage of commercial rated vehicles
over one and one-half tons in a residential zoning district is prohibited
with the exception of:



      (1)   Recreational vehicles; in compliance with § 152.222;



      (2)   Commercial rated vehicles for farm use may be permitted
in the Rural Area Residential Zoning District of “RA-10”; in compliance
with § 152.222;



      (3)   During times where the owner of the commercial rated
vehicle is on call and the vehicle is reasonably necessary to perform the job
for which the owner is on call; and



      (4)   Construction equipment such as a bulldozer, grader,
cement mixer, dump truck and other similar equipment may be stored on a lot
during construction of a building thereon.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.242  IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Required parking spaces, parking lot area, loading spaces,
maneuvering areas, driveways, and fire lanes shall be paved with asphalt,
concrete, paving stones, or a similar dust free material approved by the city
to a sufficient thickness to withstand repeated vehicular traffic.



   (B)   All required off-street parking spaces shall be connected with
a public street, or by an approved private street, by a paved driveway of not
less than 20 feet in length, within the property line, unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator.



   (C)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer and the Zoning
Administrator, all off-street parking lots shall be screened from street
view, with a three foot high screen wall, landscaping, a landscaped berm or
combination thereof. Parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with the
regulations of §§ 152.295 through 152.300.



   (D)   A six inch vertical separation method, such as but not limited
to a concrete curb, shall be required between any parking lot area and
landscape area to protect the landscaped area and control vehicular
circulation.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.243  REQUIRED PARKING BY LAND USE TYPE.



   (A)   The number of parking spaces required to be provided for uses
permitted in this chapter are specified in Table No. 15.



   (B)   In calculating the total number of required off-street parking
spaces, fractional amounts shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number if
the fraction is 0.5 or greater.



   (C)   The number of parking spaces required for uses not listed
shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator and approved through the site
plan review process.



   (D)   In the case of mixed uses, the total requirement for
off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the various uses computed
separately. Cumulative parking space requirements for mixed-use occupancies
may be reduced by the Zoning Administrator if it is determined that peak
requirements of the mixed-use occupancies occur at different times.



   (E)   Bicycle parking devices/facilities shall be required to be
provided, at public facilities and by all commercial land uses, including but
not limited to, libraries, recreation areas, schools, post office, shopping
centers and restaurants. Bicycle parking devices/facilities are also required
within all multiple residence developments. Facilities for securing the
bicycles should be located near the building entrances or other highly
visible areas.



   (F)   For purposes of this chapter, “G.F.A.” is used to
represent gross floor area, which shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal
area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building
at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage. Gross floor area shall
not include: (a) underground parking space; (b) exterior balconies; or (c)
uncovered steps.



TABLE No. 15



Required Parking Spaces Per Land Use



 


Land Uses

 

Required Vehicle Parking






Residential Uses



Single residence, detached dwellings

Manufactured homes

Recreational vehicles
 
2 spaces: dwelling

2 spaces: unit

1 space: unit


Multiple residence:

   Efficiency

   One (1) bedroom units

   Two (2) bedroom units and larger

   Town homes and condominiums

   Complexes with 10 or more units
 


1 space: unit

1.5 spaces: unit

2 spaces: unit

2 spaces: unit

1 visitor space: 10 units



Institutional Uses



Religious institutions:


Main assembly (fixed seating)



Main assembly (without fixed seating)



Classrooms and other buildings

 


1 space: 5 seats

1 space: 300 sf. of G.F.A.

1 space: 300 sf. of G.F.A.


Hospitals
 
1 space: 1.5 beds


Elementary schools & junior high schools
 
1 space: classroom plus

1 space: 2 employees


High schools, trade schools and colleges
 
1 space: 2 employees plus

1 space: 5 students


Prisons and detention facilities
 
1 space: employee/shift



Commercial Uses



Indoor Commercial Amusement:

   Amusement center / arcades

   Skating rinks

   Dance clubs

   Theaters

   Bowling alleys

   Billiard hall
 


1 space: 300 sf G.F.A.

1 space: 300 sf G.F.A.

1 space: 300 sf G.F.A.

1 space: 4 seats

2 spaces: lane

2 spaces: table


Indoor swap meet, farmers market
 
1 space: 500 sf. G.F.A. sales area


Health clubs, gymnasiums
 
1 space: 100 sf. G.F.A.


Medical & dental offices, clinics
 
1 space: 250 sf. G.F.A. plus

1 space: 2 employees


General, professional and civic offices
 
1 space: 300 sf. G.F.A.


Private clubs, lodges and  fraternal organizations
 
1 space: 300 sf. G.F.A.


Retail sales, personal services, banks, and grocery stores
 
1 space: 300 sf. G.F.A.


Data processing/telemarketing operations
 
6 spaces: 1,000 G.F.A.


Hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast
 
1 space: room plus

ancillary use requirements


Assisted living facilities and nursing homes
 
1 space: 2 employees plus

1 space: 10 beds


Restaurants, bars and cocktail lounges
 
1 space: 75 sf. G.F.A. and outdoor seating area


Restaurants with drive-through facilities
 
1 space: 100 sf. G.F.A.


Mortuary/ funeral home
 
1 space: 75 sf. G.F.A. used for public assembly


General auto repair, car wash, service station, lube shops
 
1 space: 375 sf. G.F.A. plus

1 space: employee



Outdoor Commercial Uses



Outdoor Commercial Amusement:

   Golf courses

 

 

   Driving ranges

 


Miniature golf courses, batting cages, amusement parks, water slides.

 


4 space: hole plus

1 space: 250 sf G.F.A. clubhouse

 

1 space: each tee space

 

1 space: 500 sf of outdoor recreational area plus ancillary indoor uses.


Parks (public or private)
 
35 spaces: athletic field

6 spaces: Volleyball court

6 spaces: basketball court

2 spaces: tennis court


Outdoor sales:


Plant nursery, building supplies, RV and boat sales, and automobile sales

 
1 space: 375 sf. G.F.A. display plus 1 space: employee


Outdoor swap meet, farmers market
 
1 space: 500 sf. N.L.A. used for storage, display, and sales.



Industrial Uses



Manufacturing, assembly, production
 
1 space: 600 sf G.F.A.


Wholesale sales, warehouse and freight movement
 
1 space: 900 sf. G.F.A.


Waste related uses including recycling centers
 
1 space: 900 sf. G.F.A.


Mini-warehouse/self storage facility
 
4 spaces plus 2 spaces for manager’s quarters or office




(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.244  PARKING SPACE MANEUVERING DIMENSIONS.



   (A)   Large vehicle parking. Certain uses may be required to install
large vehicle parking spaces for trucks, buses, and recreational vehicles.
Minimum dimension standards for large vehicles spaces shall be 12 feet wide
by 45 feet long. Said spaces shall be clearly marked for customer use.



   (B)   Disabled parking. All off-street parking areas, other than for
single residence uses, shall include reserved spaces for use by disabled
persons. Disabled parking, which shall be subject to A.R.S. § 28-882 et seq.
shall be provided at a rate in compliance with the adopted building code of
the city. Notwithstanding anything in the Building Code, minimum dimension
standards for disabled parking shall be as follows:



      (1)   Single space. Sixteen (16) feet wide by 20 feet long.
The space shall be prominently striped at 11 feet width of space plus a five
foot access aisle.



      (2)   Double space. Twenty-seven (27) feet wide by 20 feet
long. The space shall be striped at 11 feet width of each space plus a five
foot access aisle between the spaces.



   (C)   Standard parking. The standard parking space shall be a
minimum of nine feet wide by 18 feet long unless specified otherwise by this
chapter.



   (D)   Parallel parking. A parallel parking space shall be a minimum
of nine feet wide by 22 feet long unless specified otherwise by this chapter.



   (E)   Loading space. There shall be provided on the same lot with
each commercial building and industrial building or structure adequate space
for off-street loading, unloading and the maneuvering of commercial vehicles.
There shall be no loading or unloading of commercial vehicles on the public
street. Off street maneuvering space shall be provided so that no backing
onto or from a public street is required. The loading space shall be a
minimum of 12 feet wide by 45 feet long and a minimum of 14 feet in height. A
reduced loading space dimension may be approved by the Zoning Administrator
on a case-by-case basis.



   (F)   Driveway and aisle dimensions. Every parking facility shall be
provided with one or more access driveways. The minimum dimensional standards
for driveways shall be as follows.



      (1)   Commercial. The minimum width for one-way enter/exit and
aisle shall be 12 feet. The minimum width for two-way enter/exit and aisle
shall be 24 feet. Additional aisle width may be required depending upon the
angle degree of the parking stalls.



      (2)   Industrial. The minimum width for one-way enter/exit and
aisle shall be 16 feet. The minimum width for two-way enter/exit and aisle
shall be 32 feet.



   (G)   Loading docks and service bays shall not front onto an
arterial or collector roadway.



   (H)   Required parking spaces shall be permanently marked.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




SIGN REGULATIONS




§ 152.255  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The principal purpose of the sign regulations is to establish
basic design standards, administrative procedures, and other criteria
pertaining to the time, manner, and placement of both on-site and off-site
signage located within the city. Such controls are established in the
interests of public safety, community aesthetics, and the public need for
clear visual communications. Visual distractions, impediments to traffic
visibility, and competition with traffic control devices shall be prohibited.
The standards and criteria of this chapter are intended to accommodate a
certain limited amount of signage in order to be comprehensible, to promote
traffic safety, and to maintain community aesthetics. As a result, visual
clutter and competition between sign structures shall be avoided to allow
approved signage to convey visual information to the public in a clear manner.



   (B)   It is also the intent of this chapter to secure the gradual
and eventual elimination, rather than expansion, of nonconforming signs and
nonconforming sign structures. Therefore, the number, size, height, location,
spacing, the means of installing, and the manner of keeping signs and sign
structures shall be regulated in order to achieve these purposes.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.256  APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Scope. The regulations and provisions of this subchapter shall
be applicable to the construction, establishment, or addition of any new
sign, sign structure, or sign face, whether on-site or off-site, as well as
to the relocation, enlargement, extension, reconstruction, replacement,
maintenance, or continuance of any existing sign, sign structure, or sign
face. These regulations shall be applicable within any existing or new
development area of the city, as well as within any area newly annexed to the
city. Nothing herein shall require any change or modification to any signage
lawfully established or constructed prior to the effective date of this
chapter, except as provided in division (C) of this section and §
152.262(E)(5) of this chapter.



   (B)   Responsibility. The duty to erect and maintain signage in the
manner specified herein shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or
occupant(s) of the property upon which the signage is located.



   (C)   Nonconforming signage. Any sign or sign structure lawfully
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, whether on-site or
off-site, and not meeting the standards and requirements specified herein,
shall be considered nonconforming and be subject to the following provisions.



      (1)   Continuance. The lawful use of any nonconforming sign or
sign structure may be continued, provided, however, that any addition,
enlargement, or other alteration which would increase the degree of
nonconformity shall be prohibited. Any nonconforming sign or sign structure
which is abandoned for a period exceeding two years shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter pertaining to removal of abandoned signage.



      (2)   Repairs and alterations. Repairs and alterations which
do not increase the degree of nonconformity shall be permitted, except that
if any sign or structure is damaged or has deteriorated to an extent that the
cost of repair equals 50% of its replacement value if sound, or if the cost
of alteration exceeds 50% of the replacement value, it shall either be
rebuilt or replaced in conformance with the standards and requirements of
this chapter, or be removed altogether.



      (3)   Replacement of on-site signage. At such time as the name
of an activity changes, any nonconforming on-site signage related to such
activity shall either be replaced or modified to meet the requirements of
this chapter, unless such signage was previously constructed with
interchangeable panels, letters, or copy. An act of maintenance or repair or
repainting a previously painted sign face, or repapering a previously papered
sign, or other similar manner of changing a sign face, none of which would
increase the degree of nonconformity, shall not be deemed as replacement
hereunder and shall be permitted.



   (D)   Prohibited signage. The following types of signage shall be
prohibited:



      (1)   Portable signs as defined by this chapter;



      (2)   Balloons or any inflatable device exceeding four feet in
diameter;



      (3)   Swinging signs;



      (4)   Signs which rotate more than six revolutions per minute;



      (5)   Banners, other than for identifying a special event as
set forth in temporary signs;



      (6)   Any sign attached to a stand pipe or fire escape;



      (7)   Any sign which impedes access to any door, window, or
fire escape;



      (8)   Unauthorized signs on public property;



      (9)   Any sign which facsimilates traffic control devices or
emergency vehicles by reason of shape, color, or other feature;



      (10)   Any on-site sign attached to an off-site installation
which increases the existing sign face area;



      (11)   Any off-site sign attached to an on-site sign
installation; and



      (12)   Any other type of signage which does not comply with
the regulations and provisions of this chapter.



   (E)   Locations within the right-of-way. No sign shall be located
within any existing or prospective public street right-of-way as classified
by the transportation/circulation element of the City of San Luis General
Plan, and its successors, nor shall any portion of a sign or sign structure
overhang such right-of-way, except as provided in the San Luis City Code or
the Arizona Revised Statutes.



   (F)   Signage for which no permits are required. Permits shall not
be required for any of the following sign installations, provided, however,
that such installations shall meet all other requirements of this chapter as
may be applicable.



      (1)   Changing the copy of a sign previously designed with
interchangeable panels, letters, or other graphics.



      (2)   Cleaning, repair, repapering, repainting a previously
painted sign, or other maintenance, including replacement of a sign face
necessitated by damage or deterioration, none of which increases the existing
sign face area. No activity shall be contrary to the requirements of division
(C) of this section (nonconforming signage) and § 152.261(D)(4) (damaged or
deteriorated signage).



      (3)   The painting of any on-site signage, whether permanent
or temporary, within a window of any building wall, or the installation or
modification, of any merchandise display within an existing window.



      (4)   Temporary signage not exceeding 32 square feet in area,
or six feet in height.



   (G)   Exempt signage. The following types of sign installations
shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



      (1)   Flags of a nation, state, or other governmental entity.



      (2)   Government signs for street names, traffic control, or
other regulatory purpose of the government.



      (3)   Holiday decorations.



      (4)   Signage located within the interior of any building or
other enclosure, and not visible from any public right-of-way or adjoining
property, provided, however, this provision shall not exempt such
installations from the requirement for any electrical permit, such as an
illuminated sign within an enclosed mall, any structural permit, or other
requirement of an applicable building code or other regulation adopted by the
city.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.257  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED SIGNAGE.  A sign which no longer identifies or advertises
bona fide business, leaser, service, owner, product or activity, and/or for
which no legal sign owner can be found.



   ANIMATED SIGNS.  Any sign which displays or employs action or
movement, whether driven by mechanical means or wind actuated; signs which
only rotate shall not be included in this category.



   BALLOONS/INFLATABLE DEVICES.  One or more balloons or inflatable
devices used as a permanent or temporary sign or as a means of directing
attention to: any business or profession; a commodity or service sold,
offered, or manufactured; or to any entertainment.



   BANNER.  Any sign consisting of paper, fabric, canvass, rubber,
plastic, or the like, with no other material for rigid structural support.



   BUILDING FACADE.  An exterior elevation of a building, extending from
the average grade level of the adjoining ground within five feet of the
building wall to the top line of the roof or parapet wall, and also extending
the entire width of the building elevation.



   BUSINESS PURPOSES.  Pertaining to economic dealings or mercantile
activity, which are engaged in as a means of livelihood.



   CANOPY.  An architectural projection beyond the external wall of a
building forming part of the building façade.



   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE.  A message displayed or caused to be displayed
before the public for business purposes involving or pertaining to the
manufacture or sale of products, property, accommodations, services,
attractions, or activities, which:



      (1)   Refers to the offer for sale or existence for sale of
products, property, accommodations, services, attractions, or activities; or



      (2)   Attracts attention to a business or to products,
property, accommodations, services, attractions, or activities, that are
offered or exist for sale or for hire.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A temporary sign identifying an architect,
contractor, subcontractor, lender and/or material supplier participating in
construction on the property on which the sign is located.



   COPY.  The words, letters, symbols, illustrations, or other graphic
characters used to convey the message of a sign.



   DEGREE OF NONCONFORMITY.  The extent to which any sign or sign
structure does not conform to the standards and requirements of this chapter,
such as the height, sign face area, setback, vertical clearance, number of
signs, or manner of keeping.



   DEVELOPMENT SIGN.  An on-site sign at the entry of a development
indicating the name of a park, subdivision, complex or center.



   DIGITAL DISPLAY.  Computer controlled electronic off-site signs that
transmit light through the use of light emitting diode display (LED)
technology.



   EXPRESSWAY. Expressway (150' ROW; access at ½ mile intersections).



   FESTOONS.  A sign where incandescent light bulbs, banners, balloons,
pennants or other such features are hung, strung overhead or tied together
and which are not an integral, physical part of the building or structure
they are intended to serve.



   FLAG.  A piece of cloth, varying in size, shape, color, and design,
usually attached at one edge to a staff or cord, and used as the symbol of a
nation, state, or organization, as a means of signaling, and the like;
ensign; standard; banner; pennant.



   FLASHING SIGN.  Any sign which contains a source of light, internal or
external, that intermittently cuts on and off, or which creates the illusion
of flashing or intermittent light through animation or other means.



   FREE-STANDING SIGN.  Any sign permanently anchored to the ground which
stands alone on its own foundation and structural supports, and free of
support from any building. Any signage mounted on the roof of any building
shall not be considered as a FREE-STANDING SIGN.



   GRAFFITI.  A drawing or inscribing a message, slogan, sign or symbol
or mark of any type that is made on any public or private building, structure
or surface, and that is made without the permission of the owner. (City of
San Luis Ord. No. 220).



   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.  For the purpose of regulating sign locations,
when a building facade has various elevations the height of the predominant
elevation shall be the building height. Where a predominant elevation cannot
be determined, the lowest height shall govern. In all situations, a sign
shall not extend outside the silhouette of the wall/roof to which it is
attached.



   INDEXING SIGN.  Any sign designed with multi-sided sign faces which is
operated by some mechanical device, thereby causing the faces to alternately
turn and stop.



   MAXIMUM HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the uppermost
point of the sign face or sign structure, whichever is higher, to the street
grade of the nearest driving lane.



   MONUMENT SIGN.  A freestanding sign, where the entire bottom of the
sign is affixed to the ground and provides a solid and continuous background
for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign, which is detached
from a building, and the support structure is a base constructed of a
permanent material. The height of any monument base or other structure
erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign
height. The sign shall be clad to the ground with a base not less than 75% of
the total sign width. The height of the structure erected to support or
ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height.



   MURAL.  A wall-mounted sign with any picture, scene, or diagram
displayed on any exterior wall or fence with the written permission of the
property-owner. The work may be a mosaic, painting, graphic art or any
combination thereof. The work shall not include any advertising, gang
identification, profanity, or any sign or language which promotes the
resentment or hatred of other races or classes of people. MURALS determined
to be advertising by the Zoning Administrator shall be considered a sign and
shall be included in the calculations of allowable sign area.



   NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE.  A message that is not a commercial message.



   OFF-SITE SIGN.  Any sign that may display a message, whether
commercial or noncommercial, that does not necessarily relate to the premises
upon which such sign is located.



   ON-SITE SIGN.  Any sign which pertains to the business operated,
activity conducted, or products sold or manufactured, on the premises upon
which such sign is located, or which displays a noncommercial message
installed or caused to be installed only by the property owner and/or lessee
of the property upon which the sign is located.



   PARAPET.  A wall extending above the plateline of the building.



   PEDESTAL SIGN.  A freestanding, ground mounted sign, detached from a
building, and where the support structure is a base constructed of a
permanent material. The support structure of a pedestal sign and sign face
shall be designed as one architecturally unified and proportional element.
The sign shall be clad to the ground with a base not less than 65% of the
total sign width. The height of the structure erected to support or ornament
the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height.



   PERMANENT SIGN.  Any sign set in the ground with its own foundation,
or which is painted on or otherwise anchored to a building, wall, or other
permanent structure, and any of which are installed to achieve a lasting and
enduring condition and location.



   PLATELINE.  The point where the roof structure first touches an
external wall.



   POLE SIGN.  A free standing sign which is supported by one or more
structural elements that are either (a) architecturally dissimilar to the
design of the sign or (b) which is less than one-fourth of the width of the
sign face. The bottom edge of the sign face is eight feet or more above
finished grade.



   POLITICAL SIGN.  A sign as regulated by A.R.S. § 16-1019.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  Any signage which is designed to be placed upon the
ground, rather than anchored to the ground or to any structure, and which may
be moved without disassembly or excavation of the sign or sign structure.



   PREMISES.  Any property or properties developed as a unit, including
all building(s), off-street parking, points of access, common area, and any
other appurtenances, all of which allows the parcel to function as a whole.



   PRIMARY BUILDING FACADE.  The particular facade of a building which
faces the street to which the address of the building pertains.



   ROOF.  The protective cover of a building.



   ROOFLINE.  The highest point of the main roof structure or parapet
wall, not including cupolas, pylons, projections, or minor raised portions of
the roof.



   SIGN.  Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue
or device, which is affixed directly or indirectly upon a parcel, building,
structure, or other surface, and used or intended to attract the attention of
the public when visible from any position on or off the premises upon which
displayed.



   SIGN FACE AREA.  The area of the smallest single geometric figure or
figures which entirely encloses both the copy and facing of the sign. The
spaces between letters, symbols, and numerals, which make words or elements
of the sign, and contrasting backgrounds, illustrations, borders, or other
devices shall be included.



      (1)   Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all
faces shall be included in determining the sign area, except that only one
face of a double-faced sign shall be considered where the angle between faces
does not exceed 30 degrees and the distance between faces does not exceed
five feet.



      (2)   Where the sign is a statue or similar three-dimensional
figure, the sign area shall be the sum of the four vertical rectangular faces
of the smallest polyhedron that entirely encloses such statue or figure.



   SIGN HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the top of the sign
and supporting frame or trim, if any, to the ground at the base of the sign
or street grade level, whichever may be the lower.



   STREET ADDRESS FRONTAGE.  The total linear dimension of the property
line which coincides with the edge of the adjoining street right-of-way to
which the address of the property pertains.



   STREET FRONTAGE.  The total linear dimension of all property lines
which coincide with the edge of an adjoining street right-of-way.



   SWINGING SIGN.  Any sign face which is suspended at one or more
points, but is not rigidly and permanently anchored to a building, wall,
post, or other support structure.



   TEMPORARY SIGNAGE.  Any signage which is set in the ground but not
permanently set in its own footing or foundation, nor permanently anchored to
a building, wall, or other structure.



   TRANSIT BENCH SIGN.  A sign located on a bench at a designated public
stop, in a City of San Luis public right-of-way.



   TRANSIT SHELTER SIGN.  A sign located on a transit shelter at a
designated public transit stop in a City of San Luis public right-of-way.



   TRI-VISION SIGN.  A sign that uses vertical venetian type triangular
panels to display one or more messages on an existing or proposed off-site
sign. Such signs shall change at intervals of three seconds or more. This
type of technology shall not be permitted on any other type of sign.



   UNAUTHORIZED SIGNAGE.  Any signage, irrespective of the method of
installation, which is erected on property without the permission of the
property owner.



   UNDER-CANOPY SIGN.  Any sign suspended from the underside of a canopy,
roof, covered walkway, porch, or cantilever projection from a building.



   VEHICULAR SIGNAGE.  Any sign which is attached to or painted on a
vehicle (motorized or drawn) which is parked and visible from the public
right-of-way for the express purpose of promoting an off-site activity.
VEHICULAR SIGNAGE is subject to the regulations for temporary signs.



   VERTICAL CLEARANCE.  The vertical distance measured from the bottom
edge of a sign face to the street grade of the nearest driving lane.



   WALL-MOUNTED SIGN.  Any sign attached to a wall of a building, whether
or not parallel to the wall surface, including any sign painted on a wall
surface.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.258  ON-SITE SIGNAGE.



   (A)   Zoning district. On-site signage shall be permitted within any
zoning district, subject to the general requirements of this chapter and the
design standards as specified in this section.



   (B)   Address/nameplates. One address and nameplate not exceeding
one square foot in area shall be allowed as a matter of right for any
building within any zoning district, and shall be in addition to the maximum
sign areas specified herein.



   (C)   Freestanding signs on shared premises. Where more than one
user shares the same premises, not more than one permanent free-standing,
on-site sign shall be allowed for each street upon which the premises front,
in accordance with the design standards as specified herein.



   (D)   Standards and criteria for permanent on-site signage. Any
permanent on-site signage proposed for installation shall conform with the
standards and criteria indicated in the Table No. 16 below. The number of any
permanent on-site sign structures and the amount of any permanent on-site
sign face area which already exists on any given premises shall be counted in
accordance with these standards and criteria when determining the amount of
permanent signage which may be added.



   (E)   The support structure for any sign shall be set back a minimum
of 12 feet from any street right-of-way line and no vertical clearance shall
be less than eight feet. The minimum setback from the street right-of-way
line to the leading edge of the sign face shall be a minimum of three feet
from the street right-of-way line.



   (F)   If the sign (including support structure) does not exceed
three feet maximum height, a minimum three foot setback from the street
right-of-way line shall be required.



TABLE No. 16



Standards and Criteria for Permanent On-Site Signage



 


Zoning District

 

Type of Installation

 

Maximum Total Area of All Sign Face(s)

 

Maximum Area of Any Sign Face

 

Maximum Number of Signs

 

Max Height




Within St. Setback

 

Outside of St. Setback





Agricultural districts
 

F-S



W-M

 
24 sq. ft.
 

12 sq. ft.

 
1 of each installation type per street frontage
 

F-S: 6'



W-M: n/a

 

F-S: 12'



W-M: (*)



Residential districts
 

F-S



W-M

 
2 sq. ft. for each dwelling
 

2. sq. ft.

 
1 per dwelling unit
 

F-S: 4'



W-M: n/a

 

F-S: 6'



W-M: (*)



50 sq. ft per development
 

50 sq. ft.

 
2 per entrance


24 sq. ft for each non- residential use
 

24 sq. ft.

 
1 of each installation per street frontage


Commercial/ industrial districts
 

F-S

 
1 sq. ft. per 1 lin. ft. of street frontage upon which the sign is located
(a)(b)
 

300 sq. ft.

 
1 per street frontage
 

35'




W-M



R-M

 
15% of primary building facade
 

300 sq. ft.

 
n/a
 

n/a

 

(*)




U-C

 
4 sq. ft. per front entrance
 

4 sq. ft.

 
1 per front entrance
 

n/a

 

(**)





 



Footnotes: F-S (Free-standing), W-M (Wall-mounted), U-C (Under-canopy), R-M
(Room-mounted), n/a (not applicable)



(*)   A minimum distance below the top of the building’s wall equal to
ten % of the height of the wall, or a distance equal to 25% the narrow
dimension of the sign whichever is less restrictive; signs on a pitched roof
must be located a minimum distance below the roofline equal to 20% of the
building’s height.



(**)   Maximum height not applicable; however, a minimum 7' vertical
clearance shall be required from walking grade to the bottom of the sign.



(a)   In the event that more than one sign is erected on a parcel with
more than one street frontage as permitted herein, a minimum space shall be
required between signs equal to one-half the length of the total street
frontage. Such spacing shall be measured along the street lines. In no event
shall more than one permanent free-standing, on-site sign be erected on any
street frontage, except as provided herein.



(b)   A free-standing on-site sign structure may be erected at the corner
of any lot or parcel under one of the following options:



   (1)   One corner sign with a maximum sign face area equal to the sum
of the two intersecting street frontages, up to 300 square feet maximum,
provided, however, that no other free-standing on-site sign shall be erected
along either of the two intersecting frontages; or



   (2)   One corner sign with a maximum sign face area equal to either
of the two intersecting frontages, up to 300 square feet maximum, provided
however, that no other free-standing on-site sign shall be erected along
whichever frontage is used for calculation purposes.



In the event that a lot or parcel has more than two street frontages, a
free-standing on-site sign may be erected on each resultant corner, provided
that the total number of such signs shall not exceed the total number of
street frontages, and in no event shall any street frontage be counted more
than once for the purpose of calculating the maximum allowable sign face area
Corner signs shall also be subject to all other design standards and
requirements of this chapter, such as height, setback, spacing between
on-site signs on the same parcel, shared premises, and the like, as may be
applicable.



   (G)   The maximum allowable sign height shall be 35 feet.



   (H)   The maximum total sign face area as specified for this
category may be distributed among each building facade or roof section.



   (I)   Monument sign. The height of any monument base or other
structure erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part
of the sign height. The sign shall be clad to the ground with a base not less
than 75% of the total sign width. The height of any monument base or other
structure erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part
of the sign height. To encourage design flexibility, the maximum height of
the sign may be lowered in order to decrease required setback from the
street. No signs shall be permitted within visibility sight triangles. Low
profile signs shall be setback, at a minimum, from the property line as
follows:



      (1)   Over six feet in height      12 foot setback



      (2)   Four feet to six feet in height   six foot setback



      (3)   Four feet or less in height   three foot setback



   (J)   Directional signage. Signage provided for the sole purpose of
traffic circulation and direction on the premises shall be permitted within
any zoning district in the amount of ten square feet per street entrance, and
shall be permitted in addition to the maximum on-site sign areas specified
herein.



   (K)   Public facilities and religious institutions. All signs for
public facilities and religious institutions, in any zoning district, shall
comply with the following criteria:



      (1)   Maximum total sign face area of all signs = 150 square
feet;



      (2)   Maximum sign face area per sign (freestanding) = 50
square feet;



      (3)   Maximum sign face area per sign (wall-mounted) = 100
square feet;



      (4)   Maximum number of signs = one of each installation type
per street frontage;



      (5)   Maximum height outside streetyard setback = 19 feet;



      (6)   Maximum height inside streetyard setback = 4 feet
(subject to visibility and clearance requirements); and



      (7)   Minimum streetyard setback = 12 feet.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.259  TEMPORARY SIGNAGE.



   (A)   Any temporary signage proposed for installation shall conform
with the standards and criteria indicated in the following Table No. 17,
except that the number of signs displaying only a noncommercial message may
exceed the maximum number of signs on any given lot or parcel.



   (B)   Lighting for temporary sign installations shall be prohibited.



   (C)   Balloons and inflatable devices; festoons. The following
applies to the use of balloons, other inflatable devices, or festoons used as
signs:



      (1)   Individual balloons, other inflatable devices, strings
of balloons, or festoons shall not be higher than the building located on the
site;



      (2)   Individual balloons, other inflatable devices, strings
of balloons, or festoons shall be tethered to the ground a distance from the
property line equal to the balloon height;



      (3)   Individual balloons, other inflatable devices, strings
of balloons, or festoons are required to be maintained solely on the property
of the business for which it is advertising;



      (4)   Individual balloons, other inflatable devices, strings
of balloons, or festoons are not allowed to cross into the right-of-way,
whether in the air or on the ground; and



      (5)   Individual balloons, other inflatable devices, strings
of balloons, or festoons are not allowed to be cut loose or to blow away. The
maintenance and disposal of the balloons is the responsibility of the
business that they are advertising. Balloons must be removed and disposed of
properly.



TABLE No. 17



Standards and Criteria for Temporary Signage



 


Zoning District

 

Type of Installation

 

Max. Area of Any Sign Face

 

Max. # of Signs

 

Max. Height




Within St. Setback

 

Outside of St. Setback



Agricultural districts
 
Free-standing Wall-mounted
 
32 sq. ft.
 
1 per street frontage
 

6'

 

12'



Residential districts
 
Free-standing Wall-mounted
 
10 sq. ft.

(less than 1 ac.)
 
1 per lot or parcel
 

6

 

6'



32 sq. ft.

(1 ac. or more)
 
1 per street frontage
 

6'

 

8'



Commercial / industrial districts
 
Free-standing
 
100 sq. ft.
 
1 per street frontage
 

6'

 

12'



Wall-mounted
 
32 sq. ft.
 
1 per building facade
 
A distance below the uppermost line of the wall upon which mounted, equal to
½ the vertical dimension of sign



 



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Am. Ord. 350, passed 6-8-2016)



§ 152.260  POLITICAL SIGNS ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   The Arizona Revised Statutes control the removal of political signs.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Am. Ord. 350, passed 6-8-2016)



§ 152.261  OFF-SITE SIGNAGE.



   (A)   General. Off-site signage shall be permitted in accordance
with the specific standards and criteria set forth in this section, as well
as with the additional requirements and provisions of this chapter pertaining
to all signage.



   (B)   Required zoning districts and frontages. Off-site signage
shall be permitted only on parcels zoned with a General Commercial (C-2) or
Light Industrial (L-I) zoning classification which front along a major
arterial street or minor arterial street, as classified by the
transportation/circulation element of the City of San Luis General Plan, and
its successors.



   (C)   Standards and criteria for off-site signage. Any off-site
signage proposed for installation shall conform with the standards and
criteria set forth in the following. The size and location of any off-site
signage which already exists shall be considered when determining the amount
and location of any new signage proposed for installation under these
standards:



      (1)   Sign face area. The maximum sign face area shall not
exceed 300 square feet.



      (2)   Sign height and vertical clearance. The maximum sign
height shall not exceed 35 feet. In all cases, a minimum ten foot vertical
clearance measured from street grade of the nearest driving lane to the
lowest line of the sign face shall be required.



      (3)   Setback. The minimum setback from any portion of the
sign face or sign structure shall be either 55 feet from the center line of
the arterial street right-of-way or 15 feet from the right-of-way line,
whichever produces the greater setback.



      (4)   Spacing. A minimum 600 foot distance, measured as a
radius, shall be required between off-site sign installations. In addition,
no more than four off-site sign installations shall be located within a
linear mile measured along the same street, wherein the beginning point and
ending point of such mile coincide with a section line.



      (5)   Method of installation. Each off-site sign shall be
erected as a free-standing sign installation as defined by this chapter. No
off-site sign shall be erected on the wall or roof of any building.



   (D)   Prohibited locations. Off-site signage shall be prohibited at
any of the following locations:



      (1)   Less than 150 feet from the nearest property line of any
residential zoning district;



      (2)   In any block where the front one-third of any lot or
parcels used for residential purposes comprises 50% or more of the block
frontage;



      (3)   Less than 1,500 feet from the exterior boundary of any
federal, state, county, or municipal historic park, monument, or district; and



      (4)   Main Street south of Co. 22nd Street.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.262  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   General. The following requirements and provisions shall be
applicable to all sign installations as regulated by this chapter, both
on-site and off-site, whether permanent or temporary.



   (B)   Responsibilities. The administration and enforcement of these
regulations shall be the responsibility of the City of San Luis Zoning
Administrator and the Building Official, in accordance with the customary
duties and responsibilities of each official, respectively, and as further
provided by § 152.010.



   (C)   Issuance of building permits.



      (1)   Permits required. A permit issued by the City of San
Luis Building Safety Division shall be required for the installation,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or replacement of all signs and
sign structures as specified in the following; failure to obtain such permit
shall be considered a violation of this chapter. Approval of such permit by
the city shall not eliminate any requirement to secure a permit from the
State of Arizona pursuant to state law where applicable.



         (a)   Application. All permit applications shall be in
the form prescribed by the Building Safety Division, and shall further
include the information required by this section.



         (b)   Permanent signage. A permit shall be required for
all permanent sign installations as regulated by this chapter, including the
painting or other attachment of any signage on the exterior of any building,
wall, roof, fence, or other outdoor surface as a new sign installation. In
applying for such permit, the sign owner shall indicate in writing whether
the sign is to be an on-site or an off-site sign installation.



         (c)   Temporary signage. A permit shall be required for
any temporary sign installation exceeding 32 square feet in sign face area,
or exceeding six feet in height, provided, however, that the installer of any
temporary sign exceeding ten square feet in sign face area shall register its
location, as permitted by this chapter, with the City of San Luis Department
of Planning and Zoning. In applying for such a permit for temporary signage
as required herein, the applicant shall indicate in writing the date by which
such signage shall be removed.



         (d)   Electrical permits. If the sign or sign structure
is to be illuminated by electrical means, a separate electrical permit shall
be required in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
Electrical Code as adopted by the City of San Luis.



      (2)   Requirements for permit applications. Each application
for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a plan or plan(s) drawn to scale
which indicate the following:



         (a)   Complete dimensions to illustrate the sign face
area, the height of the sign structure if freestanding, or the dimensions of
the wall, roof, or canopy upon which mounted or painted;



         (b)   The total amount of sign face area already
existing on the property, whether permanent or temporary, on-site and
off-site, and their locations;



         (c)   The location of the sign installation on the
property, as well as the location of all property lines, curb lines, curb
cuts, and sidewalks pertinent to the sign location;



         (d)   The method of attachment, illumination, and
structural support; any calculations as may be required by the Building
Official shall also be included; and



         (e)   The exact location of the property upon which the
signage is to be installed, either by address or legal description.



   (D)   Fees.



      (1)   Permit fee. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a
sign installation, the Building Safety Division shall collect a permit fee in
the amount specified by Table No. 3A of the Uniform Building Code, current
edition, and any successors or amendments, as adopted by the city.



         (a)   Such fee shall be based on the total valuation of
the sign and sign structure, whether or not made locally, as calculated
according to the Building Valuation Data maintained by the Building Safety
Division. The building valuation data includes the unit cost per square foot
sign face area for illuminated and non-illuminated signage.



         (b)   For any addition to an existing sign or sign
structure, the valuation shall be based upon the square footage of the sign
face area to be added.



      (2)   Plan check fee. In addition to the permit fee, a plan
check fee shall be collected by the Building Safety Division in the amount of
65% of the permit fee. The plan check fee shall be required at the time that
a permit is applied for and plans are submitted, and shall be paid whether or
not a permit is issued.



      (3)   Investigation fees. Should there begin any work for
which a permit is required by this chapter, and no permit has been issued,
the Building Safety Division shall conduct a special investigation prior to
issuing any permit for such work. The investigation fee shall equal, and be
in addition to, the permit fee.



         (a)   In addition, the party performing work shall be
subject to the penal provisions of this chapter, well as the applicable
provisions of any other code or ordinance adopted by the city.



         (b)   A re-inspection fee shall be assessed when the
work for which the inspection is called is not complete, or when corrections
previously noted have not been made. Such fee shall be as set forth in the
current building code and its successors, and shall be collected by the
Building Safety Division prior to conducting any further re-inspections.



   (E)   Construction and installation standards.



      (1)   Codes and ordinances. All signs, sign structures, and
other components including electrical features, shall be designed,
constructed, and installed in accordance with the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and regulations previously adopted, or
subsequently adopted, by the city. Those codes and ordinances shall dictate
such standards as the means of structural support, allowable stresses,
construction materials, wind loads, vibration resistance, seismic loads,
electrical wiring, and the like.



      (2)   Sign label. The building permit number as required by
the City of San Luis Building Safety Division shall be permanently affixed to
each sign installation, whether permanent or temporary, for which a building
permit is required under this chapter. Any temporary signage for which no
permit is required under this chapter shall be affixed with the telephone
number of the sign owner. Such information shall be affixed by a weatherproof
label, inscription, or other permanent means, in a manner legible upon close
inspection.



      (3)   Maintenance. Every sign shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable, and good structural condition at all times, including the
replacement of defective parts, repainting, cleaning, and other acts
necessary for the maintenance of the sign. If the sign is not made to comply
with adequate safety standards, the City Building Official may require its
removal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   Damaged or deteriorated signage. Any sign or structure
which is damaged or has deteriorated to an extent that the cost of repair
equals 50% or more of the replacement value of the sign if sound, shall
either be rebuilt or replaced in conformance with the standards and
requirements of this chapter, or be removed altogether.



      (5)   Sign removal. The Building Official shall cause the
repair or removal of any sign that endangers the public safety, such as
materially dangerous, electrically or structurally defective sign, or an
abandoned sign, according to the following provisions. The following
provisions pertaining to notice, appeal, and reoccurrence shall also apply to
all signage which is temporary signage extending beyond the permitted time
limits according to the criteria specified by this chapter.



         (a)   Notice. Written notice shall be sent to the owner
of the sign if it is an off-site sign, or to the owner of the premises upon
which an on-site sign is situated. Such notice shall identify any hazards,
defects, and deficiencies of the sign or sign structure, and the specific
section(s) of this chapter or other applicable building code or ordinance
adopted by the city to which the violations pertain. The notice shall further
indicate what repairs or other action, if any, would correct the violation(s)
as noted, and shall specify a period of 30 days for either the repair or
removal to be accomplished.



         (b)   Appeal. The owner of the sign, or the owner of the
building or property, upon which it is situated, may appeal the order of the
Building Official for removal or repair, by filing a written notice with the
Building Official within ten days after receipt of the notice, for final
consideration by the appropriate City Board. The Board of Adjustment shall
consider appeals pertaining to removal of abandoned signage, as well as any
appeals from any interpretation made by the Zoning Administrator.



         (c)   Emergency. Should the Building Official determine
that the sign or sign structure causes imminent danger to the public safety,
contact shall be made with the owner to require immediate removal or
correction. In the event that contact cannot be made with the owner, or the
owner fails to correct the danger, the Building Official shall correct the
danger by ordering the sign removal. Any sign removed by the Building
Official pursuant to such emergency shall be disposed of in the manner deemed
appropriate by City Council, upon recommendation by the Building Official.
All costs associated with removal of such sign by the city, including all
incidental costs, shall be considered a debt owed to the city by the owner of
the sign if it is an off-site sign, or the owner of the property if it is an
on-site sign, and shall be recovered in the following manner.



            1.   The Building Official shall submit a report
to the City Clerk for public hearing by the City Council. Such report shall
include a description of the work done, an itemized account of all expenses
incurred, a legal description of the property upon which the signage is or
was located, and the name(s) and address(es) of the property owner and/or
sign owner, if reasonably ascertainable.



            2.   The City Clerk shall cause notice of the
public hearing to be posted on the property involved, published once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city, and served by certified
mail to the owner of the property if it is an on-site sign, according to the
names and addresses shown on the city assessment roll, and to the owner of
the sign if it is an off-site sign if such name and address are reasonably
ascertainable. Such notice as specified herein shall be given at least ten
days prior to the hearing, and shall further specify the day, hour, and place
for the hearing.



            3.   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the
City Council shall confirm or deny the report, with or without any
modifications as it deems appropriate, and shall determine whether the
charges are to be recovered by personal obligation of the property owner.
Should Council order that the charges shall be a personal obligation of the
property owner and/or the sign owner, the City Attorney shall be authorized
to collect the same by use of all appropriate legal remedies.



   (F)   Variances and conditional use permits. Variances or
conditional use permits may be granted by the appropriate City Board as
specified herein, to allow relief from the design standards specified by this
chapter. However, no relief shall be granted to permit the erection of signs
which are prohibited by §§ 152.256(D) and 152.260(D).



      (1)   Requests for variances from the design criteria of this
chapter, such as, but not limited to, the setback, size, height, location,
spacing, and number of signs, as well as the requirements pertaining to the
manner of keeping, shall be considered by the City of San Luis Board of
Adjustment. Such variance requests, as well as any appeal from an
interpretation made by the Zoning Administrator, shall be considered in
accordance with the requirements and criteria of the zoning ordinance.
However, since it is the intent of this chapter to secure the gradual and
eventual elimination, rather than expansion, of nonconforming signs and sign
structures, the Board of Adjustment shall not grant any variance to increase
the degree of nonconformity for any existing signage.



      (2)   Requests for variances from the structural or mechanical
requirements of any building code as may be adopted by the city, or any
appeal from an interpretation made by the Building Official, shall be
considered by the appropriate board, such as the Board of Appeals or the
Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with their adopted procedures.



      (3)   Request for a conditional use permit shall be considered
by the City Council in accordance with § 152.043. A conditional use permit
to allow a sign projecting above the roofline of a building shall be
permitted only after review and approval by the City Council.



   (G)   Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate, or cause the violation of any provision of this
subchapter. Each separate day, or part thereof, that a violation continues is
a separate offense. Any violation of or failure to do or perform any act
required by this subchapter constitutes a civil offense punishable pursuant
to § 10.99. Any third, or more, offense committed within one year of the
date of the first offense shall be punishable as a class one misdemeanor
pursuant to § 10.99.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012; Ord. 367, passed 10-11-2017)




OUTDOOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS




§ 152.275  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to create standards of outdoor
lighting. It is intended to ensure appropriate lighting levels that support
way-finding and crime prevention, assist people with visual impairments,
allow flexibility in architectural design, minimize undesirable light and
glare into adjoining properties, minimize light pollution into the nighttime
sky and conserve energy and resources through regulation of the types, kinds,
construction, installation and use of outdoor electrically powered
illuminating devices.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.276  CONFORMANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES.



   (A)   All artificial outdoor illuminating devices (luminaires) shall
be installed and utilized in conformance with the provisions of this
subchapter, and all other ordinances or building codes of the city.



   (B)   Where any provisions of the Arizona State Statutes, or any
federal law, or any companion ordinance conflicts with the requirements of
these outdoor lighting provisions the most restrictive shall govern.



   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter are not intended to promote
the use of any one light source, material, or method of installation. This
subchapter does however prohibit certain light sources. The city may consider
any state of the art technology, which is consistent with the intent of the
chapter, as new lighting technology develops which is useful in reducing
light above the horizontal plane.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.277  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The following definitions are specific terms that supplement
the term OUTDOOR LIGHTING as defined in § 152.013.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FOOTCANDLE (fc).  A unit of illuminance of equal to 1 lm/ft²
(lumen/square foot) or 10.76 lx (lux).



      FULLY SHIELDED (FULL CUTOFF).  A fixture constructed (or
shielded with an opaque material) so that light rays emitted by the fixture,
either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected
only below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture
where light is emitted.



      IESNA.  Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.



      OPAQUE.  Impervious to the passage of light and not reflecting
light.



      OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE (LUMINAIRE).  Artificial outdoor
illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or
portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include,
but are not limited to: search, spot or flood lights; security lights;
parking lot lighting; landscape lighting; recreational areas and pathway
lighting; exterior building or structure illumination; street lights; signage
lighting; and shall include the complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp
or lamps and ballast(s) (when applicable) together with the parts designed to
distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps and to connect the
lamps to the power supply. Traffic lights are not OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES.



      PARTIALLY SHIELDED (PARTIAL CUTOFF).  A fixture constructed (or
shielded) so that the bottom edge of the lens extends below the bottom plane
of the fixture, and that allow some light to extend above the horizontal
plane extending from the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.



      SECURITY LIGHTING.  Lighting that is fully shielded that is
intended to provide bright illumination during emergency situations only.



      SPILL LIGHT.  The amount of light that illuminates beyond the
range or primary area that the fixture is intended to light.



      TRANSLUCENT.  Admitting and diffusing light so that objects and
the light source beyond cannot be clearly perceived.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.278  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Illumination in general. Exterior lighting shall provide for
appropriate and desirable nighttime illumination for all uses on and related
to the site, including, but not limited to, pedestrian pathways, plazas,
courtyards, building entrances, parking and driveway areas, automatic teller
machines (ATMs), and other outdoor spaces commonly used at night. Lighting of
exterior areas shall reduce conflicts between building design and landscape
treatments, provide appropriate surveillance for crime prevention, and
minimize glare or intrusive light onto adjoining properties and into the
night sky.



   (B)   Illumination levels. The maximum illumination level for any
on-site lighting should not exceed 30 lux or three footcandles when measured
at grade. When adjacent to or for residential uses the maximum illumination
levels should not exceed ten lux or one footcandle. Refer to the specific
regulations herein for the different kind of community lighting standards and
to § 152.281 for exceptions and/or waivers.



   (C)   Light trespass. All outdoor light fixtures, unless otherwise
stated in this chapter, shall be directed downward and properly aimed on the
targeted areas to maximize their effectiveness and minimize the total number
of lighting fixtures necessary. Outdoor light fixtures shall be directed away
from any residential property and shall not detract from driver visibility on
adjacent streets. Spill light from any fixture shall be minimized and shall
not spill beyond the property line on which the fixture is located. In all
cases the illumination levels should not exceed one lux or (0.1 fc) at the
property line when measured at grade.



   (D)   Shielding. All outdoor light fixtures, unless otherwise stated
in this chapter, shall be fully or partially shielded as denoted in Table No.
18 of this section. Refer to § 152.281 for exceptions and/or waivers. Light
sources that must be shielded shall be shielded in a manner that the bulb or
light source from the fixture is not visible from an adjoining property or
from the street view when viewed horizontally to the fixture.



   (E)   Preferred light source. Low pressure sodium lamps are the
preferred light source for minimizing adverse effects on astronomical
observations. However, other light sources as outlined in Table No. 18 that
are more energy efficient are also permitted.



TABLE No. 18



Requirements for Shielding - Outdoor Lighting Regulations



 


Fixture Lamp Type

 

Shielding Requirements (4)





Low pressure sodium (1)
 
Partially shielded


High pressure sodium
 
Fully shielded


Metal halide/warm halide (6)
 
Fully shielded


Fluorescent (2) (7)
 
Fully shielded


Quartz (3)
 
Fully shielded


Incandescent, greater than 75 watts
 
Fully shielded


Incandescent, 75 watts or less
 
Partially shielded


Fossil fuel
 
None


Neon, Argon, Krypton; in glass tubes (5)
 
None


Induction lighting
 
Fully shielded


Other lamp types (4)
 
As approved by the city




 



   Footnotes:




   (1)   This is a preferable lamp type to minimize undesirable light
into the night sky affecting astronomical observations.





   (2)   Warm, white and natural lamps are preferred to minimize
detrimental effects.





   (3)   For the purpose of this chapter, quartz lamps/quartz halogens
shall not be considered an incandescent light source.





   (4)   Or current Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA) guidelines; whichever is more restrictive.




   (5)   Permitted only in commercial zoning districts; prohibited in
all residential zones.



   (6)   Metal halide lighting used display purposes shall not be used
for security lighting after 11:00 p.m. Metal halides shall be installed only
in enclosed luminaries. These lamp fixtures shall be “filtered” bglass,
acrylic or translucent enclosure of the light source (clear quartz glass does
not meet this requirement). Only Pulse Start Metal Halides can now be used in
Arizona.




   (7)   Outdoor advertising signs of this type constructed of
translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within do not require
shielding.




(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.279  SPECIFIC USES OF ILLUMINATION.



   (A)   Building and structures. All lighting fixtures for buildings,
structures and canopies shall adhere to the following requirements. The more
basic style of lighting fixtures are shown in Exhibit No. 3 is for
illustrative purposes only.



      (1)   All building mounted light fixtures shall be fully
shielded and shielded in such a manner as to avoid creating concentrated
light (hot spots) on the structures to which they are mounted. Residential
dwellings may install partially shielded light fixtures such as sconces but
only at the garage and primary entryway.



      (2)   Exterior fixtures shall be mounted in or on a building
wall no higher than necessary to illuminate the area required.



      (3)   In commercial districts, within a 15-foot radius of the
entry door, there shall be some type of lighting to distinguish the building
entrance.



      (4)   Overhead lighting used to light building overhangs and
open canopies (including service station pump island canopies) shall use flat
lenses (rather than drop lenses or refractors) and/or be fully recessed
within the overhang or canopy.



   (B)   Security lighting. If elected, security lighting may be
permitted provided it meets the requirements outlined in division (A) of
this  section and the following:



      (1)   Wall mounted security light fixtures shall comply with
all requirements outlined in division (A) of this section and shall not
exceed a mounting height equal to 1/3 the height of the building wall on
which they are mounted. The maximum height of lighting standards (poles) used
for security purposes, excluding parking lot lighting, should be 12 feet.



      (2)   Fully shielded light fixtures that are activated with
motion sensors are the preferred type for security lighting for all
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional uses; rather than dusk
to dawn type of security lights.



      (3)   In residential zoning districts the motion sensor
security lighting should be controlled separately from all other lighting
with the security lights being on timers that regulate their operation time
to a maximum of ten minutes and limited to lamps with a maximum of 750 lumens.



   (C)   Parking area lighting. The city requires the lighting of
designated parking areas. The use of short bollard style shielded light
fixtures may be considered in lieu of overhead lighting for parking lot
lighting particularly in residential neighborhoods or adjacent to
residentially zoned property. Parking lot lighting requirements shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Within the “C-2” commercial and the “L-I” and
“H-I” industrial zoning districts the maximum height of parking area
lighting standards (poles) shall be 25 feet within the interior of the
parking area and 16 feet at or along the perimeter of the parking area.
Within the “C-1” and “MU” Zoning Districts or if the parking area
abuts a residential zoning district the maximum height of the lighting
standards (poles) shall be 20 feet within the interior of the parking area
and 12 feet at or along the perimeter of the parking area.



      (2)   All parking area lighting, serving commercial and
industrial uses, shall be turned off one-half hour after the close of the
business that the parking area serves or as required for the safety of the
employees leaving the business.



      (3)   Within the multiple residence zoning districts lighting
standards (poles) within the parking areas shall be limited to a maximum
height of 12 feet. Motion sensor/detector light fixtures are encouraged to be
placed under the parking shade canopy to provide both security and parking
area lighting.



   (D)   Outdoor signage. If signage is illuminated it shall adhere to
the following requirements:



      (1)   All lighting fixtures used to externally illuminate an
outdoor sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign structure, shall be
fully shielded and directed downward;



      (2)   Internally illuminated outdoor signs shall be
constructed with a translucent panel material and wholly illuminated from
within in a manner that the bulb or light source from the fixture is not
visible. Dark backgrounds with light lettering and warm white and natural
lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental effects; and



      (3)   Backlit advertising outdoor signage is permitted
provided the bulb or light source is not visible.



   (E)   Ambient and landscape lighting. If desired ambience lighting
may be permitted provided the following:



      (1)   Short bollard style partially shielded light fixtures or
low wattage ornamental twinkle string lighting of specimen trees is preferred
to that of building mounted lighting; and



      (2)   All outdoor ambience lighting fixtures shall be turned
off one-half hour after the close of the business or as required for the
safety of the employees leaving the business.



   (F)   Recreational facilities. If recreational facilities are
lighted they shall adhere to the following:



      (1)   Lighting of outdoor recreational facilities, public or
private, shall be turned off one-half hour after the conclusion of the
recreational or sporting event or as required for the safety of the employees
leaving the facility and shall comply fully with all regulations of this
chapter; and



      (2)   Retention areas used as open space and/or equipped for
recreational uses along with the sidewalk or pathways adjoining the basin
area should be illuminated in compliance with this chapter. If the retention
area is part of a subdivision plat the final plat shall contain a statement
noting compliance with these regulations.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.280  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   The following types of lights and fixtures are prohibited in
the city.



      (1)   Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for
advertising purposes.



      (2)   Mercury vapor. The installation of mercury vapor
fixtures. Existing mercury vapor fixtures are encouraged to be removed and
replaced with compliant lighting fixtures.



      (3)   Signage. Bottom mounted outdoor light fixtures for any
advertising sign lighting.



      (4)   Security lighting. Dusk-to-dawn lights (constantly on)
are discouraged (motion sensor is encouraged). Unshielded wall-pack type
fixtures are prohibited.



      (5)   Landscaping. Unshielded floodlight or spot light
fixtures are prohibited.



      (6)   Floodlighting. Building mounted floodlights used for
area lighting and or yard security lighting is prohibited unless the
floodlight fixture is fully shielded, directed downward, and does not cause
or create spill lighting.



      (7)   Temporary lighting. Any temporary lighting that violates
the provisions of this chapter.



      (8)   Fixtures and/or fixtures similar to those labeled as
prohibited, in Exhibit No. 3, are prohibited by this chapter.



EXHIBIT No. 3



Styles of Building Mounted Light Fixtures



(Examples)







 



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.281  EXEMPTIONS AND WAIVERS.



   (A)   Exemptions. The following types of lights are exempt from the
standards in §§ 152.278 and 152.279.



      (1)   Fossil fuel light (gas). Lighting produced directly or
indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil
fuels is exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Holiday lights. Low wattage outdoor lighting fixtures
for traditional holiday decorations are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter and are a permitted lighting installation; including those installed
by the city.



      (3)   Landscape lighting. Landscape accent lighting consisting
of low voltage light fixtures and/or incandescent bulbs under 35 watts are
exempt provided they are shielded.



      (4)   Prison facilities. Prison facilities are exempt for
public safety and security reasons.



      (5)   Single residence homes. Landscape lighting or decorative
lighting consisting of low voltage light fixtures and/or incandescent bulbs
under 35 watts is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



      (6)   Streetlights. Streetlights in the public right-of-way,
which are governed by the City of San Luis standard details.



      (7)   Recreational venues. Lighting standards (poles) for
athletic playing fields shall be allowed to exceed the height requirements of
this chapter. The maximum illumination limitation level of 30 lux or three
footcandles may be exceeded until 11:00 p.m. No outdoor recreational
facility, public or private, shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. except to
conclude any recreational or sporting event or other activity conducted at
the sports venue, outdoor amphitheater, arena, or similar facility in
progress prior to 11:00 p.m.



   (B)   Waivers. Waivers from this chapter may be administratively
approved by the Zoning Administrator based on consideration of evidence
demonstrating that the proposed solution will provide a benefit without
negative impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.282  PROCEDURES FOR COMPLIANCE.



   Application. Any person applying for a multiple residence, commercial
or industrial building permit, a sign permit and all use permit applications
that intends to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall, as a part of the
application, submit evidence that the proposed lighting will comply with this
chapter. The application shall contain, but shall not necessarily be limited
to, the following information:



   (A)   Plans indicating the proposed luminaire location on the
building and the site (if applicable), and the type of illuminating devices,
fixtures, lamps, supports, other devices, the aiming angles and a statement
of the proposed hours when the luminaries will be on and when they will be
extinguished;



   (B)   Manufacturer’s catalog cut sheets and drawings that describe
the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, lumen outputs and wattages,
supports, and other devices, and the like; and



   (C)   For commercial and industrial uses and for all lighted parking
lots a photometric study that includes a lux/footcandle grid that
demonstrates adequate intensities and uniformity as well as the maximum
lighting intensity measured at the property lines.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS




§ 152.295  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish landscape standards
applicable to all zoning districts. The standards and regulations set forth
in this subchapter shall qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the
district regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.296  PLANT SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Trees. Where required by this chapter trees shall be, upon
installation, a minimum of 15 gallon size with 40% of the required number of
trees to be specimen trees of 24 inch box size or larger.



   (B)   Shrubs. Where required by this chapter shrubs shall be, upon
installation, a minimum of one gallon size with 40% of the required number
being five gallon in size. The use of cactus and/or succulents may be
substituted for up to 50% of the required shrubs.



   (C)   Organic groundcovers. Where required by this chapter shall be
a minimum of one gallon size upon installation. Turf may also be considered
for use in select areas. Turf, when used, should be hypoallergenic (midiron)
grass. An irrigation system for the turf areas shall be installed by approved
standards.



   (D)   Inorganic groundcovers. Where required by this chapter shall
consist of decomposed granite (minimum size 1/2" minus). River rock, or pea
gravel, in select areas, may also be considered.



   (E)   The use of fruit producing species of Olive and Mulberry trees
shall be prohibited.



   (F)   Low water use drought tolerant plant species, as listed in
Appendix A of this chapter, are encouraged. A drip irrigation system is the
preferred method for landscape maintenance, with the exception of turf areas.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.297  LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES.



   (A)   Single residence developments.



      (1)   Required landscaping for a subdivision development shall
include the required open space area, retention or detention basins, along a
canal right-of-way trail system if applicable, and the adjacent public
right-of-way as required in § 152.298.



      (2)   The required landscaping for a subdivision development
shall be installed in proportion to the construction phasing of the project
and in accordance with the approved subdivision landscape plan.



   (B)   Multiple residence developments.



      (1)   The required landscaping for a development shall include
the required common area and open space area, retention or detention basins,
the canal right-of-way trail system if applicable, parking area and the
adjacent public right-of-way as required in § 152.298. Installation of the
required landscaping shall be in accordance with the approved landscape plan
for the development. Any part of the lot or parcel not developed for
buildings, structures, vehicular access, streets, parking and utility areas
shall be landscaped.



      (2)   The required rear and side yards shall contain a
continuous, landscaped buffer area having a minimum width of ten feet and
containing a minimum of one tree and two shrubs every 30 feet, or portion
thereof, to provide visual screening between adjacent uses.



      (3)   All “R-2” zoned developments that abut a single
residence zoned property shall provide and maintain a landscaped buffer area,
a minimum width of ten feet, along the common property line. This landscaped
area shall contain a minimum of one tree and two shrubs every 30 feet, or
portion thereof, to provide a visual screening between adjacent uses.



      (4)   All “R-3” zoned property that abuts a single
residence zoned property shall provide and maintain a landscaped buffer area,
a minimum width of 15 feet, along the common property line. This buffer strip
shall contain a minimum of one tree and two shrubs every 25 feet, or portion
thereof.



      (5)   When adjacent to any single residence zoning district a
perimeter wall, a maximum of six feet in height and decoratively treated on
all sides to match the architectural style and design of the development,
shall be constructed.



      (6)   Vehicular parking areas adjacent to the right-of-way
shall be screened to a height of at least three feet by either a solid
decorative masonry wall or a landscaped berm or a combination thereof. The
slope of any berm shall not exceed a ratio of one to two (1:2) and shall be
landscaped with ground cover to prevent soil erosion. All landscape areas
adjacent to the vehicular parking and access areas shall be protected by a
permanent vertical barrier or containment, in order to minimize damage by
vehicular traffic.



   (C)   Commercial and industrial developments.



      (1)   The required landscaping for an individual site or
development shall include the required building setback area, retention or
detention basins, canal right-of-way trail system if applicable, parking
area, buffer areas, and the adjacent public right-of-way as required in §
152.298. Installation of the required landscaping shall be in accordance with
the approved landscape plan for the individual site or development. Any part
of the lot area not developed for buildings, structures, approved storage,
loading and vehicular access, streets, parking and utility areas shall be
landscaped.



      (2)   All “C-1” zoned commercial developments that abut a
residentially zoned property shall provide and maintain a landscaped buffer
area, a minimum width of ten feet, along the common property line. This
landscaped area shall contain a minimum of one tree and two shrubs every 30
feet, or portion thereof.



      (3)   All “C-2” zoned commercial and “L-I” and
“H-I” zoned industrial developments that abut a residentially zoned
property shall provide and maintain a landscaped buffer area, a minimum width
of 20 feet, along the common property line. This landscaped area shall
contain a minimum of one tree and three shrubs every 25 feet, or portion
thereof. This landscape area shall not be used for parking, maneuvering or
storage. The front yard landscaping is in addition to the streetscape
requirements in § 152.298.



      (4)   Dense landscaping, combined with architectural
treatments, shall be provided to screen unattractive views and features such
as storage areas, trash enclosures, transformers, generators, heavy
mechanical equipment and other similar eyesores.



      (5)   Vehicular parking areas adjacent to the right-of-way
shall be screened to a height of at least three feet by either a solid
decorative masonry wall or a landscaped berm or a combination thereof. The
slope of any berm shall not exceed a ratio of one to two (1:2) and shall be
landscaped with ground cover to prevent soil erosion. All landscape areas
adjacent to the vehicular parking and access areas shall be protected by a
permanent vertical barrier or containment, in order to minimize damage by
vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.298  LANDSCAPE FOR SPECIFIC ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Arterial street requirements.



      (1)   Any lot, parcel or development, or portion thereof, that
is adjacent to an arterial (major or minor) street, as classified in the San
Luis General Plan, shall be required to landscape the undeveloped portion of
the right-of-way, in addition to the on-site landscaping that is required by
this chapter. A minimum of one tree and three shrubs and/or organic
groundcover or cacti per tree shall be planted every 40 feet, or fraction
thereof, in such a manner as to create the appearance of a tree lined street:
exclusive of that portion of the public right-of-way occupied by a driveway
area. Additional streetscape such as, but not limited to, benches, school bus
stops, trash containers, pedestrian path and bike trail are strongly
encouraged.



      (2)   Individual property owners and/or improvement districts
shall properly maintain all landscape materials and landscaped areas,
including that within the public rights-of-way adjacent to their property or
the development, in accordance with the approved landscape plan, except in
and along public rights-of-way and easements where the city has agreed to
provide maintenance.



   (B)   Collectors, local and neighborhood street recommendations.



      (1)   For all residential lots, parcels or developments
(single residence) the landscape plan should include, at a minimum, one
canopy-type shade tree of 15-gallon size or greater for each lot 50 feet or
less in width and two canopy-type shade trees of 15-gallon size or greater
for each lot over 50 feet in width. These trees should be planted in the
front yard close to the back of the sidewalk or within the right-of-way
between the back of curb and the sidewalk if such a separation exists.



      (2)   In areas not associated with a lot, a minimum of one
tree should be planted every 30 feet, or fraction thereof, depending on the
recommended spacing according to each species’ needs. The trees should be
planted either behind the sidewalk or between the back of curb and the
sidewalk, where a sidewalk is required, in a lineal pattern creating a tree
lined street.



      (3)   For multiple residence developments (condominiums,
townhouses, apartments and the like) the landscape plan should include, at a
minimum, one canopy-type shade tree every 30 feet or fraction thereof; with
50% of the trees being specimen trees. These trees should be planted in the
front yard close to the back of the sidewalk or within the right-of-way
between the back of curb and the sidewalk if such a separation exists.



      (4)   Commercial and industrial developments should provide a
minimum of one tree and three shrubs and/or organic groundcover for every 40
lineal foot of street frontage or fraction thereof; exclusive of that portion
of the public rights-of-way occupied by a driveway area.



      (5)   Individual property owners, and/or improvement
districts, should properly maintain all landscape materials and landscaped
areas, including that within the public rights-of-way adjacent to the
development, in accordance with the approved landscape plan, except in and
along public rights-of-way and easements where the city has agreed to provide
maintenance.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.299  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Amount required. In parking lots, at least 10% of the interior
parking area shall be landscaped, exclusive of perimeter landscaping and
frontage landscaping. For every eight required parking spaces, or portion
thereof, a minimum of one tree and two shrubs shall be provided within the
interior of the parking area. Trees located in the interior of the parking
area shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet and shrubs located in the
interior of the parking area a maximum height of three feet for adequate
visibility.



   (B)   Location. Landscape areas shall be located and designed in
such a manner as to break up the expanse of the parking area, better define
parking circulation, and provide shade and comfort. The required landscaping
shall be located in protected areas such as along walkways, in centrally
located protected islands, at the ends of parking aisles, or between parking
spaces. Landscape areas should contain a minimum of 25 square feet and should
have a minimum width of five feet.



   (C)   Irrigation of parking lot landscaping. All right-of-way street
frontage, perimeter and interior parking area landscaping shall be provided
with a pressurized, underground irrigation system.



   (D)   Maintenance of landscaping. The maintenance of all required
landscaping, whether located on the property or within the adjoining
right-of-way frontage shall be the responsibility of the property owner.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.300  LANDSCAPE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any proposed building, building additions, or use of land
shall require a site plan to be submitted to the city for review and
approval. The site plan shall include information on the required landscaping
in compliance with this chapter and the Subdivision Ordinance. The landscape
information may be submitted as a separate landscape plan. The landscape
plans shall be submitted at the time of application for rezoning or
conditional use permit or at the time of building permit if none of the above
applications are required and shall at a minimum contain the following.



      (1)   Irrigation plans. Show irrigation layout for both drip
system and turf system, if applicable. Include specifications and
manufactures model and type for pipes, nozzles and heads.



      (2)   Plant location. Call out the location of all existing
and proposed species and inorganic ground covers, sidewalks, paths, curbing,
fencing, walls, benches, ramadas, fountains, and waterways. Notations should
be made concerning any existing trees that will be removed. For fencing and
walls, provide a graphic representation as to what is intended relative to
the fencing and wall theme.



      (3)   Right-of-way and parking lot landscaping. Those areas as
required by §§ 152.298 and 152.299 shall be included in the landscape plans
for the project.



      (4)   Plant species. Include a plant palette, in list form, on
the landscape plans that call out all proposed plant species and inorganic
ground covers.



      (5)   Plant sizes. Call out the specific sizes of all proposed
plant and inorganic ground covers. This information shall be included within
the plant palette list on the landscape plan.



      (6)   Plant quantities. Call out the exact quantities for each
species of tree, shrub and ground cover per each size and species. This
information shall be included within the plant palette list on the landscape
plan.



      (7)   Paths, trails, sidewalks. Indicate the location of any
proposed path, trail, or sidewalk on the landscape plan. Call out the
material type and width of the surfacing of all proposed paths, trails and
walks.



      (8)   Walls/fencing. Call out the type and location of
proposed walls/fencing, if applicable. Indicate exact material types for all
fencing and walls proposed. A separate 24" X 36" wall/fence sheet may be
required to be submitted.



      (9)   Signage. Indicate the location of any proposed signs or
freestanding monument signs to be located within the landscape area.



      (10)   Back flow preventers. Where required, indicate the
location of all back flow preventers and associated infrastructure.



      (11)   Identify existing lots, streets, fences, walls, wells,
or other features as may be applicable.



      (12)   Identify the line of sight requirements of the city,
county and state.



      (13)   Identify the name of the developer, project engineer,
and landscape architect/designer on the plan.



   (B)   All site plans and/or landscape plans submitted shall be
reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of a
building permit.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS



§ 152.315  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish general
guidelines and a review procedure for the sighting of wireless communications
towers and antennas.



   (B)   The intent of these provisions is to protect neighborhoods,
protect corridors and environmentally sensitive areas, prompt co-location,
prompt location on existing structures, and improve the aesthetics of the
facilities through careful design and innovative camouflaging techniques.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.316  CONFORMANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES.



   All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the FAA, the FCC, any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas, and the
provisions of this subchapter. The following provisions are not intended to
prevent the use of any material or method of installation not specifically
prescribed by this subchapter, provided any such alternate has been approved
in writing by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall
consider any state of the art technology, which is consistent with the intent
of the chapter, as new wireless communication technology develops.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.317  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions are specific terms that supplement the term
TELECOMMUNICATIONS (WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS as defined in § 152.013. For the
purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT.  Any equipment serving or being used in
conjunction with a telecommunications facility or support structure. This
equipment includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment,
power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets
and storage sheds, shelters or other structures.



   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE.  Any clock or bell towers, church
steeples, chimneys or stacks, elevators, light poles, power poles and similar
alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the
presence of antennas or towers.



   ANTENNA.  Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a
tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiates or
captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals, or
other communication signals.



      (1)   WHIP ANTENNA.  A long and thin device that transmits
and/or receives radio frequency signals in a 360 degree radial pattern.



      (2)   PANEL ANTENNA.  A relatively flat rectangular device
that transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a directional
pattern of less than 360 degrees.



      (3)   DISH ANTENNA.  A bowl-shaped device for the reception
and/or transmission of radio frequency communications signals in a specific
directional pattern.



   BUILDING MOUNTED ANTENNA.  Any antenna that is attached to the walls
of, or integrated into buildings or parapet walls.



   CARRIER ON WHEELS OR CELL ON WHEELS (COW).  A portable self-contained
telecommunications facility that can be moved to a location and set up to
provide wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. A COW is
normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna
support structure.



   CO-LOCATION.  The use of a single mount and/or site by more than one
personal wireless service.



   FAA.  The Federal Aviation Administration.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.



   HEIGHT.  The HEIGHT of monopoles and towers shall be measured from
natural grade to the top of all appurtenances. The HEIGHT of rooftop mounted
communication equipment shall be measured from the roof elevation to the top
of all appurtenances. The HEIGHT of building mounted communication equipment
shall be from the top of the equipment to natural grade.



   MONOPOLE.  A facility used exclusively for PWSF mounts and is
self-supporting with a single shaft of steel, concrete or wood.



   MOUNT.  The ground or the structure to which a PWSF is attached.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY (PWSF).  A facility for the
provision of personal wireless services as defined by the Telecommunications
Act of 1996, and any amendments thereto. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
are composed of two or more of the following components:



      (1)   Antenna;



      (2)   Mount;



      (3)   Equipment cabinet; and/or



      (4)   Wall or security barrier.



   SITE.  The physical location occupied by a single tower and its
accompanying ground-mounted or roof-mounted equipment.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1996.  This federal legislation established
certain standards for local review of various types of antennas and other
communication devices. Local governments may consider standards such as
height, appearance, screening, stealth design, planting, and public safety
issues (other than radiation). The local government may not discriminate
between service providers, prohibit wireless services or have the effect of
prohibiting wireless services, regulate on the basis of electromagnetic
radiation if the facility complies with FCC standards, make land use
decisions without substantial evidence and a written record of the
proceedings, or unreasonably delay decision making on proposed applications.



   TOWER.  Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including monopole towers. The term includes
radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier
towers, and digital and/or cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and the like. The term also includes the structure and any
support thereto.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.318  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Antennas and towers may be considered as either a principal or
an accessory use. A different existing use of an existing structure on the
same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such a
lot.



   (B)   For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including
but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements and other
such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such
lot.



   (C)   The setback of the communication equipment and/or the
accessory structures shall meet the building setbacks for the zoning district
in which it is located. Towers shall be set back a distance equal to at least
100% of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line. Facilities that
are located on street lights, traffic signals poles, 69 kilovolt or above,
and existing electrical utility poles are exempt from setback requirements.



   (D)   Towers shall be painted or treated to minimize the contrast of
the tower against the horizon. At a tower site, the design of the buildings
and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
development.



   (E)   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower,
the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be
painted or treated such that they match the color and/or texture of the
supporting structure.



   (F)   Rooftop mounted equipment shall be screened from off-site
views to the extent possible by solid screen walls or the building parapet.
Screening shall be integrated into and architecturally compatible with the
building design.



   (G)   Building mounted antennas shall be mounted a minimum of one
foot below the top of the building wall, shall not be extended more than 12
inches from the face of the building, and shall be either treated or painted
to match the color and texture of the building.



   (H)   Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six
feet in height and no more than eight feet in height and shall be
non-climbable. Above ground equipment cabinets shall be completely screened
from view by a compatible solid wall or view obscuring fence.



   (I)   All equipment shall be unmanned. Equipment storage buildings
or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes.



   (J)   Any exterior lighting shall be within the walled area and
shall be mounted on poles or on the building wall below the height of the
screening fence or wall. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required,
the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance
to the surrounding views.



   (K)   No signs shall be allowed on an antenna, on a tower or on any
portion of the premises leased for wireless communication use except that
each PWSF shall be identified by a permanently installed plaque or marker, no
larger than one foot by one foot, clearly identifying the provider’s name,
address and emergency phone number.



   (L)   All new towers or poles over 40 feet in height shall allow for
co-location by other wireless communications providers.



   (M)   Monopole towers are the preferred type of tower. Lattice-type
structures are allowed but strongly discouraged. Towers or structures which
require the use of guy wires are prohibited.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.319  ZONING DISTRICTS AND PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Wireless communication towers and antennas may only be
permitted in any zoning district with a conditional use permit.



   (B)   Amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas are permitted in the
Suburban Ranch, Low Density, and Medium Density Residential Zoning Districts
(SR-5”, “SR-2”, “R1-35”, “R1-20”,“R1-12”, “R1-8”,
“R1-6”, “R1-5”) with these conditions:



      (1)   Such structures shall not be located in the required
front yard, or required street side yard, or in front of the front line of
the dwelling or principal building;



      (2)   Such structure shall in no case be located nearer than
five feet to any side or rear property line;



      (3)   Such structures does not exceed a height of 15 feet
within a required side or rear yard;



      (4)   Such structures does not exceed the maximum building
height of the zoning district in which such structure is located;



      (5)   Not more than two such structures shall be erected per
lot or parcel; and



      (6)   The tower and antenna shall be retractable.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.320  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   The following provisions shall govern the issuance of conditional use
permits for towers and antennas by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (A)   If a conditional use permit is required it shall be processed
in accordance with § 152.043.



   (B)   In granting a conditional use permit the Commission may impose
conditions to the extent such conditions are necessary to minimize adverse
effects of the proposed tower or antenna on adjoining properties, and to
blend with other similar vertical objects and not be intrusive in its setting
or obtrusive to views and the surrounding landscape.



   (C)   When a use permit is granted for a co-location on a facility
with an existing use permit, the action of granting the new use permit shall
extend the existing use permit so that they will expire simultaneously.



   (D)   Upon compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
stipulations of the conditional use permit, the Building Safety Division
shall issue a permit for the installation of the PWSF and/or antenna to be
installed per the approved application.



   (E)   The review of all telecommunication devices shall comply with
the Telecommunications Act of 1996. This federal legislation established
certain standards for local review of various types of antennas and other
communication devices. Local governments may consider standards such as
height, appearance, screening, stealth design, planting, and public safety
issues (other than radiation). The local government may not discriminate
between service providers, prohibit wireless services or have the effect of
prohibiting wireless services, regulate on the basis of electromagnetic
radiation if the facility complies with FCC standards, make land use
decisions without substantial evidence and a written record of the
proceedings, or unreasonably delay decision making on proposed applications.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.321  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All wireless communication facilities shall submit the
following information:



      (1)   All PWSF applications will go through the normal
pre-application process as outlined in §§ 152.040 through 152.048;



      (2)   A map of the service area for this facility;



      (3)   A scaled site plan indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed facility, mounting style and number of antennas on
each facility, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed facilities, and any other information deemed by the Zoning
Administrator to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter; and



      (4)   Each applicant for an antenna and/or a tower shall
provide the city with an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites
approved for towers or city antennas, that are within the jurisdiction
boundaries of the city, the city’s planning area as determined by the San
Luis General Plan, and within one mile of the city’s border. The inventory
shall include specific information about the location, height, range, design
of each antenna and/or tower, and the owner/operator of the existing
facilities if known. This inventory shall also include a one-year build-out
plan for all other wireless communications facilities within the city
planning area.



   (B)   All new towers or poles shall also provide the following
information:



      (1)   A map that shows any personal wireless antenna monopoles
or towers, within a mile radius of the proposed site that are existing or are
currently under construction;



      (2)   Description of any efforts to co-locate the proposed
facility on one of the monopoles or towers that currently exists, or is under
construction. Provide engineering information or letters from the owners of
the existing monopoles describing why co-location is not a possibility;



      (3)   Description of detailed efforts to locate the proposed
facility on an existing vertical element, such as a building or a pole, that
is comparable to the height of the proposed facility. Include a map of the
sites;



      (4)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the engineering of
a proposed new tower or pole and the placement of ground mounted facilities
will accommodate other providers’ facilities. The owner of the tower or
pole and the property on which it is located must certify that the tower or
pole is available for use by another wireless telecommunications provider on
a reasonable and non-discriminatory basis;



      (5)   Description of efforts to blend personal wireless
facilities with the surrounding area, including the process for arriving at
the color for the proposed pole or tower. Describe the efforts to minimize
the diameter of the pole and the mass of the tower supporting the proposed
facility; and



      (6)   Illustrate the method of fencing and the finished
texture and color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and
illumination.



   (C)   All new rooftop and building mounted PWSF shall also provide
the following information:



      (1)   Description of the type, height, mounting style, number
of antennas, and method of screening or blending the facility with the
building;



      (2)   Description of the process for arriving at the color of
the personal wireless facility and the options that were explored for
screening the personal wireless facility; and



      (3)   Description of the alternative structures used and any
structural alterations that may be required to accommodate the PWSF, such as
but not limited to, elements that camouflage or conceal the presence of
antennas or poles, if a pole is utilized to support the personal wireless
facility.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.322  EXEMPTIONS.



   Communication towers and antennas designed and used specifically for
public safety purposes shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and are
exempt from the conditional use permit process. Communication towers and
antennas approved for public safety purposes and which are also utilized by
commercial communication companies shall be considered commercial
communication towers and are subject to approval of a conditional use permit.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)




NONCONFORMING USES




§ 152.335  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide the regulations that limit
the development and continued existence of nonconforming buildings, uses,
lots, and signs within the city.



   (A)   These regulations are designed to protect the rights of
legally existing nonconforming buildings, uses, lots, and signs under
specific conditions and within certain parameters. It is also the intent of
this chapter to curtail substantial investment in non-conformities and to
bring about their eventual improvement or elimination in order to preserve
the integrity of this chapter, promote adopted plans and policies, and
enhance the character of the city.



   (B)   Any use or activity lawfully conducted under county zoning
regulations at the effective date of annexation or legally established under
previous zoning regulations in effect at the adoption of this chapter, or any
amendment, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use under this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.336  LIMITATION ON BUILDINGS.



   A legal nonconforming building (which shall also include structures)
may continue only in the manner and to the extent that it existed at the time
of such enactment, amendment, or annexation, subject to the following
provisions.



   (A)   The routine repairs or maintenance of legal nonconforming
buildings is permitted.



   (B)   Any legal nonconforming building, which has been damaged by
fire, windstorm, flood, or some similar abnormal and identifiable event, for
which the cost of restoring the structure to its original condition is up to
50% of the assessed valuation, may be reconstructed and used as before
provided that a building permit is secured, reconstruction is started within
two years from the date of damage, and such reconstruction is diligently
pursued to completion. During this period, the property shall be maintained
in a manner that does not create a life safety or hazardous condition.



   (C)   Any legal nonconforming building, which has been damaged by
fire, windstorm, flood, or some similar abnormal and identifiable event to an
extent of 51% or more of its most recent, pre-damage assessed valuation, as
determined by a qualified appraiser shall lose any legal nonconforming status
and may not be restored, reconstructed, replaced or used except in conformity
with the provisions of the zoning district it is located in and to this
zoning ordinance.



   (D)   A legal nonconforming building which ceases to be used for a
period of two consecutive years shall lose all nonconforming status and shall
be retrofitted to comply with applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance.



   (E)   This chapter shall not prohibit the continued occupancy of a
manufactured home which was legally located and occupied as a private
residence within the city at the time of adoption of this chapter but is not
located within the Manufactured Home Zoning District or which may not be in
compliance with the requirements of §§ 152.150 through 152.154.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.337  LIMITATIONS ON USES.



   A legal nonconforming use may continue only in the manner and to the
extent that it existed at the time of such enactment, amendment, or
annexation, subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   A legal nonconforming use which ceases to be used for a period
of two consecutive years, or is replaced by a conforming use, shall lose all
nonconforming status; and



   (B)   A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed to a different
nonconforming use. This shall not prevent a name change or change in
ownership of the same nonconforming use.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



§ 152.338  LIMITATIONS ON LOTS.



   (A)   Routine maintenance of a legal nonconforming lot is permitted.



   (B)   This chapter shall not prohibit the continued occupancy of a
building which has been legally constructed on a nonconforming lot.



   (C)   Any legal lot existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter, or any amendment, which does not conform with the required lot area
may be used for any use permitted by right in that zoning district provided
that the use does not constitute more than a 20% reduction in the required
lot area and all other applicable regulations of this chapter are complied
with.



   (D)   For residential zoning districts only: if the application of
the zoning ordinance to a parcel, which was a legally constituted lot on
which development would have been permitted prior to the adoption date of
this chapter, would prevent the development of at least one single
residential dwelling unit, the parcel may be developed with one single
residential dwelling pursuant to all other provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)



Appendix A Landscape Plant List



This list does not include all of the possible low water use/drought tolerate
plants; rather it lists those that the City of San Luis would prefer to have
used within the public rights-of-way. Not every plant listed is suited to
every right-of-way or low water use landscape situation. It is the
responsibility of the landscape designer, architect or contractor to
determine which plants are suitable for a specific location and situation.



TREES



Acacia smallii - Desert Sweet Acacia



A. greggii - Catclaw Acacia



A. willardiana - Palo Blanco



A. saligna - Wattle



A. schaffneri - Twisted Acacia



Cercidium floridum - Blue Palo Verde



C. praecox - Palo Brea



C.microphyllum – Foothills Palo Verde, Little Leaf Palo Verde



Celtis reticulata - Western Hackberry



C.pallida – Desert Hackberry



Chilopsis linearis - Desert Willow



Dalbergia sissoo – Sissoo Tree



Lysiloma thornberi – Desert Fern, Fern-of-the-desert



Olneya tesota – Ironwood



Pithecellobium flexicaule - Texas Ebony



Prosopis velutina - Velvet Mesquite



P. glandulosa - Texas/Honey Mesquite



P. pubescens - Screwbean Mesquite



Schinus molle – California Pepper Tree



Ulmus parvifolia cv. ‘Sempervirens’ – Chinese Evergreen Elm



 



CACTI and SUCCULENTS



Agave - many species



Carnegiea gigantea - Saguaro



Echinocactus grusonii - Golden Barrel



Echinocereus engelmannii - Hedgehog Cactus



Ferocactus acanthodes - Compass Barrel



Opuntia violacea - Purple Prickly Pear



O. basilaris - Beavertail Prickly Pear



Yucca elata - Soaptree Yucca



Y. brevifolia - Joshua Tree



Y. baccata - Banana Yucca



 



GROUNDCOVERS



Baileya multiradiata - Desert Marigold



Dalea greggii - Trailing indigo Bush



Lantana spp. – Trailing Lantana



Melampodium leucanthum - Blackfoot Daisy



Oenothera berlandiere – Mexican Evening Primrose



Stachys coccinea - Texas Betony



Zauschneria californica - Hummingbird Trumpet



 



SHRUBS



Ambrosia deltoidea – Triangleleaf Bur-sage



Atriplex leatiformis - Quail Bush



Caesalpinia mexicana - Mexican-bird-of-paradise



C. pulcherrima - Red-bird-of-paradise



C. qilliesii - Yellow-bird-of-paradise



Calliandra. californica - Baja Red Fairy Duster



C. eriophylla – Pink Fairy Duster



Cassia wislizeni - Shrubby Senna



Dalea frutescens - Black Dalea



D. pulchra - Pea Bush



D. versicolor - Indigo Bush



Dodonaea viscosa - Hopbush



Encelia farinosa - Brittlebush



Fouquieria splendens - Ocotillo



Hesperaloe pariflora - Hesperaloe



Justicia californica - Chuparosa



J. spicigera - Orange Hummingbird Bush



Larrea tridentata - Creosote



Leucophyllum frutescens - Texas Sage or Green Cloud



L. candidum - Silver Cloud



L. laevigatum - Chihuahuan Sage



Penstemon eatoni - Firecracker Penstemon



P.parryi - Parry’s Penstemon



P.pseudospectabilis - Desert Penstemon



P.superbus - Superb Penstemon



Ruellia spp. - Ruellia



Salvia spp. - Sage



Senna spp. - Cassia



Simmondsia chinensis – Jojoba



Sphaeralcea ambigua - Globe Mallow



Tecoma stans - Arizona Yellow Bells



(Ord. 312, passed 4-11-2012)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 153:  PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS



Section



   153.001   Adoption of Public Works Standards



§ 153.001  ADOPTION OF PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS.



   That certain documents known as "Public Works Standards for Yuma County
Volume 3" as adopted by Yuma County on August 21, 2006, "Construction
Standard Detail Drawings, February 2009 of the City of Yuma," "Uniform
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction as sponsored and
distributed by the Maricopa Association of Governments 2015 Edition" and
"City of San Luis Supplement to the 2015 MAG Uniform Standard Specifications
for Public Works Construction and to the City of Yuma Construction Standard
Detail Drawings," three copies of which are on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, of the City of San Luis, Arizona, said documents having been made a
public record by Resolution No. 1166 of the City of San Luis, Arizona are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as the Public Works
Standards of the City of San Luis as though fully set forth again in full.



(Ord. 359, passed 10-26-2016)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   AGREEMENTS



      II.   ANNEXATIONS



      III.   EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY



      IV.   FRANCHISES



      V.   ZONING



TABLE I:  AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




98
 
1-22-1992
 
Extending the time within which construction may be started by the Marchand
Co.


100
 
6-3-1992
 
Authorizing a development agreement with San Luis Price Center Partners.


101
 
8-12-1992
 
Authorizing the first amendment to a development agreement with San Luis
Price Center Partners.


102
 
9-23-1992
 
Authorizing the first amendment to amended and restated development agreement
between Los Portales Development, Inc. and the city.


108
 
3-24-1993
 
Authorizing the second amendment to a development agreement with San Luis
Price Center Partners.


111
 
11-24-1993
 
Authorizing the second amendment to amended and restated development
agreement between Los Portales Development, Inc. and the city.


129
 
11-22-1993
 
Renegotiating a development agreement with the Comite de Bienstar.


136
 
6-5-1996
 
Approving and adopting the modification and extension of the development
agreement between the city and Maxall Corporation.


140
 
9-11-1996
 
Authorizing a development agreement with Dr. Allen Guinn for the development
of Frontera Estates.


146
 
9-10-1997
 
Authorizing the execution and delivery of a leaseback agreement; approving
the execution and delivery by San Luis Civic Improvement Corporation of a
leaseback agreement.


147
 
11-19-1997
 
Authorizing a development agreement with Las Casitas de San Luis for the
development of Las Casitas Apartments.


151
 
3-25-1998
 
Authorizing the third amendment to the amended and restated development
agreement between Los Portales Development, Inc. and the city.


173
 
4-25-2001
 
Adopting development fees for water and utility lines and making water and
sanitary sewer service available to Barkley Farms Limited Partnership and the
Barkley Farm Liquidating Trust.


187
 
- -2002
 
Amending development agreement between the city and Riedel Construction L.L.C.


203
 
12-16-2003
 
Amending a development agreement between Riedel Construction L.L.C. and the
city.


212
 
6-22-2004
 
Amending development agreements between Riedel Construction L.L.C. and the
city.


217
 
11-24-2004
 
Approving an agreement for exchange of roadway and/or property and
development agreement with Sunset Community Health Center.


377
 
1-10-2018
 
Approving wireless facilities standard terms and conditions; approving forms
of wireless provider right-of-way license franchise agreements; approving
city design standards, concepts and requirements for small wireless
facilities in the right-of-way; authorizing the execution of wireless
provider license agreements; issuing small wireless provider license permits.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




28
 
7-28-1982
 
Annexing Addition No. 1 and Lot No. 9, 99.9915 acres.


30
 
10-27-1982
 
Annexing property located in Section 2, Township 11 South, Range 25 West,
Gila and Salt River Meridian, Los Portales Del Alamo Phase 3.


32
 
12-8-1982
 
Annexing property located in Section 2, Township 11 South, Range 25 West,
Gila and Salt River Meridian, a subdivision known as Los Portales Del Alamo
Unit No. 2. (Revised).


33
 
12-8-1982
 
Annexing property located in Section 2, Township 11 South, Range 25 West,
Gila and Salt River Meridian.


61
 
4-9-1986
 
Annexing property located in Lots 1 and 2 of Section 12, Township 11 South,
Range 25 West, Gila and Salt River Meridian, and additional parcel of land
situated in the south half of the northeast quarter of the above stated
section, township and range.


65
 
7-22-1987
 
Annexing property located in:


 
 
 
 
Area A bounded roughly by a line 1,000 feet north of County 23rd Street on
the north; by the east section line of Section 1 and Section 12 on the east;
by a line approximately 404 feet south of County Twenty-Third Street on the
south and by Fourth Street on the west; and


 
 
 
 
Area B bounded roughly by a line 1,000 feet north of County Twenty-Third
Street on the north; by the midsection line of Section 6 and Section 7 on the
east; by a line 60 feet north of the USA-Mexican International Boundary on
the south and by Sixth Street on the west.


66
 
3-30-1988
 
Annexing property located on the west side of the following subdivisions: San
Luis Townsite Addition No. 1 and Lot No. 9, Los Portales del Alamo Unit No.
3, Los Portales del Alamo Unit No. 2 and Los Portales del Alamo,
approximately 187 acres, more or less.


80
 
2-14-1990
 
Annexing a portion of east half northeast quarter southeast quarter of
Section 2, Township 11 South, Range 25 West, Gila and Salt River Meridian.


116
 
12-14-1994
 
Annexing the following:


 
 
 
 
Parcel A, described as Tract 1 of State Plat 17, Comite de Bienstar, except
the south 500 feet;


 
 
 
 
Parcel B, described as Tract 6 of State Plat 17, Comite de Bienstar, except
the south 600 feet; and


 
 
 
 
Parcel C, described as Tract 2 of State Plat 17, Comite de Bienstar, except
the south 702.54 feet.


119
 
3-22-1995
 
Annexing property located in Yuma County, being that part of Section 1 and
Section 2, Township 11 South, Range 25 West, Gila and Salt River Base and
Meridian, approximately 266 acres, more or less.


145
 
9-10-1997
 
Annexing the north 500 feet of United States government Lots 1 and 2 and the
northeast quarter, except the north 404.70 feet of Section 7, Township 11
South, Range 24 West, Gila and Salt River and Meridian, approximately 166
acres, more or less.


155
 
4-14-1999
 
Annexing approximately 1,280 acres of land bordered on the west by the
Colorado River, on the south by the international boundary of Mexico and on
the north and east as more specifically described in the legal description
set forth in its entirety in this ordinance.


158
 
4-26-1999
 
Annexing approximately 14,430 acres, more or less, of land bordered on the
west primarily by Avenue H, on the south by the international boundary of
Mexico, on the north primarily by County Twenty-First Street, and on the east
primarily by Avenue A.


163
 
1-12-2000
 
Annexing approximately 90 acres, more or less, of land bordered on the west
primarily by Avenue J, on the east by Avenue I, on the north by County
Twenty-First Street and south by County Twenty-Third Street.


167
 
5-24-2000
 
Annexing property located in the vicinity of and approximately bounded by the
alignments for County Twenty-Third and One-Half Street, County Twenty-Fourth
Street, Avenue E and Avenue D, approximately 280 acres, more or less.


169
 
9-27-2000
 
Annexing approximately 160 acres, more or less, of land bordered on the west
primarily by Avenue 114 on the east by Avenue H, on the north by County
Twenty-Second Street and south by County Twenty-Third Street.


171
 
11-22-2000
 
Annexing approximately 888 acres, more or less, the site is bound on the
north by County Twenty One and One-Half Street and on the south by Juan
Sanchez Boulevard and on the west by Fourth Street and the east by County
Avenue H.


211
 
7-28-2004
 
Annexing approximately 82.8 acres of land bordering on the west primarily by
Avenue H-1/2, on the east by Avenue H, on the north by A Street and the south
as more specifically described in the ordinance.


227
 
4-27-2005
 
Annexing approximately 77.31 acres, more or less, of land bordered on the
west primarily by Tenth Avenue, on the south by the County Twenty-Second
Street, on the north primarily by County Twenty-First Street, and the east
primarily by the Avenue G.


268
 
8-13-2008
 
Annexing the following: APN-767-05-005; APN-767-05-006; APN-767-05-008A;
APN-767-05-008B; APN-767-05-009; APN-767-05-006; APN-768-01-006;
APN-768-33-003A; APN-768-33-003B; APN-768-33-004A; APN-768-33-008;
APN-768-33-009A; APN-768-33-009B; APN-768-33-003A; APN-776-01-006A;
APN-776-01-014; and APN-776-01-015.


304
 
5-11-2011
 
Annexing territory identified as S 1/2, S 1/2, SE 1/4 of Section 11, Section
13, and Section 14, T 11 S, R 24 W, G. & S.R.B.&M., Yuma County, Arizona.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


156
 
4-7-1999
 
Authorizing the exchange of lands of substantially equal value between the
city and Leonardo C. Riedel, Nieves Riedel and Riedel Construction, Inc.


254
 
8-22-2007
 
Authorizing the exchange of lands between the city and John Sanchez.


355
 
5-25-2016
 
Authorizing exchange of real property for the Wastewater diversion lift
station project.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE IV:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


17
 
7-8-1981
 
Granting a franchise to Arizona Public Service Company the right, privilege
and franchise to construct, maintain and operate upon, over, along, across
and under the streets, avenues, alleys, highways, bridges and other public
places in the city and future additions thereto, electric light and power
plants and lines.


34
 
5-25-1983
 
Granting, on term and conditions, a license to Micro Cable Communications,
Inc., dba Valley Telecasting Co., its successors and assigns, the right and
authority to establish, construct, operate and maintain a cable television
antenna service in the city for a period of 25 years.


165
 
4-26-2000
 
Granting to Southwest Gas Corporation, its successors and assigns, the right,
privilege and franchise to construct, maintain and operate upon, over, along,
across and under the public rights-of-way of the city.


 
 



 



TABLE V:  ZONING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




71
 
12-28-1988
 
Rezoning Parcels 1, 2, 3 and 4 from Agricultural Use to Mobile Home 1.


 
 
 
 
Rezoning Parcels 5, 6 and 7 from Agricultural Use to Residential 1.


72_1
 
- -1989
 
Rezoning property lying east of the east right- of-way line of the USRS Main
Canal from Residential 3 to Commercial 2.


76
 
9-27-1989
 
Amending Ordinance 69; rezoning property constituting Bienstar Estates Phase
Two from Residential 1 to Residential 3.


83
 
5-23-1990
 
Rezoning 0.848 acres from Residential 1 to Residential 3.


86
 
10-10-1990
 
Amending Ordinance 69; rezoning property a portion of the north 514" of the
northeast quarter, Section 11, Township 11 South, Range 25 West except the
north 30" (county right-of-way) 9 SRRM. from Residential 1 to Residential 3.


87
 
10-10-1990
 
Amending Ordinance 69; rezoning Lot 6 of Block 16 of Townsite from Commercial
1 to Commercial 2.


89
 
12-12-1990
 
Amending Ordinance 69; rezoning a portion of the northwest quarter, Section
27, Township 11 South, Range 24 West, Gila and Salt River Median from
Residential 1 to Residential 1/MH.


90
 
12-12-1990
 
Amending Ordinance 69; rezoning Parcel 1, 2 and 3 from Residential 1 to
Commercial 1.


92
 
- -1991
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning described real property from High Density
Residential (R-3) to General Commercial (C-1).


93
 
6-26-1991
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning Lots 50 through 56 and Lots 60 through 70,
Rancho San Luis, Mobile Home Subdivision II from Mobile Home Subdivision (MH
SUB) to High Density Residential (R-3).


95
 
6-26-1991
 
Amending Ordinances 13 and 74; rezoning Parcel 1, 2 and 3 to
Residential-Manufactured Housing (R-MH).


96
 
7-24-1991
 
Amending Ordinance 95; rezoning additional property to
Residential-Manufactured Housing (R-MH).


99
 
6-3-1992
 
Amending Ordinances 13 and 74; rezoning Parcel 7, 8, 9 and 10 to Intermediate
Density Residential (R-2).


103
 
10-28-1992
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning Lot 10, Block 12, San Luis Townsite Addition
No. 1 from Residential 1 (R-1) to High Density Residential (R-3).


104
 
10-28-1992
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning property lying east of the East Main Canal
right-of-way and east of the U.S. Highway 95 right-of-way from Residential 1
(R-1) to General Commercial (C-2).


105
 
11-25-1992
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning Lot 14, Los Portales del Alamo from
Residential (R-1) to High Density Residential (R-3).


106
 
3-10-1993
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning approximately 15.33 acres from Recreational
Vehicle Park (RVP) to Intermediate Density Residential (R-2).


107
 
3-24-1993
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning approximately 110.20 acres from Low Density
Residential (R-1-6) to Medium Density Residential (R-2).


110
 
6-23-1993
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning five parcels of land in the San Luis Townsite
Addition No. 1 from Low Density Residential (R-1) to General Commercial (C-1).


113
 
4-27-1994
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 22317 Bentu Avenue, Plaza 1 from Low Density
Residential (R-1) to Residential/Manufactured Housing (R-MH).


117
 
1-11-1995
 
Rezoning Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, San Luis Townsite and Lot 1 to 7
inclusive Block 7, Lot 1 to 9 inclusive Block 8, Lot 4 to 9 inclusive Block
9, Lot 1 to 4 inclusive Block 15, Lot 1 to 6 inclusive Block 16, Block 13,
14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28, San Luis Townsite
Addition No. 1 and Lot 2 from Local Commercial (C-1) to General Commercial
(C-2).


124
 
5-24-1995
 
Rezoning property described as Section 7, Township l1 South, Range 24 West,
State Plat No. 17, consisting of approximately 12.29 acres from Residential 1
(R-l) to Manufactured Housing (MH).


126
 
9-11-1995
 
Rezoning part of the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 12,
Township 11 South, Range 25 West, Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian and
the portion of the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 12,
Township 11 South, Range 25 West of the Gila and Salt River Bass and Meridian
from Intermediate Density Residential (R-2) to High Density Residential (R-3).


130
 
11-22-1995
 
Rezoning Lot 53, Plaza II, Map 102, Book 63 Parcel 053 from Residential 1
(R-1) to Manufactured Housing (MH).


135
 
5-22-1996
 
Rezoning the west half of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter and
that part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 2,
Township 11 South, Range 25 west of the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian
from Rural Area (RA-40) to Mobile Home Park.


139
 
8-28-1996
 
Rezoning the following:


 
 
 
 
Property owned by the Curtis Family Trust (parcel no. 102-58-015) from Rural
Area (RA- 40) to Mobile Home Park;


 
 
 
 
Property owned by Robert K. and Kathleen Barkley (parcel no. 102-58-002) from
Rural Area (RA-40) to Mobile Home Park;


 
 
 
 
Property owned by Louise Barkley Braden (parcel no. 102-58-001) from Rural
Area (RA- 40) to Light Industrial (LI);


 
 
 
 
Property owned by Louise Barkley Braden (parcel no. 102-57-007) from Rural
Area (RA- 40) to General Commercial (C-2);


 
 
 
 
Property owned by the Barkley Family Liquidating Trust and Louise Barkley
Braden (parcel no. 102-57-008C and east 350' parcel no. 102-57-007) from
Rural Area (RA-40) to Intermediate Density Residential (R-2); and


 
 
 
 
Property owned by the Barkley Family Liquidating Trust (parcel no.
102-57-008A) from Rural Area (RA-40) to R-1-6 Residential.


148
 
12-17-1997
 
Rezoning the following:


 
 
 
 
Parcel A from Rural Area (RA-40) to Intermediate Density Residential District
(R-2);


 
 
 
 
Parcel B from Rural Area (RA-40) to Manufactured Housing Subdivision (MHS);


 
 
 
 
Parcel C-l from Rural Area (RA-40) to High Density Residential (R-3);


 
 
 
 
Parcel C-2 from Rural Area (RA-40) to Commercial General (C-2); and


 
 
 
 
Parcel C-3 from Rural Area (RA-40) to Intermediate Density Residential (R-2).


152
 
5-27-1998
 
Rezoning Tract 8 of State Plat No. 17, Comite De Bienestar, Inc., Recorded in
Book 11 of Plats, Pages 86-88, Records of Yuma County, Arizona, and being a
portion of the northeast quarter northwest quarter of Section 7, Township 11
South, Range 24, West Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian from
Residence-Manufactured Housing District (R-MH) to General Commercial (C-2).


159
 
6-9-1999
 
Rezoning the following:


 
 
 
 
Lots 10, 11 and 12 Block 8 and Lots 1,2,3, 10, 11 and 12 Block 9 San Luis
Townsite Addition No. 1 from Residential (R-l-6) to General Commercial (C-2);


 
 
 
 
Block 10, Block 11, east half of Block 7, east half of Block 16, east half of
Block 15, and Lots 1 through 9 inclusive Block 12 San Luis Townsite Addition
No. 1 from Residential (R-l-6) to Local Commercial (C-1);


 
 
 
 
Lot 10 Block 12 San Luis Townsite Addition 1 from Residential (R-3) to Local
Commercial (C-1); and


 
 
 
 
Lots 1 -22, inclusive, Bienestar Estates, from Residential (R-1-6) to Local
Commercial (C-1).


162
 
12-8-1999
 
Rezoning property within Lots 149 through 331 from Residence-Manufactured
Housing District (R-MH) to Intermediate Density Residential District (R-2),
all within Los Portales Del Alamo Unit 4


170
 
10-11-2000
 
Rezoning property described as; east half of the northwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 2, Township 11 South, Range 25 West, Gila and
Salt River Base and Meridian from Mobile Home Park (MHP) to Low Density
Residential (R-l-6).


174
 
8-22-2001
 
Amending Ordinance 69, rezoning three parcels of land consisting all in
Section 6, Township 11 South, Range 24 West of the Gila and Salt River Base
and Meridian owned by Riedel Construction:


 
 
 
 
Parcel 1 consisting of 30.0795 acres, more or less, from Rural Area 10 Acre
Parcels (RA-10) to General Commercial (C-2);


 
 
 
 
Parcel 2 consisting of 39.4613 acres, more or less, Rural Area 10 Acre
Parcels (RA-10) to Intermediate Density Residential (R-2); and


 
 
 
 
Parcel 3 consisting of 10.7311 acres, more or less, from Rural Area 10 Acre
Parcels (RA-10) to High Density Residential (R-3).


175
 
9-12-2001
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 5.5 acres on the south side of County
Twenty-One and One-Half Street 900 feet west of U.S. Highway 95 from Rural
Area (RA-40) to Light Industrial (LI).


176
 
9-12-2001
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 4.5 acres on the south side of County
Twenty-One and One-Half Street 418 feet west of U.S. Highway 95 from Rural
Area (RA-40) to Light Industrial (LI).


177
 
9-12-2001
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 30 acres on the south side of County
Twenty-One and One-Half Street west of U.S. Highway 95 from Rural Area
(RA-40) to Light Industrial (LI).


179
 
9-12-2001
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 10.7 acres, more or less, located west of
Tenth Avenue, approximately three-fourth of a mile north of Juan Sanchez
Boulevard; from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels (RA-10) to High Density
Residential (R-3).


180
 
10-10-2001
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 80 acres located west of Tenth Avenue, 1,000
feet north of Juan Sanchez Boulevard, from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels (RA-10)
to Low Density Residential (R-1-6) 13 acres, Intermediate Density Residential
(R-2) 55 acres and Residence-Manufactured Housing (R-MH) 12 acres.


181
 
10-29-2001
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 30 acres located at the north west corner of
Tenth Avenue and Juan Sanchez Boulevard, from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels
(RA-10) to General Commercial (C-2).


186
 
4-24-2002
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 5 acres located at the north west corner of A
Street and Tenth Avenue, from General Commercial (C-2) to Intermediate
Density Residential (R-2).


193
 
1-22-2003
 
Amending Ordinance; rezoning 122 acres located at the southwest corner of A
Street and Eighth Avenue, from Industrial Park (IP) to Intermediate Density
Residential (R-2).


207
 
4-28-2004
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 147.15 acres located on the north west corner
of Avenue F and County Twenty-Fourth Street from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels
(RA-10) to Medium Density Residential (R-2) 134.5 acres, High Density
Residential (R-3) 9.9 acres and Local Commercial (C-l) 2.75 acres.


208
 
4-28-2004
 
Amending Ordinance; rezoning 35 acres more or less located west of Fourth
Avenue between the East Main Canal and the Yuma Valley main drain from Low
Density Residential (R-l-6) to Manufactured Home Park (MHP).


221
 
6-8-2005
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 33 acres more or less, consisting of a parcel
located at approximately the southeast corner of Eighth Avenue and
Urtuzuastegui Street, from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels (RA-10) to Intermediate
Density Residential (R-2).


230
 
6-22-2005
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 77.31 acres more or less, of land bordered on
west primarily by Tenth Avenue, on the south by the County Twenty-Second
Street, on the north primarily by County Twenty-First Street, and the east
primarily by the Avenue G from County City Zoning Rural Agricultural (RA-40 )
to Intermediate Density Residential (R-2).


231
 
6-22-2005
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 50 acres more or less, consisting in of a
parcel located at approximately the southeast corner of Eighth Avenue and
Urtuzuastegui Street, from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels (RA-10) to Intermediate
Density Residential (R-2).


240
 
3-8-2006
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 341 acres more or less, consisting in 5
parcels located south from County Twenty-Fourth Street and between Avenue E
and D and to the north by International Boundary of the Republic of Mexico,
from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels (RA-10) to Light Industrial (LI).


246
 
11-21-2006
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 80 acres at the southeast corner of Avenue F
and County Twenty-Fourth Street from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels (RA-10) to
Intermediate Density Residential (R-2).


249
 
3-28-2007
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning real property at the northeast corner of
Fourth Avenue and Urtuzuastegui Street from General Commercial (C-2) to
Intermediate Density Residential (R-2).


250
 
4-25-2007
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 280 acres located at the northeast corner of
Avenue F and County Twenty-Fourth Street from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels
(RA-10) to Intermediate Density Residential (R-2) on 257.5 acres, to High
Density Residential (R-3) on 10 acres and to General Commercial (C-2) on 12.5
acres.


251
 
6-13-2007
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 24 acres located west of Fourth Avenue, north
of the East Main Canal, from Mobile Home Park (MHP) to Intermediate Density
Residential (R-2).


252
 
7-25-2007
 
Amending Ordinance13; rezoning 80 acres, located at, the southwest corner of
Avenue E and County Twenty-Fourth Street from Rural Area 10 Acre Parcels
(RA-10) to Intermediate Density Residential (R-2) on 40 acres, to Light
Industrial (LI) on 30 acres, and to General Commercial (C-2) on 10 acres.


263
 
5-28-2008
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 7.20 acres located at the northeast corner of
Avenue F-l/2 and County Twenty-Fourth Street from Limited Commercial (C-l) on
2.5 acres to High Density Residential (R-3) and from Rural Area 10 Acre
Parcels (RA-10) to High Density Residential (R-3) on 4.70 acres.


272
 
3-11-2009
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 6.14 acres located on the south side of Juan
Sanchez Boulevard between Sixth and Seventh Avenues from
Residence-Manufactured Housing (R-MH) to General Commercial (C-2).


278
 
8-19-2009
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 3.45 acres from R-2 (Intermediate Density
Residential) to R-3 (High Density Residential) located on the southeast
corner of Jane Napolitano Boulevard and Harris Avenue.


279
 
9-23-2009
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 1.05 acres from R-2 (Intermediate Density
Residential) to R-3 (High Density Residential) located on the southeast
corner of Janet Napolitano Boulevard and County 23rd-1/2 Street.


285
 
6-9-2010
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 4.7078 acres located in the Las Brisas De San
Luis Subdivision from Intermediate Density Residential (R-2) to High Density
Residential (R-3).


286
 
6-9-2010
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 8,139 square feet located on the northeast
corner of South Fourth Avenue and “D” Street from Limited Commercial
(C-1) to Low Density Residential (R-1-6).


293
 
2-10-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 8,139 square feet located on the northeast
corner of North Fourth Avenue and D Street from Low Density Residential
(R-1-6) to Limited Commercial (C-1).


294
 
2-10-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 141.1097 acres located south of County 23-1/2
Street and east of Avenue E from Rural Area - 10 acres minimum (RA-10) to
Light Industrial (L-I).


295
 
4-13-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 13.7262 acres located south of County 23-1/2
Street and east of Avenue E from Rural Area - 10 acres minimum (RA-10) to
Intermediate Density Residential (R-2).


296
 
4-13-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 8.5375 acres located south of County 23-1/2
Street and east of Avenue E from Rural Area - minimum 10 acres (RA-10) to
High Density Residential (R-3).


297
 
3-23-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 71.3681 acres located on the northeast corner
of Avenue E and County 24th Street from Rural Area - minimum 10 acres (RA-10)
to General Commercial (C-2).


298
 
5-11-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 280 acres located at the northwest corner of
Avenue D and County 24-1/2 Street from Rural Area - minimum 10 acres (RA-10)
to Light Industrial (L-I).


299
 
5-11-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 240 acres located at the northwest corner of
Avenue D and County 25th Street from Rural Area - minimum 10 acres (RA-10) to
Light Industrial (L-I).


300
 
5-11-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 10 acres located at the southeast corner of
Avenue E and County 24th Street from Rural Area - minimum 10 acres (RA-10) to
General Commercial (C-2); and rezoning 70 acres located in the vicinity of
the southeast corner of Avenue E and County 24th Street from Rural Area -
minimum 10 acres (RA-10) to Light Industrial (L-I).


301
 
5-11-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 8.52 acres located at the southeast corner of
Avenue E and County 24-1/2 Street from Rural Area - minimum 10 acres (RA-10)
to General Commercial (C-2); and rezoning 31.48 acres located at the
southeast corner of Avenue E and County 24-1/2 Street from Rural Area -
minimum 10 acres (RA-10) to Light Industrial (L-I).


302
 
5-11-2011
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 10 acres located on the northeast corner of
Avenue E and County 25th Street from Rural Area - minimum 10 acres (RA-10) to
General Commercial (C-2); and rezoning 30 acres located on the northeast
corner of Avenue E and County 25th Street from Rural Area - minimum 10 acres
(RA-10) to Light Industrial (L-I).


313
 
5-23-2012
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning 880 acres located south of County 25th Street
between Avenue C and Avenue B from Rural Area - 10 acre minimum (RA-10) to
Heavy Industrial (H-I).


317
 
9-26-2012
 
Amending Ordinance 312; rezoning approximately 38.30 acres located at the
southwest corner of Avenue E and County 24th Street from Rural Area - 10 acre
minimum (RA-10) to Light Industrial (L-I); and rezoning approximately 39.03
acres located along the County 24th Street frontage from Medium Density
Residential (R-2) to Light Industrial (L-I).


323
 
3-13-2014
 
Amending Ordinance 13; rezoning a 7,579 square foot lot described as
International Plaza - Phase 2, Lot 88, from Community Commercial (C-2) to
Medium Density Residential (R-1-6).


329
 
9-24-2014
 
Rezoning approximately 640 acres more or less located east of Ave. D, west of
Ave. C, South of 24th Street and North of 25th Streets from Rural Area
Residential (RA-10) to General Industrial (H-I).


334
 
2-25-2015
 
Rezoning 1.77 acres located on 3676 East County 24th Street from Neighborhood
Commercial (C-l) to Community Commercial (C-2).


340
 
8-26-2015
 
Rezoning approximately 26.32 acres of real property located at San Luis Plaza
Subdivision from Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) to Community Commercial (C-2).


351
 
5-25-2016
 
Rezoning approximately 27.58 acres located south of County 22nd Street
between the East Main Canal and Las Quintas De San Luis Subdivision from
Rural Area Residential (RA-10) to Medium Density Residential (R1-6).


352
 
5-11-2016
 
Rezoning approximately 29 acres located on the southwest corner of Avenue E
1/2 and County 23 1/2 Street from Medium-High Density (R-2) to Medium Density
Residential (R1-6).


356
 
7-27-2016
 
Rezoning approximately a 6,958 square foot lot located at 315 E. Cuauhtemoc
Street, Rancho San Luis Mobile Home Subdivision from High Density Residential
(R-3) to Manufactured Home (MH).


361
 
12-28-2016
 
Rezoning approximately ten acres located north of County 22nd Street and east
of the East Main Canal from Rural Area Residential (RA-10) to Medium Density
Residential (R1-6).


364
 
5-10-2017
 
Rezoning approximately 35.82 acres located east of Avenue F between Aracely
Street and County 24th Street; 34.63 acres from Medium-High Density
Residential (R-2) to Medium Density Residential (R1-6) and 1.19 acres from
Medium-High Density Residential (R-2) to Community Commercial (C-2).


369
 
10-11-2017
 
Rezoning approximately 33 acres located on the northwest corner of County
24th Street and 20th Avenue from Medium-High Density Residential (R-2) to
Medium Density Residential (R1-6).


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Arizona Revised Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES



 



 

A.R.S. Cites
 
Code Section




3-365
 
152.076


4-101
 
94.10


Title 8
 
91.99


9-240(B)(3)(e)
 
152.063


9-272
 
30.020


9-461.01 et seq.
 
152.026


9-461.05
 
152.013


9-461.06
 
152.042; 152.047


9-462
 
152.028


9-462 et seq.
 
152.002; 152.064


9-462.01(B)
 
152.061


9-462.03
 
152.040


9-462.04
 
152.041; 152.042


9-462.06
 
152.041; 152.045


9-462.06 et seq.
 
152.027


9-462.06(A)
 
152.028


9-463.05
 
150.041; 150.042, 150.044; 150.046; 150.054


9-463.05(K)
 
150.041


9-463.05(N), (O)
 
150.055


9-463.05(T)(5)
 
150.042


9-463.05(T)(10)
 
150.042


9-500.05
 
150.042; 150.052


9-805
 
150.010; 150.014


9-1204
 
152.013


11-258
 
110.10


13-101
 
112.02


13-901.03(B)
 
152.225


13-2407
 
37.13


13-2810
 
10.99; 72.99


13-4301 et seq.
 
130.03; 130.99


16-1019
 
152.257


Volume 17B
 
72.99


Title 20
 
110.02


22-404
 
34.06


Title 28
 
72.39


Title 28, Chapter 6
 
73.03


Title 28, Chapter 6, Art. 20
 
32.05; 70.99


Title 28, Chapter 6, Art. 21
 
32.05; 70.99


Title 28, Chapter 9
 
73.03


Title 28, Chapter 11
 
74.02


28-101 et seq.
 
112.02


28-101
 
38.02


28-641
 
71.05


28-643
 
71.05


28-693
 
73.03


28-882 et seq.
 
152.244


28-882C
 
72.39


28-883A
 
72.39


28-883B
 
72.39


28-884
 
74.03


28-964
 
73.03


28-1321
 
92.99


28-1551 et seq.
 
Adopting Ordinance; 10.99


28-1591 et seq.
 
Adopting Ordinance; 10.99; 32.05; 70.99


28-5201
 
71.10


Title 32, Chapter 9, Art. 2
 
34.06


Title 34
 
36.11


34-201 et seq.
 
150.052


36-581 et seq.
 
152.013


36-1601
 
110.11; 131.01


36-1601 et seq.
 
131.03


36-1609
 
131.03


36-1681
 
152.220


36-2202
 
38.02


36-2804
 
110.11; 152.013


36-2804(B)(1)(c)
 
152.225


36-2806(E)
 
110.11; 152.013


36-2811
 
152.225


38-260
 
30.026


38-421
 
37.13


38-503(C)
 
36.10


Title 39, Chapter 1
 
37.21


39-101
 
37.13, 37.15, 37.16


Title 41, Chapter 1, Art. 2.1
 
37.10, 37.13


Title 41, Chapter 9, Art. 8
 
150.013


41-151.15
 
37.12


41-151.16
 
37.13, 37.16


41-1750
 
36.12; 37.02


44-1201
 
51.12


45-454
 
54.02


Title 48, Chapter 4, Art. 6
 
150.047


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code
 
2011 Code




Art. 1-1
 
10.01


Art. 1-2
 
10.02


Art. 1-3
 
10.03


Art. 1-4-1
 
10.04


Art. 1-4-2
 
10.05


Art. 1-4-3
 
10.06


Art. 1-4-4
 
10.07


Art. 1-5
 
10.08


Art. 1-6
 
10.09


Art. 1-7
 
10.10


Art. 1-8
 
10.99


1-9-1
 
10.11


1-9-2
 
10.12


1-10
 
10.13


2-1-1
 
30.020


2-1-2
 
30.021


2-1-3
 
30.022


2-1-4
 
30.023


2-1-5
 
30.024


2-1-6
 
30.025


2-1-7
 
30.026


2-1-8
 
30.027


2-2-1
 
30.001


2-2-2
 
30.002


2-2-3
 
30.003


2-2-4
 
30.004


2-2-5
 
30.005


2-2-6
 
30.006


2-3-1
 
30.040


2-3-2
 
30.041


2-3-3
 
30.042


2-3-4
 
30.043


2-3-5
 
30.044


2-4-1
 
30.055


2-4-2
 
30.056


2-4-3
 
30.057


2-4-4
 
30.058


2-4-5
 
30.059


2-4-6
 
30.060


2-4-7
 
30.061


2-4-8
 
30.062


2-5-1
 
30.075


2-5-3
 
30.077


2-5-4
 
30.078


2-5-5
 
30.079


2-5-6
 
30.080


2-5-7
 
30.081


3-1-1
 
31.01


3-1-2
 
31.02


3-1-3
 
31.03


3-1-4
 
31.04


3-1-5
 
31.05


3-1-6
 
31.06


3-2-1
 
31.20


3-2-3
 
31.22


3-2-4
 
31.23


3-2-5
 
31.24


3-2-6
 
31.25


3-2-7
 
31.26


3-4-01
 
36.01


3-4-02
 
36.02


3-4-03
 
36.03


3-4-04
 
36.04


3-4-05
 
36.05


3-4-06
 
36.06


3-4-07
 
36.07


3-4-08
 
36.08


3-4-09
 
36.09


3-4-10
 
36.10


3-4-11
 
36.11


3-4-12
 
36.12


4-1-1
 
32.01


4-1-2
 
32.02


4-1-3
 
32.03


4-1-4
 
32.04


4-1-5
 
32.05


4-1-6
 
32.06


4-2-1
 
33.01


4-2-2
 
33.02


4-2-3
 
33.03


4-2-4
 
33.04


4-2-5
 
33.05


4-2-6
 
33.06


4-2-7
 
33.07


4-2-8
 
33.08


4-2-9
 
33.09


4-2-10
 
33.10


4-2-11
 
33.11


Art. 5-1
 
34.01


5-2-1
 
34.20


5-2-2
 
34.21


5-2-3
 
34.22


Art. 5-3
 
34.02


6-5
 
150.011


7-1-1
 
111.01


7-1-2
 
111.02


7-1-3
 
111.03


7-1-4
 
111.04


7-1-5
 
111.05


7-1-6
 
111.06


7-1-7
 
111.07


7-1-8
 
111.08


8-4-1
 
91.15


8-4-2
 
91.16


8-4-3
 
91.17


8-4-4
 
91.18


8-4-5
 
91.19


8-4-6
 
91.20


8-4-7
 
91.21


8-4-8
 
91.22


8-4-9
 
91.23


8-4-10
 
91.24


9-1-1
 
92.01—92.03; 92.99


9-1-2
 
91.01


9-1-3
 
90.01


9-1-4
 
93.01; 93.02


10-1
 
70.01


10-2
 
70.02


10-3
 
70.03


10-4
 
70.04


10-5
 
70.05


11-1
 
71.01


11-2
 
71.02


11-3
 
71.03


11-4
 
71.04


11-5
 
71.05


11-6
 
71.06


11-7
 
71.07


11-8
 
71.08


11-9
 
71.09


12-1
 
72.01


12-2
 
72.02


12-3
 
72.03


12-4
 
72.04


12-5
 
72.05


12-6
 
72.06


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




1
 
9-20-1979
 
30.055; 30.056


2
 
9-20-1979
 
30.040—30.043


4
 
9-20-1979
 
35.01


6
 
4-10-1980
 
91.15—91.24


8
 
5-22-1980
 
92.01—92.03; 92.99


9
 
6-26-1980
 
32.01—32.06


10
 
7-24-1980
 
150.001—150.013; 150.999


14
 
11-13-1980
 
30.055


15
 
2-11-1981
 
90.01; 90.99; 91.01; 91.99; 93.01; 93.02; 93.99


16
 
2-11-1981
 
30.055


17
 
7-8-1981
 
TSO IV


18
 
9-23-1981
 
94.99


20
 
12-9-1981
 
30.055


21
 
12-23-1981
 
34.01; 34.02; 34.20—34.22


22
 
2-10-1982
 
94.01


25
 
7-14-1982
 
95.01


28
 
7-28-1982
 
TSO II


27
 
8-11-1982
 
31.25


30
 
10-27-1982
 
TSO II


32
 
12-8-1982
 
TSO II


33
 
12-8-1982
 
TSO II


35
 
5-11-1983
 
72.07


34
 
5-25-1983
 
TSO IV


36
 
8-10-1983
 
30.055


37
 
10-8-1983
 
72.07


39
 
11-10-1983
 
30.055


40
 
2-22-1984
 
10.99


41
 
2-22-1984
 
71.03


42
 
2-22-1984
 
32.05


43
 
2-22-1984
 
72.02


44
 
2-22-1984
 
70.99


45
 
2-22-1984
 
72.05


46
 
5-23-1984
 
30.055


50
 
2-27-1985
 
51.01—51.14


51
 
3-27-1985
 
72.07


53
 
4-24-1985
 
94.99


54
 
4-24-1985
 
51.12; 51.15; 51.16; 51.99


58
 
6-12-1985
 
51.12


59
 
7-15-1985
 
72.07


61
 
4-9-1986
 
TSO II


63
 
5-13-1987
 
35.15


65
 
7-22-1987
 
TSO II


66
 
3-30-1988
 
TSO II


67
 
5-25-1988
 
35.15


71
 
12-28-1988
 
TSO V


72_1
 
- -1989
 
TSO V


70
 
1-25-1989
 
30.001; 30.020


72
 
2-22-1989
 
30.060


73
 
4-26-1989
 
150.065; 150.999


76
 
9-27-1989
 
TSO V


79
 
12-13-1989
 
52.001; 52.002; 52.015—52.018; 52.030; 52.031; 52.045; 52.060—52.064;
52.075—52.078; 52.090—52.092


80
 
2-14-1990
 
TSO II


83
 
5-23-1990
 
TSO V


84
 
5-23-1990
 
35.15


85
 
6-27-1990
 
96.01—96.08; 96.99


86
 
10-10-1990
 
TSO V


87
 
10-10-1990
 
TSO V


89
 
12-12-1990
 
TSO V


90
 
12-12-1990
 
TSO V


92
 
- -1991
 
TSO V


93
 
6-26-1991
 
TSO V


95
 
6-26-1991
 
TSO V


96
 
7-24-1991
 
TSO V


98
 
1-22-1992
 
TSO I


99
 
6-3-1992
 
TSO V


100
 
6-3-1992
 
TSO I


101
 
8-12-1992
 
TSO I


102
 
9-23-1992
 
TSO I


103
 
10-28-1992
 
TSO V


104
 
10-28-1992
 
TSO V


105
 
11-25-1992
 
TSO V


106
 
3-10-1993
 
TSO V


107
 
3-24-1993
 
TSO V


108
 
3-24-1993
 
TSO I


109
 
5-26-1993
 
130.01—130.03; 130.99


110
 
6-23-1993
 
TSO V


111
 
11-24-1993
 
TSO I


113
 
4-27-1994
 
TSO V


116
 
12-14-1994
 
TSO II


117
 
1-11-1995
 
TSO V


118
 
1-11-1995
 
35.15


119
 
3-22-1995
 
TSO II


121
 
5-10-1995
 
30.055


124
 
5-24-1995
 
TSO V


125
 
9-11-1995
 
53.01—53.13; 53.99


126
 
9-11-1995
 
TSO V


129
 
11-22-1995
 
TSO I


130
 
11-22-1995
 
TSO V


132
 
1-24-1996
 
51.02; 51.12; 52.015; 52.016; 52.030


135
 
5-22-1996
 
TSO V


136
 
6-5-1996
 
TSO I


137
 
8-28-1996
 
91.55; 91.56; 91.99


138
 
8-28-1996
 
35.15


139
 
8-28-1996
 
TSO V


140
 
9-11-1996
 
TSO I


142
 
11-13-1996
 
35.15


143
 
12-26-1996
 
150.013


145
 
9-10-1997
 
TSO II


146
 
9-10-1997
 
TSO I


147
 
11-19-1997
 
TSO I


148
 
12-17-1997
 
TSO V


149
 
1-14-1998
 
72.07; 72.99


151
 
3-25-1998
 
TSO I


152
 
5-27-1998
 
TSO V


153
 
8-26-1998
 
30.056; 30.058


154
 
9-23-1998
 
35.15


156
 
4-7-1999
 
TSO III


155
 
4-14-1999
 
TSO II


158
 
4-26-1999
 
TSO II


157
 
5-12-1999
 
34.03; 34.04; 34.05; 34.22


159
 
6-9-1999
 
TSO V


161
 
12-8-1999
 
35.15


162
 
12-8-1999
 
TSO V


163
 
1-12-2000
 
TSO II


165
 
4-26-2000
 
TSO IV


166
 
5-10-2000
 
92.15—92.19; 92.99


167
 
5-24-2000
 
TSO II


168
 
9-13-2000
 
34.06


169
 
9-27-2000
 
TSO II


170
 
10-11-2000
 
TSO V


171
 
11-22-2000
 
TSO II


172
 
1-24-2001
 
112.01—112.10; 112.99


173
 
4-25-2001
 
TSO I


174
 
8-22-2001
 
TSO V


175
 
9-12-2001
 
TSO V


176
 
9-12-2001
 
TSO V


177
 
9-12-2001
 
TSO V


179
 
9-12-2001
 
TSO V


180
 
10-10-2001
 
TSO V


181
 
10-29-2001
 
TSO V


187
 
- -2002
 
TSO I


182
 
1-9-2002
 
35.15


183
 
2-13-2002
 
112.02; 112.03; 112.05; 112.06; 112.09; 112.10


186
 
4-24-2002
 
TSO V


193
 
1-22-2003
 
TSO V


197
 
5-14-2003
 
150.041—150.052


194
 
5-28-2003
 
35.15


203
 
12-16-2003
 
TSO I


202
 
12-23-2003
 
74.01—74.04; 74.99


205
 
2-11-2004
 
112.02


207
 
4-28-2004
 
TSO V


208
 
4-28-2004
 
TSO V


212
 
6-22-2004
 
TSO I


211
 
7-28-2004
 
TSO II


214
 
7-28-2004
 
35.15


189
 
8-11-2004
 
72.20—72.39; 72.99


215
 
8-25-2004
 
35.15


217
 
11-24-2004
 
TSO I


219
 
1-12-2005
 
36.01


220
 
1-26-2005
 
91.35—91.40; 91.99


222
 
2-9-2005
 
35.15


223
 
2-23-2005
 
73.01—73.03; 73.99


225
 
3-23-2005
 
150.046; 150.047; 150.050


226
 
3-23-2005
 
72.32


227
 
4-27-2005
 
TSO II


229
 
5-11-2005
 
110.01—110.12; 110.99


221
 
6-8-2005
 
TSO V


230
 
6-22-2005
 
TSO V


231
 
6-22-2005
 
TSO V


232
 
6-22-2005
 
150.040; 150.050


235
 
11-9-2005
 
34.05


240
 
3-8-2006
 
TSO V


243
 
5-31-2006
 
35.15


245
 
9-13-2006
 
32.01; 32.02; 32.04; 33.01—33.05


246
 
11-21-2006
 
TSO V


247
 
11-29-2006
 
35.15


248
 
2-14-2007
 
37.01; 37.02


249
 
3-28-2007
 
TSO V


250
 
4-25-2007
 
TSO V


251
 
6-13-2007
 
TSO V


252
 
7-25-2007
 
TSO V


254
 
8-22-2007
 
TSO III


255
 
11-28-2007
 
34.05


253
 
12-19-2007
 
35.15


257
 
1-23-2008
 
10.99


259
 
1-23-2008
 
75.01; 75.99


260
 
4-9-2008
 
35.15


261
 
4-23-2008
 
112.06


262
 
4-23-2008
 
112.02


263
 
5-28-2008
 
TSO V


265
 
7-9-2008
 
112.05


266
 
7-23-2008
 
112.08


267
 
8-13-2008
 
112.08


268
 
8-13-2008
 
TSO II


258
 
9-10-2008
 
150.009; 150.999


272
 
3-11-2009
 
TSO V


273
 
3-11-2009
 
74.03


275
 
5-2-2009
 
38.01—38.04


278
 
8-19-2009
 
TSO V


280
 
8-19-2009
 
35.15


279
 
9-23-2009
 
TSO V


281
 
12-22-2009
 
32.01; 32.02; 32.04; 33.01—33.05


282
 
1-27-2010
 
112.06


276
 
4-4-2010
 
150.001—150.010; 150.025; 150.999


284
 
5-12-2010
 
150.080—150.086


285
 
6-9-2010
 
TSO V


286
 
6-9-2010
 
TSO V


287
 
9-8-2010
 
91.38; 91.39; 91.99


288
 
11-10-2010
 
131.01—131.05; 131.99


289
 
12-8-2010
 
113.01—113.13; 113.25—113.30; 113.99


290
 
1-12-2011
 
110.11


293
 
2-10-2011
 
TSO V


294
 
2-10-2011
 
TSO V


295
 
4-13-2011
 
TSO V


296
 
4-13-2011
 
TSO V


297
 
3-23-2011
 
TSO V


298
 
5-11-2011
 
TSO V


299
 
5-11-2011
 
TSO V


300
 
5-11-2011
 
TSO V


301
 
5-11-2011
 
TSO V


302
 
5-11-2011
 
TSO V


303
 
4-13-2011
 
35.15


304
 
5-11-2011
 
TSO II


305
 
6-8-2011
 
150.006


306
 
7-13-2011
 
52.016; 52.018; 52.030


307
 
7-27-2011
 
35.15


308
 
9-28-2011
 
34.05


309
 
10-26-2011
 
72.08—72.11; 72.36


310
 
11-22-2011
 
112.03—112.09; 112.99


312
 
4-11-2012
 
152.001—152.013; 152.025—152.028; 152.040—152.048; 152.060—152.064;
152.075—152.078; 152.090—152.092; 152.105—152.108; 152.120—152.122;
152.135; 152.136; 152.150—152.154; 152.165—152.168; 152.180—152.182;
152.195—152.199; 152.210—152.226; 152.240—152.244; 152.255—152.262;
152.275—152.282; 152.295—152.300; 152.315—152.322; 152.335—152.338;
Ch. 152, App. A


313
 
5-23-2012
 
TSO V


314
 
7-11-2012
 
52.016; 52.018; 52.030


316
 
7-25-2012
 
54.01; 54.02; 54.99


317
 
9-26-2012
 
TSO V


318
 
10-10-2012
 
Adopting Ordinance


319
 
9-26-2012
 
54.01; 54.02; 54.99


320
 
12-12-2012
 
71.06


322
 
4-10-2013
 
132.01—132.03; 132.99


323
 
3-13-2014
 
TSO V


324
 
2-26-2014
 
112.06


325
 
2-26-2014
 
30.040


326
 
2-26-2014
 
30.042


327
 
5-28-2014
 
150.040—150.055


328
 
5-28-2014
 
35.15


329
 
9-24-2014
 
TSO V


331
 
11-12-2014
 
31.20 - 31.22; 32.03; 33.09; 33.10; 35.01; 35.02; 35.15


332
 
11-24-2014
 
110.09


333
 
2-25-2015
 
Adopting Ordinance


334
 
2-25-2015
 
TSO V


336
 
2-25-2015
 
71.10


337
 
5-27-2015
 
95.02, 95.99


338
 
5-27-2015
 
152.107, 152.122


339
 
8-26-2015
 
110.03


340
 
8-26-2015
 
TSO V


341
 
9-9-2015
 
94.20, 94.99


343
 
11-10-2015
 
91.50—91.57; 91.99


344
 
1-27-2016
 
152.026


345
 
1-13-2016
 
34.05


346
 
12-9-2015
 
70.99; 71.04; 71.05; 71.07; 71.10; 71.11; 72.04; 72.07; 72.10; 72.99; 112.02;
112.03; 112.07


347
 
1-27-2016
 
152.061; 152.075; 152.078; 152.090—152.092


348
 
3-23-2016
 
35.15


349
 
4-27-2016
 
Adopting Ordinance


350
 
6-8-2016
 
152.259; 152.260


351
 
5-25-2016
 
TSO V


352
 
5-11-2016
 
TSO VV


353
 
5-25-2016
 
150.008—150.008.4


355
 
5-25-2016
 
T.S.O. III


356
 
7-27-2016
 
TSO V


357
 
7-27-2016
 
35.15


358
 
10-12-2016
 
95.02


359
 
10-26-2016
 
153.001


360
 
12-28-2016
 
37.10—37.17


361
 
12-28-2016
 
TSO V


364
 
5-10-2017
 
TSO V


365
 
6-28-2017
 
37.20; 37.21


366
 
7-12-2017
 
152.121


367
 
10-11-2017
 
152.262


368
 
10-11-2017
 
152.013; 152.221


369
 
10-11-2017
 
TSO V


370
 
11-21-2017
 
Adopting Ordinance


371
 
11-21-2017
 
35.15


372
 
11-21-2017
 
152.078; 152.091


373
 
12-27-2017
 
30.077


374
 
12-27-2017
 
30.075; 30.078


375
 
1-10-2018
 
51.12


377
 
1-10-2018
 
TSO I


378
 
1-24-2018
 
94.02; 94.03; 94.10—94.14; 94.99


379
 
2-28-2018
 
152.040


380
 
3-14-2018
 
95.04—95.07


 
 
 
 
 




 


