CITY OF TOLLESON, ARIZONA CODE OF ORDINANCES 
____________ 
VOLUME 1 
____________ 
2019 S-18 Supplement contains: 
Local legislation current through 
Ord. 582, N.S. passed September 11, 2018. 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF TOLLESON, ARIZONA 
____________ 
Anna Tovar 
Mayor 
____________ 
Juan F. Rodriguez 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Lupe L. Bandin 
John A. Carnero 
Clorinda Erives 
Linda M. Laborin 
Albert P. Mendoza 
Council Members 
____________ 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
CITY OF TOLLESON, ARIZONA 
ORDINANCE NO. 482, N.S. 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF TOLLESON, MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA, ADOPTING THE REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF TOLLESON, ARIZONA; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; AND ESTABLISHING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TOLLESON, MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA, AS FOLLOWS: 
    SECTION 1: That certain document entitled the "Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Tolleson, Arizona", three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 1036 of the City of Tolleson, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance. 
    SECTION 2: Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
    SECTION 3: Severability. If any section, subsection, or clause of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, subsections and clauses shall not be affected. 
    SECTION 4: Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed. 
    SECTION 5: Effective date. That the provisions of this Ordinance shall be effective from and after 12:00 midnight on the 15th day of May, 2009. 
    PASSED by the Council of the City of Tolleson this 14th day of April, 2009. 
    APPROVED by the Mayor this 14 day of April, 2009. 
/s/   
      Adolfo F. Gámez, Mayor   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      Scott W. Ruby, City Attorney   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Chris Hagen, City Clerk   
CHAPTER 1: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 1-1: - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY 

§ 1-1-1 - HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the Revised Code of the City of Tolleson, Arizona , and may be so cited. The code may also be cited as the Tolleson City Code, Revised . 
§ 1-1-2 - CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES. 
    The rules and the definitions set forth in this article shall be observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the city unless the construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the Council, the context of this code or the ordinances of the city. 
§ 1-1-3 - DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  General rule regarding definitions. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved use of the language. Technical words and phrases and such others, as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood according to the peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(B)  Specific definitions. 
    ACTS BY AGENTS. When an act is required to be done which may, by law, as well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirements shall be construed to include all acts when done by an authorized agent. 
    CITY. The City of Tolleson, Arizona. 
    CODE. The Revised Code of the City of Tolleson , unless the context indicates otherwise. 
    COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Tolleson. 
    COUNCIL MEMBER. A member of the Council of the City of Tolleson, other than the Mayor. 
    COUNTY. Maricopa County, Arizona, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
    DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME. DAYTIME is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. NIGHTTIME is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
    DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the city unless the context requires otherwise. 
    GENDER; SINGULAR AND PLURAL. Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular. 
    JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority. 
    KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through an agent, servant or employee. 
    MANAGER or CITY MANAGER. The Manager of the City of Tolleson, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Tolleson, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    MEMBER OF COUNCIL. A member of the Council of the City of Tolleson, including the Mayor. 
    MONTH. A calendar month. 
    OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. 
    OWNER. A building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of part of the building or land. 
    PERSON. Includes a corporation, company, partnership, association or society, as well as a natural person. 
    PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
    PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively. 
    PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and personal property. 
    PUBLIC PLACE. Any thoroughfare, park, open space or building not privately owned or controlled. 
    REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    SHALL, MAY. SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive. 
    SHALL HAVE BEEN. Includes past and future tenses. 
    SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. Includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, the signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
    STATE. The State of Arizona, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    STREET. Any lane, court, boulevard, public way, public square, public place or thoroughfare. 
    TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of, the building or land, either alone or with others. 
    TENSES. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future includes the present. 
    TIME; COMPUTATION. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be excluded. When the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    TIME, REASONABLE. In all cases where any section of this code shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, shall be deemed to mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty or compliance with the notice. 
    WEEK. A week consists of seven consecutive days. 
    WRITING. Any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made, in writing, in the English language, unless expressly provided otherwise. 
    YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise provided. 
§ 1-1-4 - REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS, ARTICLES OR SECTIONS; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. 
(A)  Additional rules of construction. In addition to the rules of construction specified in §§ 1-1-2 and 1-1-3, the rules set forth in this article shall be observed in the construction of this code. 
(B)  References to this code. All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this code unless otherwise specified. 
(C)  Conflicting provisions. 
(1)  If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter that is most stringent shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of the chapter. 
(2)  If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section that is most stringent shall prevail unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of the chapter. 
§ 1-1-5 - SECTION HEADINGS. 
    Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute part of the law. 
§ 1-1-6 - EFFECT OF REPEAL. 
    When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
§ 1-1-7 - SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be severable and, if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code. 
§ 1-1-8 - PENALTY. 
(A)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this code, any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished pursuant to the terms set forth in the A.R.S. § 13-707, § 13-802, and § 13-902, as amended. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
(B)  The penalties provided in this article shall be applicable to every provision of this city code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate provision. 
(C)  Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by Chapter 6 of this code constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 5, Articles 3 and 4, and amendments thereto. Hearings and appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Cases. 
(Ord. 567, N.S., passed 11-22-2016) 
§ 1-1-9 - REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES. 
(A)  Effective date of repeal. All ordinances of the City of Tolleson, except those specially exempted in this article, now in force and effect are hereby repealed effective at 12:00 noon on May 15, 2009, but all rights, duties and obligations created by the ordinances shall continue and exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted. 
(B)  Ordinances exempt from repeal. The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or, in any way, to affect or modify: 
(1)  Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations, dedications, zoning, subdivisions or cable television; 
(2)  Any ordinance making an appropriation; 
(3)  Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been authorized; 
(4)  The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this code becomes effective; 
(5)  The continued existence and operation of any department, agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held; 
(6)  Any bond of any public officer; 
(7)  Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed; and 
(8)  Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State of Arizona, any county or subdivision thereof or with the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof. 
§ 1-1-10 - EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE. 
    Each section of this code as herein contained and hereby enacted shall take effect and be in force on and after 12:00 midnight on May 15, 2009, except that where a later effective date is provided it shall prevail. 
CHAPTER 2: - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE 2-1: - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
COUNCIL 

§ 2-1-1 - ELECTED OFFICERS; TERMS. 
(A)  The elected officers of the city shall be the Mayor and six Council members. The Mayor and Council members shall constitute the City Council and shall hold its office for terms of four years each and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(B)  For purposes of elections, the City Council shall be divided into two classes. The first class shall consist of the Mayor and three Council members. The second class shall consist of the other three Council members. The Mayor and Council members shall be elected by the classes at alternating regular elections and shall serve four-year overlapping terms. For the purpose of facilitating the change in election dates pursuant to § 2-1-40 and § 2-1-42 of this chapter, the term of office for the Mayor and the Council members holding office on the tenth Tuesday before the first Monday in November of 2014, whose term would have expired in June of 2015 shall be extended until their successors are elected and qualified in December of 2016 and the term of office for the Council members holding office on the tenth Tuesday before the first Monday in November of 2016, whose term would have expired in June of 2017, shall be extended until their successors are elected and qualified in December of 2018. 
( Am. Ord. 534, N.S. , passed 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-271 and 9-272 
§ 2-1-2 - CORPORATE POWERS. 
    The corporate powers of the city shall be vested in the Council and shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or motion. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-232 
§ 2-1-3 - DUTIES OF OFFICE. 
    The Mayor and Council members shall assume the duties of office at the first regularly scheduled meeting date in December following the date of the general election at which the Mayor or Council members were elected. 
( Am. Ord. 534, N.S. , passed 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-231 and 9-232 
§ 2-1-4 - VACANCIES IN COUNCIL. 
(A)  The Council shall fill a vacancy in the Council that may occur for whatever reason, by appointment until the next regularly scheduled Council election if the vacancy occurs more than 30 days before the nomination petition deadline, otherwise the appointment is for the unexpired term. 
(B)  The member appointed shall meet the qualifications set forth in § 2-1-46 below. 
(Am. Ord. 521, N.S. , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-235 
§ 2-1-5 - COMPENSATION. 
    The compensation of elective officers of the city shall be fixed from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-232.01 and 9-274 
§ 2-1-6 - OATH OF OFFICE. 
    Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each member of the Council shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office. 
§ 2-1-7 - BOND. 
(A)  Prior to taking office, every member of the Council shall execute and file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and their sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the city or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of the officer in his or her official capacity. 
(B)  A person so injured or aggrieved may bring suit on the bond under provisions identical to those contained under state law. Bonds shall be in the sum as shall be provided by resolution and the premium for the bonds shall be paid by the city. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-302 
MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR 

§ 2-1-20 - ELECTION OF MAYOR. 
    The Mayor shall be directly elected by the qualified electors of the city. The mayoral election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of § 2-1-40 and § 2-1-42 of this article. 
( Am. Ord. 534, N.S. , passed 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-272.01 
§ 2-1-21 - SELECTION OF VICE MAYOR. 
(A)  The Council shall, at the first regularly scheduled meeting in December, after its election, choose the Vice Mayor from among its number. 
(B)  The Vice Mayor shall be elected by majority vote of the Council members present at the election meeting. In the event that no candidate receives a majority vote, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall run in a runoff election until the time as one candidate receives a majority. 
( Am. Ord. 534, N.S. , passed 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-236 
§ 2-1-22 - TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON. 
    In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Council may designate, by motion, another of its members to serve as temporary chairperson who shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor during the absence or disability. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-236 
§ 2-1-23 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR. 
    The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following. 
(A)  The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. 
(B)  The Mayor shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its meetings. The Mayor may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings. 
(C)  The Mayor shall enforce the provisions of this code. 
(D)  The Mayor shall execute and authenticate, by the Mayor's signature, the instruments as the Council, or any statutes, ordinances or this code shall require. 
(E)  The Mayor shall make recommendations and suggestions to the Council as the Mayor may consider proper. 
(F)  The Mayor may exercise all powers set forth in § 4-4-4 of this code in instances of emergencies. 
(G)  The Mayor shall perform other duties required by state statute and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the city. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-236 
§ 2-1-24 - ABSENCE OF MAYOR. 
    The Mayor shall not be absent from the city for a greater period than 15 consecutive days without the consent of the Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-236 
§ 2-1-25 - FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS. 
    If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring the Mayor's signature for five days consecutively, then a majority of the Council members may, at any regular or special meeting, by motion authorize the Vice Mayor, or in the absence of the Vice Mayor, a temporary chairperson to sign the ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument which when so signed shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-236 
COUNCIL ELECTION 

§ 2-1-40 - PRIMARY ELECTION. 
(A)  Commencing in 2014, primary elections shall be held on the tenth Tuesday before the first Monday in November of even-numbered years or on the date as otherwise prescribed by state law. 
(B)  Any candidate for the Council who shall receive at the primary election a majority of all the votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which the person is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate. 
(C)  In calculating the votes cast in the primary election where the office of Mayor is up for election, for purposes of determining if a candidate for the office of Mayor or Council has received a majority of the votes cast, the basis shall be the number of votes cast for the office of Mayor at that election. 
( Am. Ord. 534, N.S. , passed 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-821.01 
§ 2-1-41 - NON-POLITICAL BALLOT. 
    Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the source of the candidacy or of the support of the candidate by political parties or any group, organization or individual. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-821.01 
§ 2-1-42 - GENERAL ELECTION. 
(A)  Commencing in 2014, general elections of the city shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even-numbered years or on the date as otherwise prescribed by state law. 
(B)  If, at any primary election held as above provided, there be any office or offices for which no candidate is elected, then as to the office or offices, the election shall be considered to be a primary election for nomination of candidates for the office or offices, and the general municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill the office or offices. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the general municipal election shall be those not elected at the primary election, shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office or less than that number if there be less than that number named on the primary election ballot. Persons who receive the highest number of votes for the respective offices at the primary election shall be the only candidates at the general election, provided that, if there be any person who, under the provisions of this subsection, would have been entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of votes therefor, then all persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for such office. 
( Am. Ord. 534, N.S. , passed 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 16-201 and 16-203 
§ 2-1-43 - ELECTION TO OFFICE. 
(A)  The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. 
(B)  The Clerk, immediately upon the confirmation of election, shall issue certificates of election to each elected member of the Council. The certificates shall be in a form as approved by the Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-821 and 16-647 
§ 2-1-44 - RECOUNT. 
(A)  In the event the vote spread between two candidates for one Council seat is less than ten votes, in either the primary or general election, an automatic recount of the votes shall be required. 
(B)  The procedure to be followed for the recount shall be pursuant to the provisions in A.R.S. Title 16, Chapter 4, Article 12, and amendments thereto. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 16-661 
§ 2-1-45 - FILING DEADLINE FOR NOMINATION PAPERS. 
(A)  A person desiring to become a candidate and to have his or her name printed on the official ballot for City Council shall file a nomination paper and other nomination materials not less than 90 days nor more than 120 days before the primary election date. 
(B)  All nomination papers must be completed and filed with the City Clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the last day for filing the papers. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 16-311 
§ 2-1-46 - ELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE. 
    A person shall not be a member of the City Council unless, at the time of election, the person is 18 years old or older, is a qualified elector residing within the city at the time of election, and has resided in the city for one year next preceding the election, or if an area has been annexed to the city for a period of less than one year next preceding the election has resided in the area for one year next preceding the election. If an annexed area is subject to the provisions of this section, a person may meet the residency requirements if the person has resided within the existing limits of the city for a one-year period. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-232 
COUNCIL PROCEDURE 

§ 2-1-60 - REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS. 
(A)  Regular meetings. The Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. When the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day not a holiday. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the City Hall of Tolleson. 
(B)  Special meetings. The Mayor, or the City Manager, upon the written/verbal request of three Council members, may convene the Council at any time by notifying the members of the date, hour and purpose of the special meeting. 
(Am. Ord. 352, N.S., passed 5-28-1996; Am. Ord. 570, N.S. , passed 3-14-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-233 
§ 2-1-61 - MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC. 
    All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except that, upon approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a closed executive session in the manner provided by state statute. No ordinance, order, rule, resolution, regulation, contract, appointment or other official action shall be finally approved in any executive session. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-234, 38-431.01 and 38-431.03 
§ 2-1-62 - QUORUM. 
    A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for transacting business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. No adjournment shall be to a day beyond the next stated meeting of the Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-233 
§ 2-1-63 - AGENDA. 
    Prior to each Council meeting the City Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the Council, and prepare an agenda according to the order of business and shall furnish a copy to each member of Council and the City Attorney at least 24 hours prior to any regular meeting. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-234 
§ 2-1-64 - CONSENT AGENDA. 
(A)  When any item of business requires action by the Council, but is of a routine and non-controversial nature, the item may be presented at a regular meeting of the Council as part of a consent agenda. 
(B)  The consent agenda shall be introduced by a motion "To approve the Consent Agenda" and shall be considered by the Council as a single item. 
(C)  There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the Council regarding any item on the consent agenda, beyond asking questions for simple clarification. 
(D)  All items on the consent agenda which require public hearings shall be open for hearing simultaneously, and the Mayor shall announce, or direct the City Clerk to announce, the titles of all items. 
(E)  Upon objection by any member of the Council to inclusion of any item on the consent agenda, that item shall be removed from the consent agenda forthwith. The objections may be recorded at any time prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve the consent agenda. All items shall be considered individually, in the order in which they were objected to, immediately following consideration of the consent agenda. 
(F)  Approval of the motion to approve the consent agenda shall be fully equivalent to approval, adoption or enactment of each motion, resolution, ordinance or other item of business thereon, exactly as if each had been acted upon individually. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-234 
§ 2-1-65 - ORDER OF BUSINESS. 
    The business of the Council at its regular meeting shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order. 
(A)  Call to order. The Mayor shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order. In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall call the Council to order. In the absence of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Manager shall call the Council to order and a temporary chairperson shall be selected to chair the meeting. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or the Vice Mayor, the Vice Mayor or the temporary chairperson shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council. The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and decide all questions of order. 
(B)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the Clerk or the Clerk's deputy shall enter in the minutes the names of those members of the Council present and those absent. If a quorum is not present, the members present may adjourn pursuant to § 2-1-62 of this code. 
(C)  Pledge of allegiance. At every regular Council meeting, the Mayor or chairperson of the meeting shall request someone on the Council or in the audience to lead the pledge of allegiance to the flag. 
(D)  Invocation/moment of silence. If desired, the Mayor or chairperson of the meeting shall request someone on the Council or in the audience to lead the invocation/moment of silence. 
(E)  Open call to the public. 
(1)  Persons wishing to address the Council on items not already on the agenda may do so, although each speaker is limited to no more than three minutes. The Mayor or Council may limit the total time offered speakers. At the conclusion of the open call to the public, individual members of the Council may only: 
(a)  Respond to criticism made by those who addressed the Council; 
(b)  Ask staff to review a matter; or 
(c)  Ask that a matter be placed on a future agenda. 
(2)  The Council is not permitted under state law to discuss or take legal action on matters raised during an open call to the public unless the matters were properly noticed for discussion and legal action. 
(F)  Consent agenda. The Council shall consider any items on the consent agenda in accordance with § 2-1-64 above. 
(1)  Minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a member of the Council, the minutes of the preceding meeting shall be considered approved, if correct, and errors rectified if any exist. At each meeting, the Mayor shall ask for any corrections, additions or changes in the minutes of the previous meeting. 
(2)  Claims. Each month the Clerk shall prepare a list of all claims paid by the city. The list shall be reviewed and approved when required by the Council and a copy of it shall be included in the minutes. 
(G)  Executive sessions. Any member of the Council may request an executive session pursuant to the authority of the Arizona Revised Statutes. If a majority of the members of the Council vote to have an executive session, the Mayor shall clear the Council chambers, appoint one of the remaining staff or Council members to take minutes of the meeting and proceed with the executive session. 
(H)  Adjournment. The Council may, by a majority vote of those present, adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-234, 38-431.01 and 38-431.03 
§ 2-1-66 - EXECUTIVE SESSIONS. 
(A)  Executive sessions may be placed on an agenda under the same circumstances as any other agenda item, however approval of the City Attorney of all executive sessions shall be required to assure compliance with the open meeting law. Executive sessions may only be placed on the agenda if the issue is allowed to be considered in an executive session pursuant to state law. 
(B)  Under normal circumstances, executive sessions will be attended by the Mayor and Council, City Manager, City Clerk and City Attorney. The Mayor may direct, or a majority of the Council may vote, to have other individuals attend the executive session. 
(C)  Executive sessions are not to be tape recorded, but an individual appointed by the Mayor shall take written minutes of executive sessions to document the nature and extent of the discussions. All minutes of executive sessions shall be sealed and retained by the City Clerk. Only those individuals who were present at a particular executive session or others specifically permitted by law may review the minutes of that session. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 38-431.03 
§ 2-1-67 - PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE. 
(A)  A public hearing may be placed on the agenda under the same agenda item as the discussion and action of the Council. 
(B)  The normal procedure for public hearings shall be as set forth hereafter. 
(1)  Calling agenda item: The agenda item shall be called by the Mayor or his or her designee as any other agenda item. 
(2)  Declaration of public hearing: The Mayor shall declare that the Council is now in public hearing. 
(3)  Proponent presentation: The proponent may make an opening statement in order to explain the item to the Council and public. The Mayor or Council may limit the time for this statement as necessary. 
(4)  Staff report: Staff shall have an opportunity to report on the issue and answer questions by the Council. 
(5)  Written comments: Written communications filed with the city or staff shall be presented to the Council or read into the record. 
(6)  Public comments: Testimony from members of the public shall be permitted. Members of the public shall be limited to three minutes per person, or less as designated by the Mayor or Council. The total time allotted to the public on any issue may be limited by the Mayor or Council. 
(7)  Council discussion: Discussion by Council members may be held at this time of public hearing. 
(8)  Declaration of end of public hearing: Unless a majority of the Council members object, the Mayor shall declare the termination of the public hearing. 
(9)  Council discussion and vote: The agenda item will then be discussed and action taken as on any other agenda item. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-234 
§ 2-1-68 - CONFLICT OF INTEREST. 
    Each member of Council has a responsibility for compliance with state law concerning conflicts of interest. Any member of the Council who believes he or she has a conflict of interest shall, immediately upon determining that a conflict exists, declare the conflict of interest and explain the basis for the conflict. That member of Council may then leave the room and shall refrain from taking any part in the meeting, discussion, consideration or determination of that issue. If that issue is not resolved at that meeting, that Council member shall not discuss the matter with any other Council member until the matter is finally resolved. The member who declared the conflict may return to his or her seat when that agenda item is completed. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 38-501 et seq. 
§ 2-1-69 - DISCUSSION AND VOTING PROCEDURE. 
(A)  Every Council member desiring to speak shall address the Mayor and, upon recognition by the Mayor, shall confine himself or herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
(B)  A Council member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call him or her to order. If a Council member, while speaking, is called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined and, if in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed. 
(C)  While the Council is in session, the members of Council must preserve order and decorum. A member shall neither by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the Council or Mayor, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(D)  In the event a person in the audience wishes to address the Council on an issue on the agenda which is not a public hearing, the Mayor may permit the person to speak or may present the request to the Council. If a majority of the Council wishes to hear from the public on the issue, that person shall be permitted to speak, however any public address shall be limited to three minutes per person and as otherwise restricted by the Mayor or Council. Written communications which were delivered to the Mayor prior to the agenda item being called will be read into the record or a copy shall be delivered to each Council member. 
(E)  Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks, or who becomes boisterous while addressing the Council, or who interferes with the order of business before the Council, and who fails upon request of the Mayor to cease the activity, shall be barred from further audience before the Council for the remainder of that meeting unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote of the Council. 
(F)  A motion shall be made by beginning the statement with words such as, "I move that...." A motion must be stated clearly, and specifically state the contents of the motion. There can be no discussion after a motion is made until there is a second or the motion dies for lack of a second. If there is not a second, the Mayor shall announce that the motion failed for lack of a second, and the discussion may continue, or the Council may move on to the next agenda item. 
(G)  At any time before the question is called on a pending motion, the member of Council who made the motion may ask that his or her motion be amended. At the time of the amendment, he or she shall clearly state the amendment, and the amendment shall be read back by the Clerk. If the member of Council who seconded the vote agrees, then the motion shall be considered amended voluntarily. 
(H)  At any time before the question is called on a pending motion, a member of Council may make a motion to amend the motion. At that time, the discussion of the underlying issue will stop. If there is not a second to the motion to amend, then discussion on the underlying issue will continue. If there is a second to the motion to amend, then all discussion will be confined to the motion to amend, and there shall be a vote on the motion to amend. If the motion to amend is adopted by a majority of the Council, discussion will continue on the (now) amended motion. If the motion to amend fails, discussion will continue on the original motion on the floor. 
(I)  At any time before the question is called on a pending motion, the member of Council who made the motion may ask that his or her motion be withdrawn. The motion will be withdrawn only in the event that the member of Council who seconded the motion agrees with withdrawal of the motion. 
(J)  Discussion shall end at the time the question is called, or at the time the Mayor determines that there is no further discussion desired by any Council member. The Mayor shall direct the Clerk to read the motion, and the Clerk shall read the motion as made or amended. The only persons who can object to the form of the motion at this time are the members of Council who made and seconded the motion. If there is a conflict as to whether the motion as read is the motion as intended, the matter will revert to further discussion until the discrepancy is corrected. 
(K)  The Mayor shall ask Council members to designate their individual votes by announcing "aye" or "nay." If, prior to the vote or after the vote, any member of Council requests a roll call vote, the Mayor or his or designee shall call roll and each member of Council shall state his or her vote aloud. 
(L)  After the vote, the Mayor or his or her designee shall announce whether the motion failed or passed. If the vote was unanimous the Mayor or his or designee shall so state and, if it was not, the Mayor or his or designee shall state the individual votes for the record, stating the number of "aye" and "nay" votes. If any member of Council disagrees with the vote as read back by the Mayor or his or designee, he or she shall immediately request a clarification or roll call vote. After the Mayor or his or designee reads back the individual votes, silence by any member of Council indicates his or her agreement with the vote as read. 
(M)  A motion passes if it receives more "aye" votes than the combined number of "nay" votes, plus the number of members of Council abstaining from voting on the motion, regardless of the reason for the abstention. In the case of a tie in votes on any motion, the motion shall be considered lost. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-234 
§ 2-1-70 - MOTIONS TO RECONSIDER. 
(A)  Reconsideration of any action taken (or not taken) by the City Council may be requested only by a member of Council who was on the prevailing side of the vote. A member of Council may request that the issue of reconsideration be placed on the agenda for discussion and possible action, although this request must be made prior to the start of the next regular Council meeting following the meeting at which the action was taken. If a request is made, reconsideration will be placed on the agenda for the second regular Council meeting following the meeting at which the original action was taken. The agenda will list reconsideration of the vote as one item, and the re-vote on the issue as a separate item. 
(B)  When that agenda item is called, the Council may discuss the reconsideration, however a motion to reconsider may only be made by one of the members of Council who was on the prevailing side of the vote. A motion may be seconded by any member of Council. The discussion and vote of the motion to reconsider shall be as for any other business before the Council. 
(C)  If the motion to reconsider fails, the Council will skip the next agenda item, which will be the discussion and vote of the original issue. If the motion to reconsider was successful, the Council will discuss and vote on the original issue as for any other business before the Council and any member of Council may make motions on the original issue. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-234 
§ 2-1-71 - COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS. 
    The Council may create committees and commissions, standing or special, as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and shall perform duties as the Council may require and shall exist at the pleasure of the Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-239 
§ 2-1-72 - SUSPENSION OF RULES. 
    Any of the provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of three-fourths of the members present, except that this section shall not be construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-234 
ARTICLE 2-2: - CITY ORGANIZATIONS 
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

§ 2-2-1 - CREATION. 
    There is hereby established as an advisory body to the Council a Planning and Zoning Commission to be governed by the procedures and duties as provided in this subarticle. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.01 
§ 2-2-2 - MEMBERSHIP. 
(A)  The Commission shall be composed of a total of five members who shall be residents of the city. The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Council. In the event of death or resignation of a member, the vacancy may be filled by the Mayor and Council for the unexpired term. The term of all members shall extend until their successors are qualified. 
(B)  All members shall serve without pay, except that members of the Commission may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties upon authorization or ratification by the Commission and approval of expenditures by the Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.0 
§ 2-2-3 - OFFICERS. 
    The Commission shall elect the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its own members, who shall serve for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the latter's absence or disability. Vacancies created by any cause shall be filled by the Commission for the unexpired term by a new election. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.02 
§ 2-2-4 - DUTIES. 
(A)  It is the duty of the Commission to formulate, create and administer any lawful plan duly adopted by the governing body for the present and future growth of the city pertaining to the use of land and buildings for any purpose, together with all incidental activities usually associated therewith and commonly known as "planning and zoning;" to make or cause to be made a continuous study of the best present and future use to which land and buildings shall be put within the city and in cooperation with adjacent areas; to recommend to the governing body revisions in the plans which, in the opinion of the Commission, are for the best interest of the citizens of the city; to promulgate rules of procedure and to supervise the enforcement of rules so promulgated by the Commission and approved by the governing body. 
(B)  The Commission shall: 
(1)  Develop and maintain a general plan; 
(2)  Develop specific plans as may be necessary to implement the general plan; 
(3)  Periodically review the capital improvement program of the city; and 
(4)  Perform other planning functions as the Council may provide from time to time. 
(C)  The Commission may: 
(1)  Contract for, receive and utilize any grants or other financial assistance made available by a municipality, a county, the state or the federal government, subject to the approval of the Council; and 
(2)  Contract with the state or federal government, and any of its agencies, or the legislative body of any municipality or county subject to the approval of the Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.02 
§ 2-2-5 - HEARINGS AND MEETINGS. 
(A)  The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed zoning ordinance may conduct hearings and meetings with interested property owners and residents of the city and others in other matters in carrying out its duties. 
(B)  The Commission shall provide in its rules for its meetings; provided that, special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice Chairperson. In addition, any three members of the Commission may make written request to the Chairperson for a special meeting and in the event the meeting is not called, the members may call a special meeting in a manner and form as may be provided in the Commission rules. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.02 
§ 2-2-6 - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS. 
(A)  Three members shall constitute a quorum. 
(B)  The affirmative vote of two members shall be required for passage of any matter before the Commission. 
(C)  A member may abstain from voting only upon a declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest, in which case the member shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter in question. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.02 
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

§ 2-2-20 - CREATION. 
    There is hereby established a Board of Adjustment for the city. The Board of Adjustment is a quasi-judicial body of the city established to hear and grant, if warranted, relief from certain provisions of the city zoning code, as specifically set forth herein, and within the limits herein established. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.06 
§ 2-2-21 - MEMBERSHIP. 
    The City Council is established as the City of Tolleson's Board of Adjustment. The Council shall convene as the Board of Adjustment whenever it is necessary to fulfill the responsibilities of the Board of Adjustment. All meetings shall be open to the public and if the Board meeting is conducted as part of a Council meeting, the agenda shall clearly indicate that the Council is acting as the Board of Adjustment on that agenda item. The Mayor or, in the Mayor's absence, the Vice Mayor shall act as the Board's Chairperson and shall have the power to administer oaths and take evidence. Minutes of the Board's proceedings showing the vote of each member and records of its examinations and other official actions shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk as a public record. 
Cross reference- For provisions concerning the Board of Adjustment, see § 12-4-167(B) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.06 
§ 2-2-22 - QUORUM AND VOTING. 
    When acting as the Board of Adjustment, the Council shall follow all rules, regulations and procedures that it follows as the City Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.06 
§ 2-2-23 - DUTIES. 
(A)  The Board of Adjustment shall: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in an order, requirement or decision made by the City Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of a zoning ordinance adopted by the city; 
(2)  Hear and decide appeals for variances from the terms of a zoning ordinance only if, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including its size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance will deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by other property of the same classification in the same zoning district. Any variance granted is subject to the conditions as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is located; and 
(3)  Reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator appealed from, and make an order, requirement, decision or determination as necessary. 
(B)  The Board of Adjustment may not: 
(1)  Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of the zoning ordinance; provided, the restriction in this division shall not affect the authority to grant variances pursuant to this subarticle; and 
(2)  Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the property are self-imposed by the property owner. 
(3)  Impose stipulations and/or special conditions in granting the variance appeal. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-461.06 
COMMUNITY SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD 

§ 2-2-30 - NAME. 
    There is hereby established the Community Services Advisory Board as an advisory body to the Council. 
( Ord. 496, N.S. , passed 9-14-2010) 
§ 2-2-31 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this Board is to guide the city's Community Services Department's activities in Tolleson and surrounding areas, and to serve as an advisory board to the City Council for the purpose of identifying social service needs of the community and finding resources to meet these needs through collaboration with community groups, agencies, cities and organizations. 
( Ord. 496, N.S. , passed 9-14-2010) 
§ 2-2-32 - MEMBERSHIP AND COMPOSITION. 
(A)  Number of members. The Board shall be composed of seven members and one alternate. Members shall be residents of the City of Tolleson at the time of appointment. Consideration will be given to include representatives of the public and private sector in order to provide for broad community participation, and due consideration shall be given to a diverse membership on the Board. 
(B)  Appointment. Board members may be nominated by the Mayor or any Council member and shall be appointed by the City Council. 
(C)  Term. The term of office for an appointed Board member shall be three years, unless the Board member resigns sooner or is removed. For initial appointments, staggered terms of two and three years shall be designated. 
(D)  Term limits. No member of the Board may serve more than two consecutive terms. However, a member appointed to fill a vacancy may serve two consecutive terms after conclusion of the unexpired term to which he or she was appointed. 
(E)  Attendance. A Board member who has three consecutive unexcused absences is subject to removal from the Board by the City Council. Any Board member proposed to be removed shall be entitled to at least seven days notice in writing from the City Clerk. 
(F)  Removal. Board members serve at the pleasure of the City Council and any Board member may be removed upon a vote of not less than four Council members for any reason. 
( Ord. 496, N.S. , passed 9-14-2010) 
§ 2-2-33 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD. 
(A)  Ad hoc committees. The Board may appoint ad hoc committees as necessary to accomplish the Board's mission. 
(B)  Assist Department staff. The Board shall, as requested by the Department Supervisor, assist the Department's staff in initiating, prioritizing, coordinating and facilitating planning and implementation of Division programs. 
(C)  Funding. The Board shall, when requested by the City Council, seek additional funds and in-kind contributions, either public or private, for the purpose of furthering the programs of the Department. 
(D)  Authority. The Board shall not have authority to direct the Department's staff. The Board may make recommendations to the Department Supervisor and the City Council concerning staff and operations. 
(E)  Project review. The Board shall review and evaluate existing or proposed projects, policies and plans and shall review Department program evaluations, audits and other relevant studies, and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the projects, policies and plans. 
( Ord. 496, N.S. , passed 9-14-2010) 
§ 2-2-34 - MEETINGS. 
(A)  Frequency. Meetings of the Board shall be scheduled quarterly, at a minimum of four times per year. Notice of meetings of the Board shall be provided to the public and its meetings shall be open to the public in compliance with the requirements of the open meeting law. A record of Board proceedings shall be filed with the City Clerk's office as a public record. 
(B)  Quorum. A meeting of the Board where a majority of its members are present shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of those Board members present and voting shall be required to take official action. No action shall be taken at any meeting in the absence of a quorum. 
(C)  Rules of procedure. The Board will operate under the City of Tolleson Council Rules of Procedure, as applicable. 
( Ord. 496, N.S. , passed 9-14-2010) 
§ 2-2-35 - BOARD OFFICERS. 
(A)  Chair and Vice Chair. The Board shall annually select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the appointed members at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the new fiscal year. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall assume responsibilities at the next scheduled meeting. The term of Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall be one year. Any member serving as Chairperson or Vice Chairperson shall be eligible for additional terms as Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. 
(B)  Duties. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the Board, decide all points of order and procedure, and perform any duties as required by law, ordinance or these rules. The Chairperson shall have the right to vote on all matters before the Board and shall have the right to make or second motions in the absence of a motion or a second. 
(C)  Absence of Chairperson. The Vice Chairperson shall act as the Chairperson in the Chairperson's absence. In the absence of the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson, the senior member, based upon years of membership, shall act as Chairperson. 
(D)  Vacancy. Any vacancy for Chairperson or Vice Chairperson, as may occur for any reason, shall be filled from the Board membership by majority vote of the Board at the next meeting where a quorum is present. Such appointment shall be for the remainder of the term. 
(E)  Removal. The Chairperson or Vice Chairperson may be removed from office at any time by a majority vote of the members of the Board. 
( Ord. 496, N.S. , passed 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE 2-3: - CITY OFFICERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Res. 2167 , passed March 11, 2014, amended Art. 2-3 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Art. 2-3, §§ 2-3-1-2-3-5, 2-3-20-2-3-35, and 2-3-50, 2-3-51, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 518, N.S., passed Nov. 8, 2011. 

OFFICERS IN GENERAL 

§ 2-3-1 - OFFICERS. 
    There are hereby created the offices of Chief Magistrate, City Attorney, City Clerk, City Engineer, City Manager, Assistant City Manager, Chief Financial Officer, Community Services Director, Economic Development Director, Field Operations Director, Fire Chief, Human Resources Director, Information Technology Director, Library Director, Police Chief and Utilities Director. The Chief Magistrate, the City Attorney and the City Manager shall be appointed by the Council and, with the exception of the Chief Magistrate, shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Clerk, City Engineer, Assistant City Manager, Chief Financial Officer, Community Services Director, Economic Development Director, Field Operations Director, Fire Chief, Human Resources Director, Information Technology Director, Library Director, Police Chief and Utilities Director shall be appointed by the City Manager as provided in this article. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-271, 9-303 and 22-403 
§ 2-3-2 - ADDITIONAL OFFICERS. 
    The City Manager may appoint and remove, from time to time, other officers as the City Manager may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this code or state statute. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239 and 9-271 
§ 2-3-3 - BOND. 
(A)  The City Manager may require any officer of the city to give bond for the due discharge of his or her duties in sums and with security as the City Manager may direct and approve. The city shall pay the costs of the bond. The provided bond may be provided by the city's insurer. 
(B)  At the discretion of the City Manager, the bond may be in the form of a blanket bond with the coverage as deemed necessary. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-239 
§ 2-3-4 - VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN ONE OFFICE. 
(A)  Any vacancy that shall occur in any city office appointed by the Council shall be filled by appointment by the Council. Any vacancy that shall occur in any city office appointed by the City Manager shall be filled by appointment by the City Manager. 
(B)  One person may hold more than one office at the discretion of the Council. 
(C)  The functions of a city official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another city official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office, but employed at the pleasure of the Council. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-271, 9-303 and 9-274 
§ 2-3-5 - ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer shall have further powers, perform further duties and hold other office as may be provided by the City Manager or Council through ordinance, resolution or order and as may be required by law. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-231 and 9-274 
OFFICERS 

§ 2-3-20 - CHIEF MAGISTRATE. 
(A)  Office created. The office of the Chief Magistrate of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The Chief Magistrate shall be appointed by the Council to serve a term of two years. 
(B)  Compensation. The Chief Magistrate shall receive compensation as the Council shall fix from time to time by ordinance, resolution, motion or contract and the compensation shall not be decreased during the Chief Magistrate's term of office. 
(C)  Removal procedure. Unless otherwise provided in an employment agreement, the Council may suspend or remove the Chief Magistrate if the Chief Magistrate: 
(1)  Pleads guilty or no contest or is found guilty of a crime punishable as a felony under any law of this state or a federal law, or of any other crime that involves moral turpitude under the law; 
(2)  Has a disability that seriously interferes with the performance of the Chief Magistrate's duties and is, or is likely to become, permanent; or 
(3)  Engages in actions that constitute willful misconduct in office, willful and persistent failure to perform the Chief Magistrate's duties, habitual intemperance or conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice that brings the judiciary and judicial office into disrepute. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Chief Magistrate shall include: 
(1)  The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon the Chief Magistrate under the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this code and the ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
(2)  The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and the proceedings of the Court therein. 
(3)  The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law. 
(4)  Payment of all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by the Court to the Treasurer. 
(5)  Submitting a quarterly report to the Council summarizing Court activities for that quarter. 
(6)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the Council, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-274 and 22-403 
§ 2-3-21 - CITY ATTORNEY. 
(A)  Office created. The office of the City Attorney of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Council wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the Council. 
(B)  Compensation. The City Attorney shall receive compensation as the Council shall fix from time to time by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
(C)  Removal procedure. Unless otherwise provided in an employment agreement, the City Attorney may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the Council. If requested, the Council shall grant the City Attorney a public hearing within 30 days following notice of removal. During the interim, the Council may suspend the City Attorney from duty but shall continue his or her salary. If the removal becomes final, the Council may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the City Attorney shall include: 
(1)  Acting as the legal counselor and advisor of the Council and other city officials, and as such, giving his or her opinion in writing when requested. 
(2)  Drafting all deeds, contracts, conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the Council. 
(3)  Approving as to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance thereof by the Council. 
(4)  Returning, within ten days, all ordinances and resolutions submitted to him or her for consideration by the Council, with his or her approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with his or her reasons therefor. 
(5)  Prosecuting and defending, or designating an attorney to prosecute and defend, all suits, actions or causes where the city is a party and reporting to the Council, when required, the condition of any suit or action to which the city is a party. 
(6)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the Council, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239 and 9-274 
§ 2-3-22 - CITY CLERK. 
(A)  Office created. The office of the City Clerk of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The City Clerk shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The City Clerk may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the City Clerk shall include: 
(1)  Keeping a true and correct record of all the business transacted by the Council and a permanent record of the Council's proceedings. 
(2)  Providing notice of all Council meetings. 
(3)  Authenticating by his or her signature and maintaining, as permanent records of the city, all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. 
(4)  Compiling and maintaining the City of Tolleson Code. 
(5)  Keeping convenient for public inspection all public records and public documents under the City Clerk's control, as provided by state statute. 
(6)  Countersigning all contracts approved by the Council and executed by the Mayor, numbering and registering the same, and maintaining them in accordance with state records retention laws. 
(7)  Preparing or causing to be prepared all minutes of Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy. 
(8)  Serving as the elections official for the city and conducting all municipal elections to ensure conformity with the City Code, city ordinances, Arizona Revised Statutes, and the Voter's Rights Act. 
(9)  Administering the city's records management program to ensure consistency and compliance with state law, and to protect and preserve the permanent records of the city. 
(10)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-274 and 9-302 
§ 2-3-23 - CITY ENGINEER. 
(A)  Office created. The office of the City Engineer of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Engineer shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The City Engineer shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The City Engineer may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the City Engineer shall include: 
(1)  Planning, developing and managing the City Engineering Department's goals, objectives and work plans to perform those duties set forth by state law, as well as city ordinance, resolution, order or directive. 
(2)  Planning, directing and coordinating the design, construction and inspection of activities related to streets, storm drains, water distribution and wastewater collection facilities, improvement districts and land divisions. 
(3)  Being responsible for the review, approval and inspection of permitted private site and subdivision improvements. 
(4)  Being responsible for the review and approval, and the development of policies and procedures, for work in the public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-274 and 9-302 
§ 2-3-24 - CITY MANAGER. 
(A)  Office created. The office of the City Manager of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the Council wholly on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the Council. The Council may enter into an employment contract with the City Manager upon the terms and conditions deemed appropriate. 
(B)  Compensation. The City Manager shall receive compensation as the Council shall fix from time to time by ordinance, resolution, motion or contract. 
(C)  Removal procedure. Unless otherwise provided in an employment agreement, the City Manager may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the Council. If requested, the Council shall grant the City Manager a public hearing within 30 days following notice of removal. During the interim, the Council may suspend the City Manager from duty but shall continue the City Manager's salary. If the removal becomes final, the Council may provide severance pursuant to the terms of an employment contract, or otherwise, in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed six months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the Council except as otherwise provided in this article. The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. In addition to the City Manager's general powers as administrative head and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the City Manager's duty and the City Manager shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections: 
(1)  Appoint, and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city not appointed by the Council. The City Manager may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in the department or office. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Council together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city during the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make recommendations as are deemed appropriate. 
(5)  Recommend to the Council merit provisions and a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the city service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. 
(6)  Recommend to the Council from time to time adoption of the measures deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(7)  Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under the City Manager's jurisdiction, with the approval of the Council. The City Manager may be the head of one or more departments. 
(8)  Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council. The City Manager shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the Council. 
(9)  In case of accident, disaster or other circumstance creating a public emergency, the City Manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting the emergency, but the City Manager shall file promptly with the Council a certificate showing the emergency and the necessity for the action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(10)  See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced. 
(11)  Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
(12)  If the Assistant City Manager is unable or unavailable to perform the duties of the City Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the City Manager, designate a qualified administrative officer of the city to perform such duties. If the City Manager is unable to make such designation during the temporary absence or disability of the permanent City Manager and if the Assistant City Manager is unable or unavailable to perform such duties, the Council may designate a qualified administrative officer of the city to perform such duties. 
(13)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the Council, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
(E)  Council not to interfere with appointments or removals. With regard to officers and employees appointed by the City Manager, neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or removal or suspension from the office by the City Manager or any of the City Manager's subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of the officers and employees in the administrative services of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-274, 9-302 and 9-303 
§ 2-3-25 - ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER. 
(A)  Office created. The office of the Assistant City Manager of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The Assistant City Manager shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Assistant City Manager shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Assistant City Manager may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Assistant City Manager shall include: 
(1)  Exercising administrative authority. 
(2)  Making reports. 
(3)  Preparing budget estimates. 
(4)  Providing services. 
(5)  Directing and supervising employees. 
(6)  Maintaining necessary records. 
(7)  Performing the duties of the City Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. 
(8)  Performing any additional duties relating to the conduct of city affairs as may be assigned by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
§ 2-3-26 - CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER. 
(A)  Office created. The office of Chief Financial Officer of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Chief Financial Officer may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Chief Financial Officer shall include: 
(1)  Taking charge of the city's Finance Department. 
(2)  Accepting, recording and depositing all cash received into the city. 
(3)  Disbursing cash as required to satisfy all claims against the city and required debt incurred by the city. 
(4)  Providing an efficient financial management system to account for all transactions of a financial nature. 
(5)  Investing all idle funds in accordance with the City Code to enhance interest earnings. 
(6)  Preparing and administering an annual budget in accordance with the City Code and the laws of the state. 
(7)  Procuring goods and services through the most efficient process available consistent with the mandates of the City Code. 
(8)  Preserving and accounting for all fixed assets acquired by the city. 
(9)  Performing any additional duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
§ 2-3-27 - COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR. 
(A)  Office created. The office of Community Services Director of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Community Services Director shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Community Services Director shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Community Services Director may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Community Services Director shall include: 
(1)  Planning, developing and implementing social programs and activities for individuals and families in need. 
(2)  Providing emergency assistance to individuals and families in need. 
(3)  Planning, developing and implementing programs and activities for special populations. 
(4)  Planning, developing and implementing programs promoting decent, safe and affordable housing and neighborhood revitalization within the city. 
(5)  Providing information and referral services to the citizens. 
(6)  Advocating for individuals and families in need. 
(7)  Promoting cultural diversity, cultural understanding, family values and citizen participation through special events and other activities. 
(8)  Promoting comprehensive service delivery models to individuals and families in need through the development of collaborative efforts with social service, governmental and private agencies. 
(9)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
§ 2-3-28 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. 
(A)  Office created. The office of Economic Development Director is hereby created and established. The City Economic Development Director shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Economic Development Director shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Economic Development Director may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Economic Development Director shall include: 
(1)  Being responsible for community development, business development and workforce development, small business development and redevelopment. 
(2)  Making recommendations to the Mayor and Council on economic development issues, including, but not limited to, economic development goal setting, policy recommendations, strategic planning, marketing and market analysis for future business recruitment and retention/expansion activities. 
(3)  Reviewing annual marketing and action plans and make recommendations during plan formation. 
(4)  Advising the Council on essential policies, rules, regulations and other matters relating to the economic development program of the City of Tolleson. 
(5)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
§ 2-3-29 - FIELD OPERATIONS DIRECTOR. 
(A)  Office created. The office of Field Operations Director of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Field Operations Director shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Field Operations Director shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Field Operations Director may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Field Operations Director shall include: 
(1)  Planning, developing and managing the Field Operations Department's goals, objectives and work plans to serve the residents. 
(2)  Being responsible for the performance and maintenance of city buildings, vehicles, streets (including, but not limited to, rights-of-way, street lights and traffic signals and signs), storm drains, parks and grounds. 
(3)  Directing the operation, maintenance and control of solid waste and recycling programs, facilities and equipment. 
(4)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-274 and 9-302 
§ 2-3-30 - FIRE CHIEF. 
(A)  Office created. The office of Fire Chief of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Fire Chief shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Fire Chief may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Fire Chief shall include: 
(1)  Being accountable to the City Manager for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the Fire Department. 
(2)  Directing the operations of the Fire Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
(3)  Assisting the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires. 
(4)  Inspecting buildings and premises and serving written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting the inspection, the Fire Chief is hereby empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within the city at any reasonable hour. Any person served with the written notice shall comply and notify the Fire Chief of compliance within a reasonable time. 
(5)  Making a complete annual report, in writing, to the City Manager at a time as may be specified by the City Manager, including a record of all fires, inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the Fire Department, together with comparative data for previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the Fire Department. Reports may be required to be submitted more frequently, at the discretion of the City Manager. 
(6)  Enforcing or causing to be enforced all ordinances, laws and regulations of the city and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and safety. 
(7)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-240, 9-274 and 9-302 
§ 2-3-31 - HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR. 
(A)  Office created. The office of Human Resources Director of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Human Resources Director shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Human Resources Director shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Human Resources Director may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Human Resources Director shall include: 
(1)  Administering the provisions of the Human Resources Department and the human resources policies and procedures under the authority of the City Manager. 
(2)  Maintaining adequate application records of all applicants and employment record of all employees. 
(3)  Periodically preparing and recommending revisions of and amendments to the human resources policies and procedures to the City Manager. 
(4)  Reporting the activities of the Human Resources Department to the City Manager. 
(5)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
§ 2-3-32 - INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DIRECTOR. 
(A)  Office created. The office of Information Technology Director of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The City Information Technology Director shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Information Technology Director shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Information Technology Director may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Information Technology Director shall include: 
(1)  Serving as chief information officer for information technology. 
(2)  Providing administrative management duties in planning, developing, implementing, and directing the systems and operation of the Information Technology Department including system applications. 
(3)  Reporting the activities of the Information Technology Department to the City Manager. 
(4)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 41-3503 
§ 2-3-33 - POLICE CHIEF. 
(A)  Office created. The office of Police Chief of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The Police Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Police Chief shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Police Chief may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Police Chief shall include: 
(1)  Enforcing the ordinances of the city and seeing that the rules and regulations of the Police Department are obeyed. 
(2)  Directing the operation of the Police Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
(3)  Arresting any person violating any of the city ordinances and taking the violator before the Magistrate Court for trial. 
(4)  Taking charge of the city jail and all prisoners confined therein and seeing that orders and sentences with reference to all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public works of the city are fully executed and complied with. 
(5)  Delivering any persons that may be confined in the jail upon conviction of a crime committed under the jurisdiction of the Magistrate Court, to an authorized officer of the city who shall at any time demand the prisoners. Any authorized person so demanding and receiving the prisoners shall work the prisoners on the streets or alleys of the city or on any and all authorized work as may be determined by the Council. 
(6)  Collecting license fees if ordered to do so by city ordinance and pay over to the Treasurer all moneys received, taking receipts therefore. 
(7)  Rendering the accounts of the Police Department, his or her duties and receipts, as may be required by the City Manager. 
(8)  Keeping the records of the Police Chief open to inspection by the City Manager at any time. 
(9)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. 565, N.S. , passed August 23, 2016, repealed § 2-3-33 and renumbered the former §§ 2-3-34 and 2-3-35 as §§ 2-3-33 and 2-3-34 as set out herein. The former § 2-3-33 pertained to the Library Director and derived from Res. 2167, passed March 11, 2014. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-240, 9-274 and 9-302 
§ 2-3-34 - UTILITIES DIRECTOR. 
(A)  Office created. The office of the Utilities Director of the City of Tolleson is hereby created and established. The Utilities Director shall be appointed by the City Manager wholly on the basis of professional experience, ability and qualifications. 
(B)  Compensation. The Utilities Director shall receive compensation as the City Manager shall fix from time to time. 
(C)  Removal procedure. The Utilities Director may be removed with cause by the City Manager subject to city personnel policies. The City Manager may provide severance in an amount deemed appropriate but not to exceed three months' salary. 
(D)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Utilities Director shall include: 
(1)  Having charge of and directing the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment plant, sanitary sewer collection system and water wells, treatment, storage and distribution systems, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
(2)  Performing any other duties as may be required by the City Manager, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 565, N.S. , passed 8-23-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-274 and 9-302 
Note- See the editor's note to § 2-3-33. 
LIABILITY INSURANCE 

§ 2-3-50 - PROCUREMENT. 
    The city shall, at all times, procure liability insurance in type and amount deemed necessary and appropriate and at rates deemed reasonable covering its officers, employees and agents while employed in their governmental or proprietary capacities. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-497 
§ 2-3-51 - NOTICES OF CLAIM. 
    Every city officer, employee and agent shall, upon receipt of any service of process commencing litigation against them or written notice of a possible claim, promptly give notice of the pendency of the action or the presentation of the claim to the City Clerk, who shall in turn present the actual or possible claim to the City Manager and City Attorney. 
( Res. 2167 , passed 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-497 
ARTICLE 2-4: - PERSONNEL POLICIES 

§ 2-4-1 - CREATION AND SCOPE. 
(A)  The City Manager shall recommend, and the City Council shall adopt, a personnel system for the employees of the city, the provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the city as set forth in the personnel policies, except elected officials, persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical services and volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the city. 
(B)  The Council may adopt rules and procedures pertaining to the officers of the city appointed directly by the Council. 
(C)  The Human Resources Director is authorized on behalf of the city to receive criminal history record information from the Department of Public Safety ("DPS") for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of current or prospective licensees, employees, contract employees or volunteers, upon submission of the subject's fingerprints and any fees as may prescribed by DPS. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code, all current and prospective employees, contract employees and volunteers of the City of Tolleson who, as a result of their positions, may come into contact with or be in the proximity of children or vulnerable adults, as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3623, or whose positions involve fiduciary responsibilities or access to safety-sensitive, private or confidential information, including but not limited to Information Technology, Finance, Senior Center, Community Action Program, Library, Fire, Police, Volunteer and the City Court, shall furnish a full set of fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card to the Human Resources Director to enable the city to conduct a criminal history record investigation to determine the suitability of the individual for such a position pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544. 
(2)  The City shall bear the cost of obtaining such criminal history record information and shall use it solely for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of prospective employees, volunteers, or promotional employees of the city. 
( Am. Ord. 499, N.S. , passed 10-12-2010) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239 and 9-274 
§ 2-4-2 - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT. 
(A)  The appointment, promotion and tenure of every employee shall be conditioned solely on merit and fitness and the satisfactory performance of the duties and responsibilities assigned. 
(B)  No employee or applicant for employment shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, gender, age, disability, marital or familial status, veteran status or political affiliation. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 41-1461 et seq. 
§ 2-4-3 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The City Council and City Manager may adopt rules, regulations and policies to give effect to this article, which may be modified and changed from time to time. 
(Ord. 298, N.S., passed 10-10-1989; Am. Ord. 375, N.S., passed 11-24-1998; Am. Ord. 383, N.S., passed 6-22-1999; Am. Ord. 436, N.S., passed 2-14-2006; Am. Ord. 452, N.S., passed 3-13-2007; Am. Ord. 457, N.S., passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 459, N.S., passed 7-24-2007; Am. Ord. 461, N.S., passed 8-14-2007) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239 and 9-274 
§ 2-4-4 - POLITICAL ACTIVITIES. 
(A)  The city shall not use its personnel, equipment, materials, buildings or other resources for the purpose of influencing the outcomes of elections. Notwithstanding this section, the city may distribute informational reports on a proposed bond election as provided in state law. Nothing in this section precludes the city from reporting on official actions of the City Council. 
(B)  No city employee shall use the authority of his or her position to influence the vote or political activities of any subordinate employee. 
(C)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as denying the civil and political liberties of any employee as guaranteed by the United States and Arizona Constitutions. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-500.14 
ARTICLE 2-5: - FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE FOR PUBLIC OFFICIALS 

§ 2-5-1 - INTRODUCTION. 
    Pursuant to state law, the city is required to adopt standards of financial disclosure consistent with those set forth in state law, and the Council has determined that the standards of financial disclosure hereinafter adopted are with respect to the city consistent with the standards of financial disclosure. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 38-545 
§ 2-5-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    BUSINESS. Includes any enterprise, organization, trade, occupation or profession, whether or not operated as a legal entity or for profit, including any business trust, corporation, partnership, joint venture or sole proprietorship. 
    COMPENSATION. Anything of value or advantage, present or prospective, including the forgiveness of debt. 
    CONTROLLED BUSINESS. Any business in which the member of Council or any member of his or her household has an ownership or beneficial interest, individually or combined, amounting to more than a 50% interest. 
    DEPENDENT BUSINESS. Any business in which the member of Council or any member of his or her household has an ownership or beneficial interest, individually or combined, amounting to more than a 10% interest, and during the preceding calendar year the business received from a single source more than $10,000 and more than 50% of its gross income. 
    GIFT. Includes any gratuity, special discount, favor, hospitality, service, economic opportunity, loan or other benefit received without equivalent consideration and not provided to members of the public at large. 
    MEMBER OF HOUSEHOLD. A member of Council's spouse and any minor child of whom the member of Council has legal custody. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 38-541 
§ 2-5-3 - DUTY TO FILE DISCLOSURE STATEMENT; CONTENTS; EXCEPTIONS. 
(A)  In addition to other statements and reports required by law, each member of Council as a matter of public record shall file with the City Clerk, on a form prescribed by the City Clerk, a verified financial disclosure statement covering the preceding calendar year ending December 31 disclosing: 
(1)  The name and address of the member of Council and each member of his or her household and all names and addresses under which each does business; 
(2)  The name and address of each employer and of each other source of compensation other than gifts amounting to more than $1,000 received during the preceding calendar year by the member of Council and members of his or her household in their own names, or by any other person for the use or benefit of the Council member or members of his or her household, a description of the services for which the compensation was received and the nature of the employer's business. This division shall not be construed to require the disclosure of individual items of compensation that constituted a portion of the gross income of the business from which the member of Council or members of his or her household derived compensation; 
(3)  For a controlled business, a description of the goods or services provided by the business, and if any single source of compensation to the business during the preceding calendar year amounts to more than $10,000 and is more than 25% of the gross income of the business, the disclosure shall also include a description of the goods or services provided to the source of compensation. For a dependent business, the statement shall disclose a description of the goods or services provided by the business and a description of the goods or services provided to the source of compensation from which the dependent business derived the amount of gross income described in § 2-5-2 above. If the source of compensation for a controlled or dependent business is a business, the statement shall disclose a description of the business activities engaged in by the source of compensation; 
(4)  The names and addresses of all businesses and trusts in which the member of Council or members of his or her household, or any other person for the use or benefit of the member of Council or members of his or her household, had an ownership or beneficial interest of over $1,000 at any time during the preceding calendar year, and the names and addresses of all businesses and trusts in which the member of Council or any member of his or her household held any office or had a fiduciary relationship at any time during the preceding calendar year, together with the amount or value of the interest and a description of the interest, office or relationship; 
(5)  All Arizona real property interests and real property improvements, including specific location and approximate size, in which the member of Council, any member of his or her household or a controlled or dependent business held legal title or a beneficial interest at any time during the preceding calendar year, and the value of any interest, except that this division does not apply to a real property interest and improvements thereon used as the primary personal residence or for the personal recreational use of the member of Council. If a member of Council, any member of his or her household or a controlled or dependent business acquired or divested any interest during the preceding calendar year, he or she shall also disclose that the transaction was made and the date it occurred. If the controlled or dependent business is in the business of dealing in real property interests or improvements, disclosure need not include individual parcels or transactions as long as the aggregate value of all parcels of the property is reported; 
(6)  The names and addresses of all creditors to whom the member of Council or members of his or her household, in their own names or in the name of any other person, owed a debt of more than $1,000 or to whom a controlled business or a dependent business owed a debt of more than $10,000 which was also more than 30% of the total business indebtedness at any time during the preceding calendar year, listing each creditor. This division shall not be construed to require the disclosure of debts owed by the member of Council or any member of his or her household resulting from the ordinary conduct of a business other than a controlled or dependent business. Nor shall disclosure be required of credit card transactions, retail installment contracts, debts on residences or recreational property exempt from disclosure under division (A)(5) above, debts on motor vehicles not used for commercial purposes, debts secured by cash values on life insurance or debts owed to relatives. It is sufficient disclosure of a creditor if the name and address of a person to whom payments are made is disclosed. If the member of Council, any member of his or her household or a controlled or dependent business incurred or discharged a debt which is reportable under this division during the preceding calendar year, the report shall disclose that the transaction was made and the date it occurred; 
(7)  The identification and amount of each debt exceeding $1,000 owed at any time during the preceding calendar year to the member of Council and members of his or her household in their own names, or to any other person for the use or benefit of the member of Council or any member of his or her household. The disclosure shall include the identification and amount of each debt exceeding $10,000 to a controlled business or dependent business which was also more than 30% of the total indebtedness to the business at any time during the preceding calendar year. This division shall not be construed to require the disclosure of debts from the ordinary conduct of a business other than a controlled or dependent business. If the member of Council, any member of his or her household or a controlled or dependent business incurred or discharged a debt which is reportable under this division during the preceding year, the report shall disclose that the transaction was made and the date it occurred; 
(8)  The name of each source of any gift, or accumulated gifts from a single source, of more than $500 received by the member of Council and members of his or her household in their own names during the preceding calendar year, or by any other person for the use or benefit of the member of Council or any member of his or her household except gifts received by will or by virtue of intestate succession, or received by way of distribution from any inter vivos or testamentary trust established by a spouse or by an ancestor, or gifts received from any other member of the household or relatives to the second degree of consanguinity. Political campaign contributions shall not be construed as gifts if otherwise publicly reported as political campaign contributions as required by law; 
(9)  A list of all business licenses issued to, held by or in which the member of Council or any member of his or her household had an interest at any time during the preceding calendar year, including the name in which the license was issued, the type of business and its location; and 
(10)  A list of all bonds, together with their value, issued by this state or any political subdivision of this state held at any time during the preceding calendar year by the member of Council or any member of his or her household, which bonds issued by a single entity had a value in excess of $1,000. If the member of Council or any member of his or her household acquired or divested any bonds during the preceding calendar year which are reportable under this division, the fact that the transaction occurred and the date shall also be shown. 
(B)  If an amount or value is required to be reported pursuant to this section, it is sufficient to report whether the amount or value of the equity interest falls within: 
(1)  Category 1: $1,000 to $25,000; 
(2)  Category 2: more than $25,000 to $100,000; and 
(3)  Category 3: more than $100,000. 
(C)  This section does not require the disclosure of any information that is privileged by law. 
(D)  The statement required to be filed pursuant to division (A) above shall be filed by all persons who qualified as a member of Council at any time during the preceding calendar year on or before January 31 of each year with the exceptions that a member of Council appointed to fill a vacancy shall, within 60 days following his or her taking of office, file a financial disclosure statement covering as his or her annual period the 12-month period ending with the last full month prior to the date of his or her taking office. 
(E)  The City Clerk shall provide forms for completing the financial disclosure statement required by this section. The forms shall be distributed to each member of Council and shall be made available to each candidate required to file a financial disclosure statement pursuant to A.R.S. § 38-543. 
(F)  The statement required to be filed pursuant to division (A) above shall be filed by each member of Council on or before January 31 of each year. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 38-542 
§ 2-5-4 - DUTY TO FILE FINAL FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT BY A CANDIDATE. 
    A candidate for Mayor or Council shall file a financial disclosure statement containing the information required as set forth in this article on a form prescribed by the City Clerk, at the time of filing his or her signed nomination papers. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 38-543 
ARTICLE 2-6: - MAGISTRATE COURT 

§ 2-6-1 - MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION. 
    There is hereby established in the city the Magistrate Court, which shall have jurisdiction of all violations of this code, and jurisdiction concurrently with justices of the peace of precincts in which the city is located of violation of laws of the state committed within the limits of the city. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 22-402 
§ 2-6-2 - PRESIDING OFFICERS. 
(A)  Magistrate. The presiding officer of the Magistrate Court shall be the Magistrate, who shall be appointed by the Council, shall receive compensation, shall have powers and duties and be subject to removal from office as provided in Article 2-3 of this chapter. 
(B)  Substitute Magistrates. In the event a substitute or alternate magistrate is required in any case in the Magistrate Court in which the Chief Magistrate cannot serve, the City Manager, is hereby authorized to bring in a duly appointed city or town magistrate or justice of the peace from some other jurisdiction to hear the case in question. The substitute magistrate may be compensated with the approval of the City Manager in an amount not to exceed a maximum established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 475, N.S., passed 5-27-2008; Am. Ord. 518, N.S., passed 11-8-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-239, 9-274 and 22-403 
§ 2-6-3 - PROCEEDINGS OF COURT. 
(A)  All proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the state's Constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the state's Supreme Court pertaining to municipal courts including the code of judicial conduct. The proceedings shall also be conducted in accordance with the rules of criminal procedure for the Superior Court, unless otherwise prescribed, and providing this code and resolutions of the city are not in conflict therewith. 
(B)  The Magistrate Court proceedings shall be commenced by complaint under oath and in the name of the state setting forth the offense charged with and the particulars of time, place, person and property as to enable the defendant to understand distinctly the character of the offense complained of and to answer the complaint. 
(C)  If the Magistrate is satisfied that the offense complained of has been committed by the person charged, the Magistrate shall issue a summons or a warrant of arrest. Before issuing a summons or warrant of arrest on a complaint, the Magistrate may subpoena and examine witnesses as to the truth of the complaint. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 22-421, 22-422 and 22-423 
§ 2-6-4 - JURY TRIALS. 
(A)  Trial by jury. The right of trial by jury shall be granted in all cases as are triable by jury under the Constitution and laws of the state. 
(B)  Formation of jury. The formation, summoning, drawing, disposition of names and the impaneling of jurors shall be accomplished in the same manner as courts of record. 
(C)  Selection of jurors. For the selection of potential jurors, lists of registered voters shall be furnished by the Maricopa County Recorder. In addition to the voters list, the Magistrate Court shall use a list of the names and addresses of all persons in the city who are at least 18 years of age and who have been licensed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 8, Articles 4 or 5, and amendments thereto. Only persons residing within the city limits are eligible for jury service in Magistrate Court. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 22-425 
§ 2-6-5 - COURT FEES AND CHARGES. 
(A)  Fee schedule. In addition to any other fees and charges authorized by law to be charged including, but not limited to, fees for filing, copying and certification, the Magistrate Court is authorized to impose the following fees and allocate charges to the parties who have caused the charges to be incurred. 
(1)  Administrative fee. A Court user fee in the amount of $20 is hereby established. The Magistrate shall direct a defendant or a Court user to pay the Court user fee in all cases processed by the Court which result in an order or agreement to pay any fine, sanction, penalty or assessment or participate in any Court authorized diversion program. The Court user fee shall not be imposed on civil parking violations. The Court user fee shall be collected by the Court for deposit in the city's General Fund. 
(2)  Court improvement fee. The Court shall impose a Court improvement fee in the amount of $5 per citation which shall be applied by the Court on all fines, sanctions, penalties and assessments imposed by the Court with the exception of civil parking violations. The Court improvement fee shall be collected by the Court for deposit in a Court improvement fund account maintained by the city and shall be used exclusively to enhance the Court's technological, operational and security capabilities. The city shall invest the monies in the same manner as other city funds. Interest earned on the monies shall be deposited in the fund. 
(3)  Prosecution fee. Upon a defendant's conviction at trial or by plea agreement, the Court shall impose a one-time prosecution fee per citation against each defendant in an amount set forth below. 
(a)  The prosecution fee for a misdemeanor citation shall be $10. 
(b)  The prosecution fee for a violation of A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 4, shall be $35. 
(c)  A prosecution fee of a higher or lower amount may be imposed as set forth in a written plea agreement and based upon the actual cost of prosecuting the citation and/or the indigent status of the defendant. 
(4)  Default judgment fee. The Court shall order the payment of a $50 fee by each defendant who fails to appear on a civil traffic violation filed in the Court or fails to pay the civil sanction as ordered, unless the default is set pursuant to the Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases. 
(5)  Order to show cause fee. The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $50 by any defendant for whom the Court issues an order to show cause to enforce any Court order. 
(6)  Warrant administrative fee. The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $50 by each defendant for whom the Court enters an arrest warrant for failure to appear, or for failure to pay any fine, restitution or other Court imposed fee or obligation, or failure to comply with any other Court order. This fee shall be added to any amounts owed by the defendant. 
(7)  Abstract fee. The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $10 by each person requesting a Court abstract for the purpose of reinstating a driver's license whether the license was suspended as a result of a civil or criminal violation. 
(8)  Suspension fee. The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $15 by any defendant for the suspension issued by the Court of the defendant's driver's license. Any defendant who has had a suspension issued by the Court for failure to appear in a civil traffic violation case or for failure to satisfy in full a civil sanction imposed in a civil traffic violation case shall be required to pay this fee to the Court for the cost of issuing and servicing the suspension. This fee shall be applied to each suspension issued. 
(9)  Jury cancellation fee. A jury cancellation fee shall be imposed by the Court on any party who requests a jury trial in the Magistrate Court, if within five days of trial and after the Court has arranged for the paneling of a jury, the party decides to not proceed with the jury trial. The amount of the jury cancellation fee shall be the actual costs incurred in connection with the canceled paneling and shall not be less than $100 nor more than $500. 
(10)  Probation monitoring fee. The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $30 per month by all defendants who are placed on monitored probation. The fee shall be paid to and collected by the probation monitor. The probation monitor in his or her discretion may waive or reduce the fee. The fee may be terminated if the probation becomes unsupervised. 
(11)  Jail cost fee. The Court may, pursuant to state law, as a part of a sentence imposed by the Court order a person sentenced to serve time in jail to reimburse the city for all or part of the actual cost of his or her incarceration incurred by the city as a result of that incarceration at the daily rates charged to the city by the jail. 
(12)  Community service monitoring fee. Each defendant allowed to complete community service in lieu of paying any fine, fee or surcharge shall be charged a fee of $10 to cover part of the cost of monitoring his or her progress on completing the community service. 
(13)  Diversion monitoring fee. Each defendant who is allowed to enter a diversion program or deferred prosecution agreement, will be charged a $25 fee to cover the added cost of monitoring his or her compliance with the diversion program or agreement. This shall not apply to those entering the Defensive Driving School or the Suspended Driver License Diversion Program. 
(14)  Debt setoff fee. A fee of $9 shall be assessed to each defendant when the defendant's case is entered into the Debt Setoff System. 
(15)  Returned check fee. The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $25 by any person paying the Court with a check that is dishonored by a financial institution. This fee will be in addition to any fees imposed on the Court by the bank or financial institution for processing the dishonored check or financial instrument. 
(16)  Collection fees. A defendant who defaults in his or her obligation for the payment of monies owed or due to the Magistrate Court, including, but not limited to, restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties, bonds, costs and fees is liable for any fees and charges assessed by a collection agency that is licensed pursuant to state law, and that is engaged by the Magistrate Court to collect and enforce the payment. The collection fees and charges assessed by the collection agency shall be added to the sum or sums from and chargeable against the defendant. 
(17)  Research fee. The Court shall order the payment of a fee of $17 by any person requesting research in locating a document. 
(B)  Waiver of fees. Notwithstanding division (A) above, a Magistrate may waive part or all of any fee imposed by this section if the Court finds the defendant is indigent, it would cause a hardship on the defendant or his or her family, or if the Magistrate is of the opinion the waiver would be in the interests of justice. 
(C)  Civil action to recover fees. In addition to any other remedies which may be allowed by law, the City Attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate civil suit in a Court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the fee(s) referred to in this article. 
(Am. Ord. 405, N.S., passed 6-10-2003; Am. Ord. 450, N.S., passed 2-13-2007; Am. Ord. 520, N.S., passed 12-13-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 22-404 and 22-406 
ARTICLE 2-7: - LIBRARIES 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 2-7-1 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The City Manager is authorized to establish library rules and regulations to govern the use of library facilities and materials. 
§ 2-7-2 - FEES AND FINES. 
    The City Manager is authorized to establish library card issuance fees, renewal fees and user fees and to change the fees from time to time. Additionally, the City Manager may establish a schedule of fines and penalties for violation of any library rule or regulation. 
§ 2-7-3 - COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR. 
    The public library shall be administered by the Community Services Director who shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Community Services Director shall administer the library and its staff. 
( Am. Ord. 538, N.S. , passed 4-8-2014) 
§ 2-7-4 - MUTILATION OF BOOKS AND LIBRARY PROPERTY. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mar, deface, mutilate or in any way damage any books, paper, periodicals or newspapers which are the property of or contained in the public library, or to mar, deface, mutilate or in any way damage any other real or personal library property, including furniture and fixtures. 
LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD 

§ 2-7-15 - CREATED. 
    There is hereby created a Library Advisory Board for the city. 
§ 2-7-16 - PURPOSE. 
    The Library Advisory Board shall: 
(A)  Promote the interests of the city's libraries; 
(B)  Coordinate fundraising activities to enhance the use of the city's libraries; 
(C)  Educate the community regarding planned giving; and 
(D)  Advise the City Council on matters and issues pertaining to library services, including, but not limited to planning of future libraries and library activities. 
§ 2-7-17 - MEMBERS; VACANCIES; REMOVAL; ATTENDANCE. 
(A)  The Library Advisory Board shall have seven regular members and one alternate member. The members shall be appointed by the City Council and shall be appointed for three-year, staggered terms. 
(B)  The Mayor, City Manager and Community Services Director shall be ex officio members of the Library Advisory Board and shall have no vote in the matters to come before the Board. 
(C)  In the event of death, resignation or removal of any member of the Library Advisory Board, the Mayor and Council shall appoint a new member to serve for the unexpired portion of the term vacated. Reappointment or a new appointment shall be made by the City Council at the end of the expired term. The City Council may, without cause, remove any member of the Library Advisory Board. The absence from three consecutive regular meeting without consent of the Board shall be deemed to constitute a resignation of the absent member, and the position shall thereupon be deemed vacant. 
§ 2-7-18 - QUORUM. 
    A majority of the Library Advisory Board shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of the majority of the Board members present shall be required to take action. 
§ 2-7-19 - MEETINGS; RULES; AND THE LIKE. 
    The Library Advisory Board shall: 
(A)  Establish the rules and regulations as it deems necessary for its government and for the faithful performance of its duties; 
(B)  By vote, set a time for regular, quarterly meetings; 
(C)  Establish a manner in which special meetings may be held and the notice to be given thereof; and 
(D)  Require attendance of the members at regular meetings. 
ARTICLE 2-8: - COMMUNITY CENTER AND PARKS 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 2-8-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    COMMUNITY CENTER shall mean all city-owned or leased facilities open either in whole or in part to the public for recreational use. 
§ 2-8-2 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The City Manager is authorized to establish community center rules and regulations to govern the use of community centers. 
§ 2-8-3 - FACILITY USE PERMITS. 
(A)  A facility use permit shall be obtained from the city's community services office by any person, organization or group desiring to reserve any portion of a community center for any activity. 
(B)  Applicants must apply for a facility use permit at least two weeks prior to the requested date(s) of use. Facility use permit applications shall reflect the use date(s), hours of use, age group and anticipated number of participants and type of activity proposed. 
(C)  Permitted activities shall be confined to the specific area of the community center designated in the permit. 
(D)  All facility use permits shall be immediately revocable by the City Manager or authorized designee upon determination that a violation of any rule, city ordinance or state statute has occurred. 
(E)  All persons, organizations or groups using any portion of a community center under a facility use permit must vacate the premises by 11:00 p.m. unless otherwise authorized, in writing, by the City Manager or authorized designee. 
§ 2-8-4 - INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY. 
    Any organization, group or person using a community center under a use permit shall indemnify the city for any and all damage to any part of the community by any person attending the activity and all liability and damages to any person for injuries, including death. If insurance is required by the City Manager or authorized designee, failure to provide proof of insurance will result in the permit being denied or revoked. 
§ 2-8-5 - PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO USE. 
    Use of the community centers is not limited to residents, however, Tolleson residents may have preferential use of and reservation rights for community centers as determined by the City Manager or authorized designee. 
§ 2-8-6 - FEES. 
    The City Manager is authorized to establish community center use fees and to change fees from time to time. 
§ 2-8-7 - CANCELLATION OF REQUEST TO USE. 
    If notice of cancellation of a request to use a community center is not received in the Community Services office at least 48 hours prior to the date of the event, the use permit holder, at the discretion of the City Manager or authorized designee, may be held responsible for any expenses incurred by the city. 
USE RESTRICTIONS 

§ 2-8-20 - SUPERVISION OF ACTIVITIES; RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE. 
(A)  At the discretion of the City Manager or authorized designee, all activities at community centers may be required to be supervised by an adult, and the use permit holder shall assume full responsibility for any damage to the community center or equipment therein that is caused by participants under the use permit. 
(B)  The City Manager may designate a city employee to oversee activities of permit holders. 
§ 2-8-21 - EXCEEDING SEATING CAPACITY. 
    The total number of people admitted to the community center for any use shall not exceed the seating capacity of the community center or designated area. 
§ 2-8-22 - USE OF EQUIPMENT. 
    The use of equipment at any community center shall be permitted only when specified in the use permit application. 
§ 2-8-23 - ATTACHMENTS TO STRUCTURE, AND THE LIKE. 
    No material of any kind shall be attached to any part of the community center without express, written approval from the City Manager or authorized designee. 
§ 2-8-24 - CONCESSION RIGHTS. 
    Concession rights at community centers shall be reserved to the city unless specifically requested by the applicant and approved in the use permit. 
§ 2-8-25 - KITCHEN FACILITIES. 
    Use of kitchen facilities, if any, shall be permitted only if specifically requested in the application for a use permit. Kitchen facilities must be cleaned after use. 
§ 2-8-26 - TOBACCO. 
    The use of tobacco at community centers is restricted to designated smoking areas, if any. 
§ 2-8-27 - POLITICAL ACTIVITIES. 
    No partisan political activities for any party or candidate shall take place in any community center. 
§ 2-8-28 - INTOXICATING BEVERAGES. 
    The use or consumption of intoxicating beverages at the community centers is prohibited, except where a license has been issued. 
§ 2-8-29 - COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES. 
    Persons or groups utilizing the community centers must obey all federal, state, county and city laws and ordinances. 
PARKS AND RECREATION 

§ 2-8-40 - DEFINITIONS. 
    PARK means all lands and water heretofore and hereafter acquired by or controlled by the city for park, open space amenity or recreational purposes, including privately or publicly owned lands, the use of which has been granted to and accepted by the city for park, open space amenity, recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-41 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The City Council shall approve park rules and regulations to govern the use of parks. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-42 - FEES. 
    The City Council shall establish recreational user fees for parks and recreational programs or for use of park facilities and may change said fees from time to time. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-43 - PARK HOURS OF OPERATION. 
    No person shall enter upon or be upon the grounds, other than public streets located therein, of any park or playground, without the express written permission of the City Manager or his designee, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.; provided, however, that with respect to any park or playground that is equipped with either general area or athletic lighting which is functioning, the closing time may be extended by the prior written approval of the City Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-44 - RESERVATION OF PARK FACILITIES. 
(A)  A permit shall be obtained from the City Manager or designee by any person, organization or group desiring to reserve any ramada, athletic playing field or other park facility. 
(B)  An application for a permit shall be submitted to the city prior to the requested date(s) as stipulated in the park polices. All applications for use of the facilities shall, along with any additional information requested by the City Manger, reflect the date, hours to be used, age of group, type of activity and anticipated number of participants. 
(C)  Functions shall be confined to the specific area of the park assigned to the permit holder. 
(D)  All permits shall be immediately revocable by the City Manager or his designee upon determination that a violation of any rule, city ordinance or state statute, has occurred. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-45 - INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY. 
    Any person, organization or group using the park facilities pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter shall indemnify the city for, from and against any and all damage to any part of the park facility caused by a person attending or participating in the activity and for any and all personal injuries caused by a person attending or participating in the activity. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-46 - PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO USE PARK FACILITIES. 
    Use of the park facilities is not limited to residents, however, Tolleson residents may have preferential use of and reservation rights for the park facilities as determined by the City Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-47 - SUPERVISION OF ACTIVITIES. 
(A)  At the discretion of the City Manager or his designee, all activities at park facilities may be required to take place under competent, adult supervision. 
(B)  The City Manager or his designee may designate a person to oversee the activity. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-48 - DOGS IN PARKS. 
    Unless in a designated park off-leash area, all dogs in any parks must be restrained by a leash, chain, rope or cord of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient strength to control the action of said dog. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-49 - OFF-LEASH AREAS. 
    The City Manager shall set rules and regulations for use of designated off-leash areas within city parks. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-50 - MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND SKATEBOARDS. 
    Unless otherwise permitted by the City Manager or authorized designee, no motorized vehicle or motorized skateboard, as defined in A.R.S. Title 28, may enter upon or park in any park area, except in designated parking areas or designated parking spaces. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-51 - REFUSE; VIOLATION. 
(A)  No person shall discard or throw paper, lunch boxes, refuse or litter on any park property, but the same shall be placed in receptacles provided for such purposes. If receptacles do not exist, paper lunch boxes, refuse or litter shall be packed out of the park and disposed of properly. 
(B)  No person shall bring trash, refuse, litter or similar pollutants onto park property for deposit in park trash receptacles. 
(C)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class one misdemeanor to be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500 or by imprisonment for not more than six months in jail. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-52 - DAMAGE; VIOLATION. 
(A)  No person, except with the prior, written permission of the city, shall take, carry away, remove, dig, cut, disturb, destroy, mar, or damage any soil or mineral substance or any form of vegetation, whether living or dead, on park property. 
(B)  No person, except with prior, written permission of the city, shall take, carry away, remove, disassemble, destroy, mar, deface, mark, damage or attach anything to any equipment, building or structure on park property. 
(C)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class one misdemeanor to be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500 or by imprisonment for not more than six months in jail. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-53 - GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED. 
    Glass beverage containers are strictly prohibited in any park located within the city. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-8-54 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be subject to a civil penalty of $50 for the first violation, $100 for a second violation, $250 for a third violation and $500 for a fourth violation in any two-year period. 
(A)  Civil Citation. The civil citation shall direct the defendant to appear in municipal court within ten days of the issuance of the citation or pay the fine imposed pursuant to this section. The citation shall also include the date and location of the violation, a reference to the City Code provision or ordinance violated and a notice that if the defendant fails to appear as directed, a default judgment will be entered in the amount of the fine designated on the citation for the violation charged, in addition to a default fee for failure to appear as set forth in division (C) below of this section. 
(B)  Citation Service. Service of the citation may be accomplished and will be deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods: 
(1)  Hand delivering a copy of the citation to the defendant. 
(2)  Mailing a copy of the citation to the defendant by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the defendant's last known address. 
(3)  In the event service cannot be accomplished as set forth above, the defendant may be served by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure for the Superior Court. 
(C)  Appearance: Penalty for Failure to Appear. Within ten days of the issuance of the citation, the defendant shall appear in person or through his or her attorney in municipal court and shall either admit or deny the allegations contained in the complaint or the defendant may proceed as provided in division (D) of this section. If the defendant admits the allegations, the court shall immediately enter judgment against the defendant in the amount of the fine for the violation charged. If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the court shall set a hearing date for trial of the matter. If the defendant fails to appear as directed on the citation, the court, upon request by the code official or authorized designee, shall enter a default judgment for the amount of the fine indicated for the violation charged. Additionally, the defendant may be fined up to $100 for failure to appear at the time and place set for any trial of a matter arising under this code. 
(D)  Payment by Mail. The defendant may admit the allegations in the citation and pay the fine indicated by mailing the citation, together with a check for the amount of the fine to and made payable to the Tolleson City Court. 
(E)  Rules of Procedure. The Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be followed by the Tolleson City Court for civil violations of this code, except as modified or where inconsistent with the provisions of this code, local rules of the municipal court or rules of the Arizona Supreme Court. 
(Ord. 479, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
ARTICLE 2-9: - REMOVAL AND STORAGE OF DEADLY WEAPONS AT PUBLIC ESTABLISHMENTS AND EVENTS 

§ 2-9-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    DEADLY WEAPON shall mean anything designed for lethal use. 
    PUBLIC ESTABLISHMENT shall mean any structure, vehicle or craft that is owned, leased or operated by the city. 
    PUBLIC EVENT shall mean any specifically named or sponsored event of limited duration that is either conducted by the city or conducted by a private entity with a permit or license granted by the city. Public event does not include an unsponsored gathering of people in a public place. 
(Ord. 481, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
§ 2-9-2 - CARRYING OF DEADLY WEAPONS. 
    Any person other than a peace officer on duty carrying a deadly weapon, upon entering any public establishment or attending a public event, shall upon request of the city or sponsor of an event, as applicable, remove any deadly weapon carried by such person and place it in the custody of the city or sponsor, as applicable. The city or sponsor, as applicable, shall provide temporary and secure storage for such deadly weapon and shall allow for the immediate retrieval of such deadly weapon upon the person's exit from the public establishment or public event. 
(Ord. 481, N.S., passed 10-14-2008) 
CHAPTER 3: - CITY POLICIES AND PROCEDURES; FEES 
ARTICLE 3-1: - ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS 

§ 3-1-1 - PRIOR APPROVAL. 
(A)  All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the Attorney and shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters. 
(B)  The person shall have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if any, prior to the passage of the ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the contract. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240 
§ 3-1-2 - INTRODUCTION. 
    Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the Council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council, except that the City Manager or City Attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the Council and any member of the Council may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that the ordinance, resolution, matter or subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240 
§ 3-1-3 - REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE. 
    Each ordinance shall have but one subject, the nature of which is clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance and, in that case, the title, numbers and pages in this code of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240 
§ 3-1-4 - READING OF PROPOSED ORDINANCE. 
    Ordinances shall be read prior to adoption, but may be read by title only provided that the Council has before it printed or electronic copies of the ordinance. A member of the Council may request that the ordinance under consideration be read in full and, in that case, the ordinance shall be read in full. 
( Am. Ord. 535, N.S. , passed 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240 
§ 3-1-5 - EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND FRANCHISES. 
    No city ordinance, resolution or franchise that would be subject to the provisions of Title 19, Chapter 1 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended shall become operative until 30 days after its passage by the Council, except emergency measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the city. An emergency measure shall not become immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the reason why it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the City Council, taken by ayes and nays, and also approved by the Mayor. Unless otherwise set forth therein, all other resolutions, ordinances or franchises shall be effective immediately upon passage by the Council. 
( Am. Ord. 535, N.S. , passed 11-18-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 19-142 
§ 3-1-6 - SIGNATURES REQUIRED. 
    Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes effective, be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk and approval signed as to form by the Attorney. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240 
§ 3-1-7 - PUBLISHING REQUIRED. 
    Only orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly ordered by the Council. All notices of election, invitation for bids, notices of letting contracts, laws and ordinances, and other notices of a public character issued by the Council shall be published as provided in state law. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-812 
§ 3-1-8 - POSTING REQUIRED. 
    Any ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment shall, in addition to the publication requirements of § 3-1-7 of this code, be published after its enactment by posting in three or more public places within the city and shall be in force from and after the date of posting. An affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the Clerk as proof of posting. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-813 
ARTICLE 3-2: - INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS 

§ 3-2-1 - POWER RESERVED; TIME OF ELECTION. 
    There is reserved to the qualified electors of the city the power of the initiative and the referendum as prescribed by the state's Constitution. Any initiative or referendum matter may be voted on at the next ensuing primary or general election or at a special election called by the Council for that purpose. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. Const. Art. 4, Part 1, § 1 
§ 3-2-2 - NUMBER OF SIGNATURES FOR INITIATIVE. 
    The total number of registered voters qualified to vote at the municipal election, whether regular or special, immediately preceding the date upon which any initiative petition is filed, shall be the basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the city required to file an initiative petition shall be computed. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 19-143 
§ 3-2-3 - NUMBER OF SIGNATURES FOR REFERENDUM. 
    The whole number of votes cast at the city election at which a Mayor or Council member was chosen last preceding the submission of the application for a referendum petition against an ordinance, franchise or resolution shall be the basis on which the number of electors of the city required to file a referendum petition shall be computed. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 19-142 
§ 3-2-4 - TIME OF FILING. 
(A)  Initiative petitions shall be filed at least four months prior to the election at which they are to be voted upon. 
(B)  Referendum petitions shall be filed within 30 days of the adoption of the ordinance, franchise or resolution to be referred. If the City Clerk is unable to provide petitioners with a copy of the ordinance, franchise or resolution at the time of application for an official number or on the same business day of the application, the 30-day period shall be calculated from the date the ordinance, franchise or resolution is available. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 19-142 and A.R.S. Const. Art. 4, Part 1, § 1 
§ 3-2-5 - SAMPLE BALLOTS AND PUBLICITY PAMPHLETS. 
    The following procedures relating to sample ballots and publicity pamphlets are hereby adopted for conducting elections at which an initiative or referendum is to be voted on. 
(A)  A publicity pamphlet, containing the entire text of the official ballot, shall be mailed by the City Clerk to each household within the city in which a registered voter resides, so far as possible, not less than ten days prior to the election to which the sample ballot pertains. 
(B)  The pamphlet shall contain the proposition as it will appear on the ballot together with a summary of each proposition. Each summary shall be followed by any arguments supporting the proposition followed by any arguments opposing the proposition. 
(C)  Arguments supporting and opposing propositions appearing on the ballot shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk by the date required by law or such other date as may be established by the City Clerk or governmental agency conducting the election. Arguments supporting or opposing propositions appearing on the ballot shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Arguments must relate to the propositions proposed by initiative or referred by referendum which will appear on the ballot. 
(2)  Arguments must identify the proposition to which they refer and indicate whether the argument is in support of or opposition to the proposition. 
(3)  Arguments may not exceed 300 words in length. 
(4)  Arguments must be signed by the person submitting them. Arguments submitted by organizations shall be signed on behalf of the organization by two executive officers of the organization authorized to take action or, if sponsored by a political committee, it shall be signed by the committee's chairperson or treasurer. All persons signing documents shall indicate their residence or post office address. 
(5)  No person or organization shall submit more than one argument for each proposition to be voted on. 
(6)  Each argument shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of $250 to offset a portion of the proportional costs of the paper and printing of the argument. This requirement shall not be waived on any account. 
( Am. Ord. 530, N.S. , passed 10-23-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 19-123, 19-124 and 19-141 
ARTICLE 3-3: - FEES 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 3-3-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
    The purpose of this article is to set forth various fees to be charged by the city in administering its municipal functions. Separate sections of the city code, the zoning code or the various building codes used by the city may have a fee schedule in conflict with this article in which case it is the intention of the Council that this article shall govern. If this article is silent and fees are set forth in other sections of the various city codes, the fees in those sections shall govern. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984) 
§ 3-3-2 - WAIVER. 
    The City Manager may, with the approval of the Council, waive or modify any of the fees charged under this article or any other codes of the city, if benefits to the city are to be provided by the applicant to offset the charges waived. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984) 
§ 3-3-3 - COLLECTION. 
    The fees provided by this article shall be collected by the City Manager or his or her designated representative. Separate bank accounts, when appropriate and required, shall be maintained by the city. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984) 
FEES 

§ 3-3-21 - PUBLIC RECORDS. 
    The city shall be authorized to set fees with regard to the copying of public records subject to disclosure for a non-commercial purpose and a commercial purpose. The amount of fees charged by the city departments for the copying of public records, including the cost of the time, equipment and personnel used in producing copies of records for a non-commercial purpose and including the cost of time, equipment, personnel and value used in producing copies of records for a commercial purpose, shall be adopted by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 467, N.S., passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 523, N.S., passed 7-24-2012) 
Cross reference- Public records request policy, see §§ 3-7-1 and 3-7-2 
ARTICLE 3-4: - TAX CODE 

§ 3-4-1 - ADOPTION OF TAX CODE. 
    That certain code entitled the City Tax Code of The City of Tolleson is hereby adopted and made a part of this code the same as though the code was specifically set forth in full herein. At least three copies of the code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Am. Ord. 369, N.S., passed 5-12-1998; Am. Ord. 403, N.S., passed 5-13-2003; Am. Ord. 439, N.S., passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. 448, N.S., passed 11-28-2006; Am. Ord. 458, N.S., passed 7-10-2007; Am. Ord. 464, N.S., passed 12-11-2007; Am. Ord. 581, N.S. , passed May 8, 2018) 
ARTICLE 3-5: - PROCUREMENT 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 3-5-1 - APPLICABILITY. 
    The purpose of this article is to set forth the rules governing procurement by the city. This article sets forth the general guidelines for the competitive selection of materials, services and construction and applies to expenditure of public monies under any contract, except as provided below. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, bequest or cooperative agreement. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-2 - EXCEPTIONS. 
    The provisions of this article are not applicable to contracts for: 
(A)  Procurement of experts to provide testimony or other professional services relating to a pending or anticipated litigation or judicial proceedings; 
(B)  Appointment, by the Mayor and Council, of the City Engineer and City Attorney; 
(C)  Intergovernmental payments, purchases and agreements, except as set forth in § 3-5-7; 
(D)  Public utility purchases of water, power and related services; and 
(E)  Specialized seminar, training and educational classes. 
(F)  Entertainment act, artistic performers, artists, musicians, actors or other persons or groups providing unique entertainment. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000; Am. Ord. 544, N.S. , passed 10-14-2014) 
§ 3-5-3 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, individual, limit liability company, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity authorized to do business. 
    CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. That portion of a bid, proposal, offer, specification or protest that contains information that the person submitting the information believes should be withheld, provided the person submits a written statement advising the Procurement Officer of this fact at the time of the submission and the information shall be so identified wherever it appears. The Procurement Officer shall review the statement and information and shall determine in writing whether the information shall be withheld. The determination statement may be reviewed by the City Attorney and shall be approved by the Procurement Administrator; and if the Procurement Officer determines to disclose the information, the Procurement Officer shall inform the person, in writing, of the determination prior to the disclosure. 
    CONSTRUCTION. All work subject to the requirements of A.R.S. Title 34, including building, improving, altering, repairing, maintaining or demolishing any public building, highway, bridge or other structure. 
    CONTRACT. All types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of materials, services or construction. 
    CONTRACTOR. Any person who has a procurement contract with the city. 
    DEPARTMENT. A department of the city. 
    DESIGNEE. A duly authorized representative of a responsible party. 
    INVITATION FOR BID. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting bids. 
    LATE BID. A bid or proposal response that is received by the city after the due date and time stated in the city's solicitation document or as may be modified by any supplemental addendum; and late bids or proposals shall be rejected and not considered. 
    MATERIALS. All property, including, but not limited to, equipment, supplies, printing, insurance and leases of personal property, but does not include land, an interest in land, or leases of land or buildings. 
    MINOR INFORMALITY. A mistake, excluding judgmental errors, which have negligible material effect on price, quantity, delivery or contractual terms and waiver or correction of the mistake does not prejudice other bidders or offerors. 
    PROCUREMENT. Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any materials, services or construction. Procurement also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any material, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
    PROCUREMENT ADMINISTRATOR. The Chief Financial Officer or the person designated by the City Manager to act as the Procurement Administrator and to which the City Procurement Officers report. 
    PROCUREMENT OFFICER. Any person, duly authorized to enter into and administer contracts and make written determinations with respect to city contracts; and includes an authorized representative acting within the limits of the Officer's authority. 
    PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Those services requiring specialized knowledge, education, skill or expertise and where the qualifications of the person(s) rendering the services are of primary importance. PROFESSIONAL SERVICES shall include, but not be limited to, appraisers, land surveyors, attorneys, architects, engineers, psychologists, physicians, health practitioners, auditors, systems and software analysts and professional consultants. 
    REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. All documents whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting proposals in accordance with procedures prescribed within this article. 
    REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS. A request by the city for detailed information concerning the qualifications of firms to provide professional services. 
    REQUEST FOR QUOTATIONS. The documentation or method used in the process of competing for purchases that are lower than the dollar amount requiring submission of sealed bids or proposals. 
    RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR OFFEROR. A person who has the capability to perform the contract requirements and the integrity and reliability, which will assure good faith performance. 
    RESPONSIVE BIDDER OR OFFEROR. A person who submits a bid, which conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids or request for proposals, subject to minor informalities. 
    SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor or subcontractor which does not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than required reports, plans, documents and performance. 
    SOLICITATION. An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, a request for quotations, a request for qualifications or any other invitation or request by which the city invites a person to participate in a procurement. 
    SPECIFICATION. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of a material, service or construction item. SPECIFICATION may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a material, service or construction item for delivery. 
    SUBCONTRACTOR. A person who contracts to perform work or render services to a contractor or to another subcontractor as a part of a contract with the city. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000; Am. Ord. 544, N.S. , passed 10-14-2014) 
§ 3-5-4 - AUTHORITY OF THE PROCUREMENT ADMINISTRATOR. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the Procurement Administrator, under the direction of the City Manager, may adopt operational procedures, consistent with this article, governing the procurement and management of all materials and services. The Procurement Administrator shall supervise and administer the procurement of all procurements in general conformity to practices that promote competitive selection of persons to provide materials, services and construction for the city. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-5 - SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT. 
    A procurement may be made or contract awarded by the Procurement Administrator without competition when the using department director determines, in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one reasonable and practicable source for the required material or service. The using department requesting the sole source procurement shall provide written evidence to support a sole source determination. The Procurement Officer will participate with the using department in the conduct of negotiations, as appropriate, to price, delivery and terms. The Procurement Officer may require the submission of cost or pricing data in connection with a purchase or award under this article. Sole source procurement shall be avoided, except when no reasonable alternative sources exist. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-6 - EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a using department director or designee may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of materials, services or construction (provided any construction-related procurements comply with A.R.S. Title 34 requirements) when there exists a threat or severe impairment to the quality of public health, welfare or safety, or if a situation exists which makes compliance with established procurement processes impracticable, unnecessary or contrary to the public interest; provided that, the emergency procurements shall be made with the competition as is practicable under the circumstances. An emergency procurement shall be limited to those materials, services or construction necessary to satisfy the emergency need. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be submitted to the procurement office and included in the purchase file. Any emergency procurement exceeding the dollar limit for Council approval shall be scheduled for review at the next available Council meeting. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-7 - COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT. 
    The city may (1) participate with a state, other political subdivisions of a state and the federal government and other units of government for the procurement of materials or services with cooperative purchasing agreements and (2) directly enter into agreements with vendors who have been awarded contracts with other governmental entities for materials and services, provided the procurement methods of the other party comply with the intent of this procurement code. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000; Am. Ord. 546, N.S. , passed 9-9-2014) 
PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES BY DOLLAR VALUE 

§ 3-5-20 - GENERAL. 
    Any contract not exceeding $50,000 may be made by the City Manager, Procurement Administrator or department directors in accordance with this article. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to create a small purchase under this section. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-21 - SMALL PURCHASES $10,000 OR LESS. 
    All procurement made pursuant to this § 3-5-21 shall be reported to the Procurement Administrator who shall maintain records showing the cumulative amount of purchases in each fiscal year for each vendor or supplier. In addition to the requirements of this section, the Procurement Administrator may adopt operational procedures for making small purchases. 
(A)  Petty cash purchases: $1.00-$250.00. Petty cash may be used for expendable items only. Such expenditures shall not exceed $250.00 and must be pre-approved by the department director. A request for petty cash reimbursement shall be accompanied by a valid receipt and a description of the public purpose for the item purchased. 
(B)  Open market purchases: Less than $2,500.00. Open market purchases do not require sealed competitive quotations or bids as prices are generally known or quoted to the marketplace; however, the price paid should be fair and reasonable as verified by the department director. Usually, these purchases are routine in nature and requiring sealed competitive quotations or bids generally consumes more time than is worthwhile spending. Citywide purchases under this subsection, from any vendor shall not cumulatively exceed $10,000.00 during the fiscal year. There shall be no fragmentation or division of contracts or purchase orders in order to circumvent the requirements of this subsection. 
(C)  Small purchases: $2,500.00-$10,000.00. The procuring department shall obtain at least three written competitive quotations; however, oral quotations may be acceptable provided the quotations are documented by the department director in writing. A lesser number of quotations may be acceptable, if there are an insufficient number of competitive vendors, as determined by the department director. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Procurement Administrator may require departments to obtain sealed competitive quotations, bids or proposals. Citywide purchases under this subsection, from any vendor shall not cumulatively exceed $10,000.00 during the fiscal year. There shall be no fragmentation or division of contracts or purchase orders in order to circumvent the requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000; Am. Ord. 544, N.S. , passed 10-14-2014) 
§ 3-5-22 - SMALL PURCHASES OVER $10,000 AND NOT MORE THAN $50,000. 
    The City Manager and the Procurement Administrator are each authorized to approve and execute purchases and contracts not exceeding $50,000.00. For small purchases over $10,000.00, but less than $50,000.00, a request for quotations shall be used and written quotations from no less than three businesses shall be obtained. The City Manager or Procurement Administrator may award a contract to the responsible bidder submitting the quotation that is most advantageous to the city and conforms in all material respects to the solicitation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000; Am. Ord. 539, N.S. , passed 5-13-2014) 
§ 3-5-23 - PROCUREMENTS OVER $50,000. 
    Procurements of materials and services in excess of $50,000 shall be procured by formal, written solicitation as set forth in this article and submitted to the City Council for approval. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-24 - CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS. 
    Construction contracts shall be procured as set forth in §§ 3-5-105 et seq. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING 

§ 3-5-40 - CONDITIONS FOR USE. 
    All contracts of the city shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in §§ 3-5-20 through 3-5-22. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000; Am. Ord. 544, N.S. , passed 10-14-2014) 
§ 3-5-41 - INVITATION FOR BIDS. 
    An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-42 - PUBLIC NOTICE. 
    The Procurement Office shall develop and maintain a method for providing adequate notice of public bid solicitations, which shall identify the place, date and time of bid opening. Notice of the bid solicitation shall be posted for public inspection and a copy of the bid solicitation shall be available for public inspection review in the procurement office. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-43 - LATE BIDS. 
    A bid is late if it is received at the location designated in the invitation for bids after the time and date set for bid opening. A late bid shall be rejected and not considered, regardless of the reason for lateness, including circumstances beyond the control of the bidder. A late bid shall not be opened, except if necessary for identification purposes. If delivered in person, a late bid shall be rejected and returned to the bidder. If not delivered in person, a late bid shall be filed unopened within the procurement office and a late bid notice shall be mailed or electronically sent to the late bidder. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-44 - BID OPENING. 
    Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of at least one witness at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and any other relevant information as the Procurement Administrator deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded. This record shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-45 - BID ACCEPTANCE AND BID EVALUATION. 
    Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article. Minor informalities may be waived or corrected in the discretion of the city. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitations for bids. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-46 - CORRECTION OR WITHDRAWAL OF BIDS; CANCELLATION OF AWARDS. 
    Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the procurement office prior to the time set for bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a non-judgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination approved by the Procurement Administrator. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-47 - CONTRACT AWARD. 
(A)  If the city, in its sole discretion, decides to award a contract, the contract shall be awarded by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid conforms in all material respects to requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. If the bidder designates a portion of its proposal as confidential information, the bidder shall isolate and identify, in writing, the confidential portions. 
(B)  A contract may not be awarded to a bidder submitting a higher quality item than that designated in the invitation for bid unless the bidder is also the lowest bidder. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-48 - IDENTICAL BIDS. 
    If there are two or more low responsive bids from responsible bidders that are identical in price and that meet all the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids, award may be made by a coin toss. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
MULTI-STEP SEALED BIDDING 

§ 3-5-60 - GENERAL. 
    When it is considered impractical or not advantageous to initially prepare a specification to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids or request for qualifications may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids or request for qualifications limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first step of the solicitation. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-61 - INITIATION OF NEXT STEP. 
    The Procurement Officer may initiate the next step of the procedure if, in the Procurement Officer's opinion, there are sufficient acceptable unpriced offers to assure effective price competition in the second step without technical discussions. If the Procurement Officer finds that such is not the case, the Procurement Officer shall issue an amendment to the invitation for bids or engage in technical discussions. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS 

§ 3-5-75 - REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. 
    When the Procurement Administrator determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by use of competitive sealed proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-76 - EVALUATION FACTORS. 
    The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. Specific numerical weighting is not required. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-77 - DISCUSSION WITH RESPONSIBLE OFFERORS AND REVISIONS TO PROPOSALS. 
    As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and the revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-78 - BEST AND FINAL OFFERS. 
(A)  If discussions are conducted, the Procurement Officer shall issue a written request for best and final offers. The request shall set forth the date, time and place for the submission of best and final offers. 
(B)  The request for best and final offers shall inform offerors that, if they do not submit a notice of withdrawal or a best and final offer, their immediate previous offer will be construed as their best and final offer. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-79 - CONTRACT AWARD. 
    If the city, in its sole discretion, decides to award a contract, the award shall be made by the Procurement Administrator to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined, in writing, to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. The city, in its sole discretion, may award to multiple offerors. The Procurement Administrator may reject all proposals if rejection is in the public interest. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. After contract award, the proposals shall be open for public inspection. If the offeror designates a portion of its proposal as confidential information, the offeror shall isolate and identify, in writing, the confidential portions. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
CONTRACTING FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 

§ 3-5-90 - GENERAL. 
    A contract for professional services may be awarded by means of competitive sealed request for proposals, by competitive sealed invitation for bid or by limited source selection if the department director of the using department determines in writing that the nature of the service presents the limited competition that a competitive process cannot reasonably be used or, if used, will result in a substantially higher cost to the city, will otherwise impair the city's financial interests or will substantially impede the city's administrative functions or the delivery of services to the public; or if only one provider has the experience and capability to successfully perform the contract; or if the need was not known in sufficient time to allow for competitive procurement and time is of the essence. The director of the using department shall be responsible for making a limited source determination, prepare and sign a written limited source justification for not seeking competition and transmit the justification to the procurement office with a requisition for the procurement. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-91 - COMPETITIVE SELECTION. 
(A)  Unless the director of the using department makes a limited source determination, the procurement office shall issue competitive solicitations for professional services. 
(B)  Competitive solicitations for professional services may, when it is considered advantageous to the city, utilize the multi-step sealed bidding process set forth in §§ 3-5-60 et seq. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-92 - CITY ATTORNEY REVIEW. 
    Professional service contracts shall be reviewed by the City Attorney before execution for contracts with a dollar value expected to exceed the dollar value requiring Council approval. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS 

§ 3-5-105 - CONTRACTS FOR CONSTRUCTION. 
    Procurement for construction shall be conducted in accordance with A.R.S. Title 34, and amendments thereto. Provisions of this article and the procedures established by the Procurement Administrator shall apply to construction-related procurement to the extent these provisions are not inconsistent with state law. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-106 - CHANGE ORDERS. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, after approval by the City Council of a construction contract in excess of $30,000, any necessary changes in the scope of the construction contracts may be approved by either the department director, the Procurement Administrator, or by the City Council as required in this section. 
(B)  Any number of changes may occur, but will be limited according to this section. 
(1)  The department director of the department responsible for the work has authority to approve individual change orders that will result in an increase of not more than $10,000 or 5% of the total contract value, whichever is greater. The department director, with the concurrence of the Procurement Administrator, has authority to approve individual change orders that will result in an increase of not more than $50,000 or more than 10% of the total contract value, whichever is greater. Unless specifically authorized by the City Council under the terms of the contract, the department director's change order authority shall not exceed a cumulative total of $100,000 per contract. All changes approved by the Procurement Administrator shall be submitted to the City Council for ratification within 30 days of the date of approval. When changes are approved by the department director and, when applicable, by the Procurement Administrator, and the changes do not exceed the limits requiring approval by the City Council, the responsible department director may immediately direct the contractor to perform the work and, if necessary, may extend the contract term, by up to 25% of the contract time, or 90 days, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, individual change orders that will result in an increase of the contract in excess of 10% or $50,000 whichever is greater, and all changes when the cumulative total changes on one contract exceed $100,000, shall be submitted to the City Council for approval prior to the commencement of the additional work by the contractor; except that, the Procurement Administrator is authorized to approve changes exceeding these limits in order to prevent substantial economic harm to the city, or on projects funded with federal monies. The changes shall be submitted to the City Council for ratification within 30 days of approval. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-107 - REPORT UPON PROJECT COMPLETION. 
(A)  Upon completion of a project, a final balancing change order identifying all contract changes will be prepared by the Procurement Administrator. 
(B)  This report shall indicate final quantities and amounts of all pay items and reference all prior amendments which have affected the contract. 
(C)  This final document will be maintained in the procurement file as a public record. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
CANCELLATION OF SOLICITATION; REJECTION OF BIDS OR PROPOSALS AFTER OPENING 

§ 3-5-120 - CANCELLATION OF SOLICITATION. 
    An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may be cancelled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the city, in the city's sole discretion. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-121 - REJECTION OF BIDS OR PROPOSALS. 
    After opening, but prior to award, all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part when the Procurement Administrator determines, in writing, that the action is in the best interest of the city, in the city's sole discretion. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
RESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDERS AND OFFERORS 

§ 3-5-135 - FACTORS USED TO DEMONSTRATE BIDDER OR OFFEROR RESPONSIBLENESS. 
    For a bidder or offeror to be considered responsible, the bidder or offeror shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city its capability to perform an awarded contract in a satisfactory and timely manner based on requirements stated in the city's bid solicitation. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-136 - PROCUREMENT RESPONSIBILITY CRITERIA. 
    The Procurement Officer may establish specific responsibility criteria for a particular procurement. Any specific responsibility criteria shall be set forth in the solicitation. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
SPECIFICATIONS 

§ 3-5-150 - MAXIMUM PRACTICABLE COMPETITION. 
(A)  All specifications shall seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the city's needs and shall not be unduly restrictive. 
(B)  If only one responsive quotation or bid is received in response to a request for quotations, an invitation for bid or a request for proposal, an award may be made to a single bidder if the city or Procurement Officer determines that the price submitted is fair and reasonable, and that either other prospective bidders had reasonable opportunity to respond or there is not adequate time for re-solicitation. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-151 - PROPRIETARY SPECIFICATIONS. 
(A)  Proprietary specifications shall not be used unless the Procurement Officer, with the approval of the Procurement Administrator, determines, in writing, that the specifications are required by demonstrable technological justification and that it is not practicable or advantageous to use a less restrictive specification. 
(B)  If a proprietary specification is determined to be appropriate, the specification shall include a description of the essential characteristics of the products and materials so specified and statement indicating the city's intent to consider alternative products or materials, which have the described essential characteristics. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-152 - ACCEPTED COMMERCIAL SPECIFICATIONS. 
    To the extent practicable, the city shall use accepted commercial specifications and shall procure standard commercial materials. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-153 - BRAND NAME OR EQUAL SPECIFICATION. 
(A)  A brand name or equal specification may be used when the Procurement Officer determines that use of brand name or equal specifications is advantageous to the city. 
(B)  A brand name specification may be prepared and utilized only if the Procurement Officer makes a determination that only the identified brand name item will satisfy the city's needs. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
TYPES OF CONTRACTS 

§ 3-5-170 - GENERAL. 
    Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which will promote the best interests of this city may be used. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-171 - MULTI-TERM CONTRACTS. 
(A)  Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract may be entered into for a period of time as deemed to be in the best interest of this city, if the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and monies are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. 
(B)  Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods are subject to the availability and appropriation of monies. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-172 - CONTRACT FORM AND EXECUTION. 
    Except as otherwise provided pursuant to this article, all contracts shall be executed in the name of the city by the Mayor, City Manager or the Procurement Administrator and countersigned by the City Clerk. All contracts executed by the Procurement Administrator pursuant to this article are not required to be countersigned by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000; Am. Ord. 539, N.S. , passed 5-13-2014; Am. Ord. 551, N.S. , passed 2-10-2015) 
CONTRACT CLAUSES 

§ 3-5-185 - CONTRACT CLAUSES. 
    All city contracts for materials, services and construction shall include a provision for termination of the contract in whole or in part for the convenience of the city. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-186 - STANDARD CLAUSES AND THEIR MODIFICATION. 
    The Procurement Administrator, after consultation with the City Attorney, may establish standard contract clauses for use in city contracts. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION 

§ 3-5-200 - AUTHORITY TO DEBAR OR SUSPEND. 
(A)  The Procurement Administrator has the sole authority to debar or suspend a person from participating in city procurements. Upon receipt of information concerning a possible cause for debarment, the director shall investigate the possible cause. If the Procurement Administrator has a reasonable basis to believe that a cause for debarment exists, the Procurement Administrator may propose debarment for a period of not more than three years. 
(B)  The causes for debarment or suspension shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Conviction of any person or affiliate for commission of a criminal offense arising out of obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of the contract or subcontract; 
(2)  Conviction of or civil judgment finding a violation by any person or affiliate under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals; 
(3)  Conviction of, or civil judgment finding a violation by any person or any affiliate of any person under any statute of the federal government, this state or any other state for embezzlement, theft, fraud, bid rigging, perjury, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which affects responsibility as a city contractor; and 
(4)  Failure to complete, perform or unsatisfactory performance of a contract with the city or with another jurisdiction or public entity during the previous five-year period or any other cause that the Procurement Administrator reasonably determines to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including suspension or debarment of the person or any affiliate of the person by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this article. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-201 - NOTICE. 
    If the Procurement Administrator proposes debarment, the Procurement Administrator shall notify the person in writing of the proposed debarment stating the reasons for the action taken and stating that a hearing shall be scheduled at the request of the person proposed to be debarred. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-202 - HEARING PROCEDURES. 
    If a hearing is requested, the Procurement Administrator shall appoint a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall arrange for a prompt hearing and notify the parties, in writing, of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner without formal rules of evidence or procedure. The hearing shall be tape-recorded and a transcribed record of the hearing shall be made available at cost to the requesting party. The hearing officer may take any action the hearing officer deems appropriate in the circumstances to conduct the hearing and gather evidence. The hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the Procurement Administrator based on the evidence presented. The recommendation shall include findings of fact and reasons for the recommendation. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
§ 3-5-203 - DECISION BY THE DIRECTOR; REINSTATEMENT. 
(A)  The Procurement Administrator may affirm, modify or reject the hearing officer's recommendation in whole or in part, may remand the matter to the hearing officer with instructions, may conduct his or her own hearing or make any other appropriate disposition. 
(B)  A decision by the Procurement Administrator shall be final; provided that, the Procurement Administrator may, at any time after a final decision on debarment, reinstate a debarred person or rescind the debarment upon a determination that the cause upon which the debarment is based no longer exists. 
(Ord. 393, N.S., passed 7-11-2000) 
PROTESTS 

§ 3-5-300 - PROTESTS; INFORMAL AND FORMAL. 
(A)  Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest: 
(1)  A solicitation issued by the city; 
(2)  A proposed award of a city contract; 
(3)  The rejection of a request for changes, including a change order. 
(B)  Protests shall be filed in writing with the Procurement Administrator within five days from the time the alleged instance occurred. The Procurement Administrator has the authority, prior to the commencement of an action in court concerning the protest, to resolve the protest of an aggrieved actual or prospective bidder, offeror or contractor, in accordance with this Code. 
(C)  If a protest is not resolved by mutual agreement, the Procurement Administrator shall use his or her best efforts to render a decision in writing within 15 business days from the date the informal protest is filed. Copies of the decision shall be furnished to all interested parties by first class mail at the last address on file with the city. If the Procurement Administrator fails to render a decision within the 15-day period, a formal protest may be filed. 
(D)  A formal protest shall be in writing signed by an authorized party, containing their name, address and telephone number, identification of the solicitation, a detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds of the protest, including copies of all relevant documents and the specific relief requested. 
(E)  The formal protest shall be filed within five business days following: 
(1)  The date of the event that is the subject of the formal protest; 
(2)  The date of issuance of the decision of an informal protest; or 
(3)  The end of the 15-day informal protest process, if no decision was issued. 
(F)  Unless otherwise extended by the hearing officer, the formal protest shall be heard by a hearing officer appointed by the Procurement Administrator for such purposes within ten business days after filing of the formal protest. 
(G)  The hearing officer: 
(1)  May: 
(a)  Reject the protest in whole or in part; or 
(b)  Sustain the protest in whole or in part; and 
(2)  Shall provide for an appropriate remedy as follows: 
(a)  In determining an appropriate remedy, the hearing officer shall consider the circumstances surrounding the procurement or proposed procurement including, but not limited to the seriousness of the procurement deficiency, the degree of prejudice to other interested parties or to the integrity of the procurement system, the good faith of the parties, the extent of performance, costs to the city, the urgency of the procurement and the impact of the relief upon the city. 
(b)  An appropriate remedy may include one or more of the following: 
1.  Decline to exercise an option to renew under the contract. 
2.  Terminate the contract. 
3.  Reissue the solicitation. 
4.  Issue a new solicitation. 
5.  Award a contract consistent with city codes and policies. 
6.  Such other relief as is determined necessary to ensure compliance with this procurement code, procurement guidelines and procedures. 
(Ord. 491, N.S., passed 6-22-2010) 
SMALL, MINORITY, DISADVANTAGED AND WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES 

§ 3-5-400 - SMALL, MINORITY, DISADVANTAGED AND WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES POLICY. 
(A)  It is the policy of the city to make all efforts to encourage the use of small, minority, disadvantaged and women-owned business enterprises in connection with public works solicitations and contracts and in compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations governing federally-funded programs and activities. This policy includes the city's commitment to comply with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act in its programs and activities, where applicable. 
(B)  The city will take affirmative steps to assure that small, minority, disadvantaged and women-owned business enterprises are utilized when possible as a source of supplies, equipment, construction and services. These affirmative steps will include the following: 
(1)  The inclusion of qualified small, minority, disadvantaged and women-owned business enterprises on solicitation lists, and solicitation of bidding for public works, professional service or rehabilitation contracts. 
(2)  Assurances that small, minority, disadvantaged and women-owned business enterprises are solicited whenever they are potential sources, particularly for purchases of supplies and materials. 
(3)  If any subcontracts are to be let, require the prime contractor to take the affirmative steps noted above. 
(C)  The city shall establish and oversee a minority outreach program to assure the inclusion, to the maximum extent possible, of minorities and women, and entities owned by minorities and women. To assure the inclusion, to the maximum extent possible, of entities owned by minorities and women, the city will develop the following program: 
(1)  The city maintains an inventory of certified minority and women-owned business enterprises identifying their capacities, services, supplies, and products. 
(2)  The city will advertise using the local media to market and promote contracts and business opportunities for minority and women-owned business enterprises. 
(3)  A centralized record on the use and participation of minority and women-owned business enterprises as contractors/subcontractors in all federally-assisted contracting activities will be reported to the appropriate agency on the applicable contract and subcontract activity report. 
(Ord. 491, N.S., passed 6-22-2010) 
ARTICLE 3-6: - DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED, UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY AND WEAPONS 

§ 3-6-1 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to direct the orderly and fair disposition of property held by the city as a result of any forfeiture or abandonment. Nothing in this Article is intended to supplant or replace the requirements of federal and state law. 
(Ord. 510, N.S., passed 5-24-2011) 
§ 3-6-2 - ABANDONED, UNCLAIMED, LOST, FORFEITED OR CONFISCATED PROPERTY TO BE DELIVERED TO POLICE DEPARTMENT. 
    In addition to property subject to § 3-6-3, all abandoned, unclaimed, lost, forfeited, or confiscated property not claimed or recovered by its owner shall be delivered to the City of Tolleson Police Department for disposition pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. 510, N.S., passed 5-24-2011) 
§ 3-6-3 - WEAPONS, DANGEROUS PROPERTY OR EXPLOSIVES TO BE HELD BY POLICE DEPARTMENT. 
    Any deadly weapon, dangerous instrument or explosive ordered to be forfeited by a court under Arizona law, or any deadly weapon, dangerous instrument or explosive lost, unclaimed, confiscated, or abandoned shall be held by the City of Tolleson Police Department for disposition pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. 510, N.S., passed 5-24-2011) 
§ 3-6-4 - ABANDONED, UNCLAIMED, LOST OR CONFISCATED PROPERTY DISPOSITION; NOT WEAPONS. 
(A)  Except that property identified in § 3-6-3, all money or property subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 12-941 shall be disposed of pursuant to the requirements of that statutory provision. 
(B)  Excluding the property subject to § 3-6-3, any abandoned, unclaimed, lost or confiscated property in the possession of the city not subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 12-941, shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Any department or agency of the city may request to have such property transferred to the department or agency for the department or agency's beneficial use. Such request shall be in writing on a form developed by the City Clerk for such purpose. Decisions on such requests shall be made by the City Manager. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided under Arizona law, any property not requested for use by a city department or agency shall be offered through competitive sale to the highest bidder. 
(3)  All proceeds of any such sale shall be deposited into the city's General Fund. 
(Ord. 510, N.S., passed 5-24-2011) 
§ 3-6-5 - DISPOSITION OF DEADLY WEAPONS, DANGEROUS INSTRUMENTS OR EXPLOSIVES. 
(A)  Any deadly weapon, dangerous instrument or explosive either ordered to be forfeited, confiscated by the city, or otherwise abandoned or unclaimed in the city's possession shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  If the deadly weapon, dangerous instrument or explosive is of useful value to the City Police Department, as determined by the Chief of Police, the property may be retained and utilized by the City Police Department, subject to the requirements of federal and state law and city ordinances. 
(2)  If the Police Chief determines the deadly weapon, dangerous instrument or explosive has no useful value to the City Police Department, all such property shall then be destroyed in accordance with federal and state law, or sold through competitive sale to the highest bidder in accordance with federal and state law. Subject to federal and state law, the City Manager shall make the final determination as to whether to destroy or sell the subject property. 
(Ord. 510, N.S., passed 5-24-2011) 
ARTICLE 3-7: - PUBLIC RECORDS 
PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST POLICY 

§ 3-7-1 - PURPOSE OF THE POLICY. 
    The purpose of the policy is to implement a procedure for the city to provide information to the public in a consistent manner according to state law. 
(Res. 2079, passed 4-10-2012; Am. Res. 2094, passed 7-24-2012) 
§ 3-7-2 - POLICY NARRATIVE. 
    All written requests for information and records are processed through the City Clerk acting as Custodian of Records or authorized designee pursuant to the City Code with the exception of police reports and minute entries or transcripts for victims of a criminal offense, as set forth in division (H) below. The public records request form can be found on the city's website: www. tollesonaz. org under City Departments, City Clerk, and is available by calling the City Clerk's office. 
(A)  The public is required to submit a request form when seeking copies of, or when seeking to review, public records. The requests should provide adequate and detailed information. The city is not responsible for creating new documents or generating reports in response to non-specific requests. Request forms are processed as required under A.R.S. Title 39, Chapter 1 and appropriate charges will be assessed to the requesting party, as set forth below. 
(B)  Only one request form is required. If the public downloads the request form from the city's website, prints the form and submits this form at City Hall, the requester is not required to fill out a duplicate form at City Hall. 
(C)  A blank request form may be faxed to the requester. The requester may then complete, sign and fax the completed form back to City Hall. However, the requested material(s) is NOT to be faxed to the requester, as the requester must submit payment, as appropriate, prior to the release of the document(s). The requested material may be faxed after payment is received. 
(D)  Telephone (verbal) requests for information will not be honored. 
(E)  Commercial requests for public information must include a statement of the commercial purpose and be notarized pursuant to state law. If the form is notarized at City Hall, the notary fee as allowed by state statute will be collected. All request forms shall be: 
(1)  Filed with the Custodian or authorized designee; and 
(2)  Date-stamped upon receipt. 
(F)  If the request is to inspect documents only, the original public record(s) must be reviewed in the presence of the Custodian or authorized designee. 
(G)  The Custodian or authorized designee will be given the request on the day the request is submitted to the city for compliance with compiling the requested information. If a request is delivered to another city department, the request will be forwarded to the Custodian that same day. 
(H)  All requests will be processed through the office of the Custodian except for requests by the victim of a criminal offense (or an immediate family member of the victim if the victim is killed or incapacitated) for a copy of the police report from the investigating law enforcement agency and the minute entry or portion of the record of any proceeding in the case that arises out of the offense committed against the victim and that is reasonably necessary for the purpose of pursuing a claimed victim's right, which may be processed and disclosed directly through the City Police Department and City Court, respectively. Except for requests by a victim as set forth above, it is the responsibility of the Custodian or authorized designee to facilitate all departmental responses to public record requests and to communicate with the public regarding public records requests. 
(I)  If a public record is maintained by a department other than the Custodian, the Custodian will request the information from the department and the department will forward the public record to the Custodian within five business days after the request is made. The city department providing the information to the Custodian will provide the Custodian or authorized designee with a total of two paper copies (i.e., one copy of all materials to be given the requester and one duplicate copy for archival purposes) or one electronic copy. If the requested information cannot be forwarded to the Custodian within five days, the Custodian must be informed of: 
(1)  The reason for the delay; and 
(2)  The earliest date the requested information will be made available. 
(J)  Every effort will be made to provide the information to the requester by the end of the seventh business day following the date the request is made. If the requested public record(s) cannot reasonably be produced within seven business days, the Custodian or authorized designee shall advise the requester within seven business days setting forth: 
(1)  The reason that such records cannot be produced within seven business days; and 
(2)  The earliest day the requested information will be made available. A request for a commercial purpose may require additional time for processing. 
(K)  The Custodian shall refer any questions of the legality of the documents or disclosures to the City Attorney by sending an e-mail with the request form as an attachment. 
(L)  If the public record contains material that is exempt from disclosure as well as material not exempt, the Custodian or authorized designee shall separate the material and make the nonexempt material available for examination and copying. The following personal information must be redacted from documents: address, phone number, Social Security number, birth date, etc. 
(M)  Public records may be disclosed in the form of a CD, DVD, cassette, videotape or paper. If the records are not maintained in electronic format by the city, the city is not required to convert the requested public records into electronic format. Public records requested to be disclosed electronically in the form of CD or DVD will be provided in a "read-only" format to ensure the public record remains intact after disclosure by the city. 
(N)  The original request form will remain on file with the Custodian of records subject to the requirements of the records retention and disposition schedule for Arizona municipalities. 
(O)  Fees. 
(1)  (a)  There will be a per page photocopy charge to the public as set forth by ordinance in addition to: 
1.  The minimum fee per request as set forth by ordinance; 
2.  Other charges as may be applicable pursuant to state law, including, but not limited to, a reasonable amount for the cost of time, equipment and personnel used in producing copies of the records, but not for costs of searching for the records; and 
3.  Applicable sales tax. 
(b)  For requests of public records for a commercial purpose, in addition to the reasonable fee for the cost of time, materials, equipment and personnel used in producing or reproducing the information, there will be a charge for the value of reproduction on the commercial market as best determined by the city. 
(2)  There will be a reasonable charge for documents converted to a read-only electronic format and provided on portable electronic storage device in addition to: 
(a)  The minimum fee for cassettes, CDs, DVDs and videotapes as set forth by ordinance; 
(b)  Other charges as may be applicable pursuant to state law, including, but not limited to, a reasonable amount for the cost of time, equipment and personnel used in converting the records into read-only electronic format, but not for costs of searching for the records; and 
(c)  Applicable sales tax. 
(3)  All fees must be paid prior to the release of the printed, CD, DVD, cassette, videotape documents and/or materials. If a document is not picked up within two weeks of the request, the requestor shall be billed for the cost of the documents and the documents may be destroyed. 
(4)  Unless otherwise determined by the city, the city will not charge the federal government, the State of Arizona or any of their political subdivisions, the fees set forth above for non-commercial purpose public records requests. 
(Res. 2079, passed 4-10-2012; Am. Res. 2094, passed 7-24-2012) 
Cross reference- Fees for copying public records, see § 3-3-21 
RECORDS MANAGEMENT AND RETENTION POLICY 

§ 3-7-20 - POLICY. 
(A)  It is the policy of the City of Tolleson (the "city") to facilitate the prompt and orderly disposition of records no longer possessing sufficient administrative, legal or fiscal value to warrant their further retention and to ensure the retention and preservation of records with continuing value for historical or research purposes. In addition, it is the policy of the city to administer a records management program to promote the economic and efficient management of the city's public records. 
(B)  This city records management and retention policy (this "policy") includes records retention and disposition schedules that have been approved by the Director of the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records and by the Tolleson City Council. These schedules are in compliance with the City Code, Arizona Revised Statutes and other federal, state and local rules and regulations relating to public records. This policy also includes the procedures for changing or adding to these schedules. 
(C)  Pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes ("A.R.S.") Title 41, Chapter 1, Article 2.1, the city desires to establish and maintain a records management program, create and submit any custom records retention schedules for approval and appoint records managers/coordinators as appropriate. This policy applies systematic controls and cost reduction principles to the city's records system through the use of the procedures outlined in this policy and through the application of the authorized retention and disposition schedules. These schedules control the utilization, maintenance and storage of all phases of the life cycle of all records created and accumulated by the city. Compliance with the procedures and with the schedules is required by law. 
(Res. 2085 , passed 2-12-2013) 
§ 3-7-21 - PURPOSE. 
(A)  The purpose of this policy is to: (A) provide guidance to city staff relating to records disposition and retention responsibilities under the Tolleson City Code, Arizona Revised Statutes and other federal, state and local rules, regulations and guidelines; (B) ensure the retention and preservation of records with continuing value for historical or research purposes; and (C) facilitate the prompt and orderly disposition of records no longer possessing sufficient administrative, legal or fiscal value to warrant their further retention. 
(B)  In addition, the purpose of this Policy is to: (A) implement a records management program in order to provide better access to information; (B) reduce the costs of recordkeeping by implementing effective and efficient recordkeeping practices; and (C) inform pertinent department personnel about their responsibilities as they pertain to records management. 
(Res. 2085 , passed 2-12-2013) 
§ 3-7-22 - APPLICABILITY. 
(A)  The policies and procedures set forth herein apply to all records received, created or compiled by officials or employees of the city (including members of the City Council) in the daily conduct of city business and to any and all officials or employees of the City receiving, creating or compiling said records. The records are the property of the State of Arizona pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-151.15. It is unlawful to remove them from the files or to destroy them except in accordance with the city records retention and disposition schedules, as defined in § 3-7-23(B) below. 
(B)  City departments should implement their records control and disposal programs in accordance with the guidelines set forth in this policy. Each Department Director is responsible for ensuring that his or her department is maintaining an up-to-date copy of this policy and ensuring that the policies and directives set forth are closely followed. 
(C)  The cooperation of each department is necessary to keep their active filing systems closely related to the city records retention and disposition schedules as applicable to the department. 
(Res. 2085 , passed 2-12-2013) 
§ 3-7-23 - REFERENCE. 
(A)  Authority. 
(1)  A.R.S. §§ 13-2407, 38-421, 39-101, and Title 41, Chapter 1, Article 2.1. 
(2)  City of Tolleson City Code. 
(3)  Rules, regulations, standards and procedures, issued by the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records. 
(B)  Definitions. 
    ACTIVE RECORDS. Any data or information that is referred to frequently for various types of transactions. These records are maintained in the office files of each department. 
    CITY RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULES. Records retention and disposition schedules as approved by the Arizona State Library, Public Records and Archives and as declared as public record by the City Council. 
    CORRESPONDENCE. Any routine type of records generated in the conduct of daily work such as letters, memoranda, reports, emails and so forth. 
    DEPARTMENT RECORDS CLERK. A city employee who is responsible for the coordination of records and forms management, needs and operations between that department and the records center. Each Department Director shall be the Department Records Clerk for his or her corresponding department unless otherwise designated by the City Clerk. 
    DIRECTORY LISTING. All original documents that are assigned a numerical filing number and that are located in the off-site storage facility. 
    DISPOSITION. The action taken at the end of the retention period. 
    FORMS MANAGEMENT. The function that establishes standards for the creation, design, analysis and revision of all forms within an organization and assures that they are designed, produced, utilized and distributed economically and efficiently. 
    INACTIVE RECORDS. Any data or information that is referred to less than once a month. Most inactive records may be disposed of after a specified time period although some records have to be kept permanently for administrative, legal, historical or archival purposes. 
    NON-RECORDS. Items which are outside of the definition of records which do not require retention, scheduling, authorization to destroy, or the reporting of destruction. 
    NUMERICAL FILING. A number assigned to active/archival original city documents in order to locate them in the off-site storage facility according to the directory listing. 
    RECORD SERIES. A group of identical or related records which are normally used and filed as a unit and which permit evaluation as a unit for retention scheduling purposes. 
    RECORDS. All books, papers, maps, photographs or other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, including prints or copies of such items produced or reproduced on film or electronic media pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-151.16, made or received by any governmental agency in pursuance of law or in connection with the transaction of public business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by the city or its legitimate successor as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations or other activities of the government, or because of the informational and historical value of data contained in the record and includes records that are made confidential by statute. 
    RECORDS CENTER. An area located in the City Clerk's office which preserves and retains records. 
    RECORDS MANAGER. The individual responsible for the coordination, implementation and maintenance of the records retention and management program for the city. The City Clerk is hereby designated as the Records Manager. 
    RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The creation and implementation of systematic controls for records and information activities from the point where they are created or received through final disposition or archival retention, including distribution, use, storage, retrieval, protection and preservation. 
    RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULE. A records retention and disposition schedule is a timetable for the management of specific record series. It describes the life cycle of each series listed on it by indicating the retention period of the records and their final disposition (i.e., microfilm, archive, or destruction). 
    RECORDS WITH HISTORICAL VALUE. Records that are deemed to have historical value because they document the history of the city. Such records include, without limitation: 1) minutes of boards, commissions and committees established by statute, resolution, proclamation or ordinance; 2) council minutes; 3) original or "official copies" of formal policy directives; and 4) original copy of organization documentation, including charts. Records may also be deemed to have historical value because they document a controversial issue or a program, project, event, or issue that results in a significant change that affects the city, county or state, or that involves prominent people, places or events, or that resulted in media attention locally, statewide or nationally. These records are permanent and should not be destroyed. 
    RETENTION. The cycle of a document from creation through its active and inactive life to destruction or permanent preservation. 
    RETENTION PERIOD. The period of time during which records must be kept before they may be disposed of, usually stated in terms of months or years but sometimes expressed as contingencies upon the occurrence of an event (e.g., employee termination, contract closure, etc.). 
(Res. 2085 , passed 2-12-2013) 
§ 3-7-24 - ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
(A)  Records Manager. The Records Manager is vested with the authority and responsibility for the creation and ongoing implementation of records management. 
(1)  The Records Manager shall: 
(a)  Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the economical and efficient management of the public records of the city. 
(b)  Serve as liaison to the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records and ensure the city's compliance with the rules, regulations, standards and procedures established by the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records. 
(c)  Develop the necessary standards and procedures in the overall field of records management, including the filing and retrieval of active records, records inventory and appraisal, inactive files management and retrieval and the management and control of essential records. 
(d)  Educate city officials and employees in all areas of records management. 
(e)  Assist the departments in the establishment and updating of the city records retention and disposition schedules in conformity with legal, administrative and fiscal constraints and as set forth in §§ 3-7-26(A) and (B) below. 
(f)  Establish a forms creation and control program. 
(2)  The Records Manager or designee shall: 
(a)  Establish and maintain records the city records retention and disposition schedules on file in the City Clerk's office. 
(b)  Coordinate the inventory of records with each department. 
(c)  Review the city records retention and disposition schedules for each department based upon the information obtained from the records inventory worksheets and amend the city records retention and disposition schedules accordingly, contingent upon approval by the City Council and the Arizona State Library, Public Records and Archives, as more particularly set forth in § 3-7-26(B) below. 
(d)  Receive from Department Records Clerks all boxes of eligible inactive records. Records assigned to the records center become the responsibility of the Records Manager. 
(e)  Keep an accurate record of all original active and archival records in the fireproof filing cabinets, in the electronic document system and in the off-site storage facility according to the directory listing. 
(f)  Dispose of the records located in the records center at the end of the retention period in accordance with the city records retention and disposition schedules. 
(g)  Assist in the retrieval and re-filing of records that are stored at the records center. 
(h)  Transfer permanent or long-term records to the off-site storage facility and track the transfer of such records with a spreadsheet listing the boxes' barcode numbers. 
(i)  Assist and monitor the document imaging when other departments receive approval for document imaging by creating templates, reviewing scanned record series and keeping track of record series that have surpassed their retention period as set forth in the city records retention and disposition schedules for deletion from the system. 
(B)  Department Records Clerk. Each Department Director shall be the Department Records Clerk for his or her corresponding department unless otherwise designated by the City Clerk. The Department Records Clerk shall: 
(1)  Coordinate all records management activities within the department, including emails. 
(2)  Inventory and aid in the appraisal of all department records. 
(3)  Work closely with the Records Manager in the administration of requests for document imaging. 
(4)  Review on a regular basis the city records retention and disposition schedules as applicable to that department to determine which records are eligible for transfer to the records center. 
(5)  Box all inactive records pertaining to the department and make arrangements for transfer to the records center. 
(Res. 2085 , passed 2-12-2013) 
§ 3-7-25 - RECORDS. 
(A)  Inventory. Each Department Records Clerk shall take an inventory of all of the records stored in the department and shall complete the records inventory worksheet in the form attached to Res. 2085 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference, as may be amended. The record series should be as descriptive as possible. Any special requirement of a particular record series should be noted on the records inventory worksheet. The Department Records Clerk shall submit the completed records inventory worksheet to the Records Manager for review. After the initial inventory, supplemental inventories may be performed as needed or as directed by the Records Manager. 
(B)  Records categories. 
(1)  Records. All documents and documentary material deemed to be records as defined in § 3-7-23(B) herein. 
(2)  Non-records. 
(a)  Non-records include, without limitation: 
1.  Extra copies of documents preserved only for convenience or reference; 
2.  Reading, tickler, follow-up, or suspense copies of correspondence; 
3.  Identical copies of documents maintained in the same file; 
4.  Extra copies of printed or processed materials (official copies of which are retained by the department of record); 
5.  Documents received from other departments that require no action (official copies of which are retained by the originating department); 
6.  Superseded copies of published manuals, other directives and drafts; 
7.  Materials documenting unofficial employee activities (blood drives, charitable funds, social and professional meetings, etc.); 
8.  Routing slips and standard transmittal sheets; 
9.  Incidental working papers, notes and emails; 
10.  Preliminary working drafts; 
11.  Blank forms; 
12.  Transcribed stenographic materials; 
13.  Catalogs, trade journals and other publications or papers received from government agencies, commercial firms or private institutions that require no action and are not part of an action case record; 
14.  Correspondence and other drafts of short-term importance that, after action has been completed, have no future use. 
15.  Reproduction materials such as stencils, mimeograph masters, offset plates, etc. 
16.  Physical exhibits, artifacts and material objects lacking documentary value; 
17.  Library or museum materials made or acquired solely for reference or exhibition purposes; and 
18.  Stocks of publications or documents intended for sale or distribution to interested persons. 
(b)  Non-records may attain the status of records in certain circumstances as determined by the Records Manager. Examples of this include: (i) transmittal slips that have acquired record status because they serve to significantly clarify the document or documents being transmitted; (ii) multiple copies that have attained the status of records because each is serving a separate and distinct program purpose or if they are maintained in different filing systems; or (iii) published codes that have become records through their adoption by the city. The Department Records Clerk shall consult with the Records Manager to determine whether a material should be designated as a record or non-record. 
(c)  Non-records generally shall not be interfiled with official records. 
(3)  Records with historical or archival value. Certain records that are created, compiled and maintained in the departments have long-term research and reference value. These records should be designated as permanent and should be transferred to the city off-site storage facility or the Arizona State Library archives, as applicable, for preservation as soon as their active role is over according to A.R.S. § 39-101. All records within the departments should be appraised to determine if they have historical value. Working in close association with City Clerk staff, the Department Records Clerk shall assess which records have historical significance and to determine when such records can be classified as inactive and thus be transferred to the city off-site storage facility or the Arizona State Library Archives, as applicable. The Records Manager or designee retains the final decision in the city as to whether such records should be designated as permanent. Records with historical value include, without limitation: 
(a)  Minutes of boards, commissions and committees established by statute, resolution, proclamation or ordinance. 
(b)  City Council meeting minutes. 
(c)  Original or "official copies" of formal policy directives. 
(d)  Original copy of organizational documentation including charts. 
(e)  Records documenting a historic or landmark event. 
(Res. 2085 , passed 2-12-2013) 
§ 3-7-26 - PROCEDURE FOR RETENTION, DISPOSITION AND DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS. 
(A)  City records retention and disposition schedules. The city records retention and disposition schedules are on file with the City Clerk and may be amended from time to time in accordance with approval from the Arizona State Library, Public Records and Archives. 
(B)  Amendments to retention and disposition schedule. The Records Manager shall review the city records retention and disposition schedules at least annually to determine whether changes need to be made. If the Records Manager desires to amend the city records retention and disposition schedules, the City Council shall approve the amended schedules by resolution, declaring the amended schedules as public record, and the amended, approved schedules shall be submitted to the Arizona State Library, Public Records and Archives. Requests for custom amendments to the city records retention and disposition schedules must be submitted in writing to the Records Manager and are subject to approval by the Director of the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records. 
(C)  Records disposition. Final disposition of records is prescribed by the city records retention and disposition schedules. 
(D)  Records on approved schedule. 
(1)  Only official records are put on the city records retention and disposition schedules. 
(2)  Records should be retained in the originating department in accordance with city records retention and disposition schedules until they are no longer in active use. Generally, records must be referred to more than once a month to be considered active records. When records are referred to so seldom as to make their continued retention by the originating department impractical, they are considered to have become inactive and should be transferred to the records center for appropriate disposition. 
(3)  Usually records retained for three years or less should be held in the originating department until they are no longer active and then they should be transferred to the records center for appropriate disposition. 
(4)  Records which have been determined to be of historical or archival value in accordance with § 3-7-25(B)(3) above shall be transferred to the city off-site storage facility or the Arizona State Library Archives, as applicable, as soon as administratively advisable per A.R.S. § 39-101. 
(5)  Records which must be retained longer than ten years and which have no archival value should be microfilmed and the hard copies destroyed, provided, however, that approval from the Director of the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records, pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-151.16 must be obtained first. 
(E)  Surveillance ("security") storage media. Surveillance (security) data shall be retained by the City Police Department on the City Police Department's server for 60 days. 
(F)  Indexing: Document imaging. The Records Manager or designee shall be responsible for indexing the minutes, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, agreements, deeds, pending agenda items, referred items and any other item concerning the actions of the City Council. Each department shall ask the Records Manager for assistance in any document imaging requests. Final approval is necessary from the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records prior to scanning documents in accordance with a document imaging implementation program pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-151.16. The Records Manager or designee shall have access to all departments' files for monitoring purposes of document imaging according to the city records retention and disposition schedules. 
(G)  Active records filing. The Department Records Clerk shall work closely with City Clerk staff in setting up an efficient active records filing system and shall monitor changes made in filing systems to maintain compliance with the applicable city records retention and disposition schedules. 
(H)  Preparing records for storage. 
(1)  The Department Records Clerk shall prepare all inactive records in his or her department for transfer to the records center for appropriate disposition. In preparing the records for transfer, the Department Records Clerk shall establish that all such records are records, as opposed to non-records, and are being retained in accordance with this policy and the rules, regulations, standards and procedures approved by the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records. 
(2)  The Department Records Clerk shall pack all inactive records to be transferred in storage boxes in the same order in which they were kept in the active records file. All labels, serial numbers, file dividers and indexes shall be included with the records to maintain the integrity of the file. Each box shall contain only those records sharing the same destruction date. 
(I)  Transferring records to the records center. 
(1)  The Department Records Clerk shall deliver all completed storage boxes to Records Manager. Each box will be stored in the corresponding location until the expiration of the retention period, at which time it will be processed for destruction. In no event shall boxes be delivered to the records center without being checked in by the Records Manager or designee. 
(2)  Only the Magistrate Court and Police Department shall store inactive records at the department until the retention period has passed. The Police Department Director shall arrange the transfer of the records to the records center at the discretion of the Records Manager when they are ready for destruction. The Police Department Director shall complete the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records Certificate of Records Destruction, in the form attached to Res. 2085 as Exhibit B and incorporated herein by reference, as may be amended, and shall transfer all inactive boxes with the certificate of records destruction. Once approved by the Records Manager, the records will be slated for destruction. 
(J)  Retrieving records from the records center. 
(1)  If a department needs to retrieve records from boxes stored at the records center or the off-site storage facility, the Department Records Clerk or designee shall contact the Records Manager or designee. Only the Records Manager or designee may retrieve records from the records center. 
(2)  All architectural/engineering plans and specifications shall be transferred to the records center and shall be kept until their retention period expires in accordance with the city's records retention and disposition schedules. 
(K)  Preparing records for disposition. 
(1)  Records retained in the originating department for the duration of the retention period should be sent to the city records center for destruction at the end of the retention period as prescribed by the city records retention and disposition schedules. 
(2)  Records stored at the records center or at the off-site storage facility will be pulled for destruction at the expiration of their scheduled retention period, and if feasible and necessary in the sole discretion of the Records Manager, the Records Manager or designee will notify the originating department of the impending destruction. The records will be held for 15 working days after the records are pulled unless information is provided to support a change in the retention period of a particular document or record series, including without limitation the reasons set forth in § 3-7-26(K)(3) below. The originating department is responsible for notifying the Records Manager if a record should not be destroyed as scheduled or if the records scheduled for destruction fall under the Federal Privacy of Information Act and require destruction by shredding or other approved permanent method of destruction. 
(3)  Scheduled destruction of records will be delayed for reasons such as court orders, litigation, audits, changes in the prescribed retention period or when there is a probability of litigation, either involving the records or requiring their use, or if the records may be required for legal discovery or ongoing audit purposes. 
(4)  The Department Records Clerk shall report the destruction of records by completing a certificate of records destruction, in the form attached to Res. 2085 as Exhibit B. The certificate of records destruction shall be approved and signed by the Records Manager or designee and it shall be mailed to the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records. A copy will be filed in the City Clerk's office and retained for two years. 
(5)  All records on document imaging system whose retention periods have expired will be noted on the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records Certificate of Records Destruction, in the form attached to Res. 2085 as Exhibit B. 
(L)  Methods of disposition. Disposition may consist of any of the following: 
(1)  Destruction by shredding, pulping or other approved permanent method. 
(2)  Archival retention in accordance with § 3-7-25(B)(3) above. 
(3)  Micrographic reproduction with destruction of originals. 
(4)  Micrographic reproduction with archival retention of originals. 
(5)  Electronic/digital reproduction with destruction of originals 
(6)  Electronic/digital reproduction with archival retention of originals. 
(M)  In-house records destruction. The Department Records Clerk or the Records Manager or designee shall screen the documents from the inactive records boxes for confidential material, such as Social Security numbers, bank account numbers, etc. Once approved for destruction by the Records Manager, all boxes from Human Resources, Legal and Police Department shall be shredded by the department or via the Records Manager. 
(N)  Outsourced record destruction. For documents not destroyed in house, the Records Manager shall confirm that those records are to be destroyed and shall submit these records for destruction to the appropriate vendor. Upon destruction, the vendor shall provide the Records Manager with an affidavit of destruction. 
(Res. 2085 , passed 2-12-2013) 
§ 3-7-27 - FORMS. 
    Forms management. Forms management is the centralized and systematic control of forms, including design, utilization, revision and stocking of the forms. 
(A)  To avoid the pitfalls associated with the utilization of poorly designed forms, each department shall work in close association with the Department Records Clerk and City Clerk staff in developing an efficient and cost-effective forms management program. 
(B)  In developing and maintaining an efficient forms management program, the Department Records Clerk shall: 
(1)  Analyze the forms currently in use in the department in relation to their cost; 
(2)  Eliminate the use of forms that have ceased to serve a useful purpose; 
(3)  Redesign current forms and design new forms in a manner that will help achieve a maximum efficiency and usefulness; 
(4)  Consolidate forms with substantially the same informational content or similar uses; 
(5)  Eliminate extra copies of forms that are not routinely used or are needless; and 
(6)  Identify the most economical and efficient methods for the printing, storage and distribution of forms. 
(Res. 2085 , passed 2-12-2013) 
ARTICLE 3-8: - SPECIAL EVENTS 

§ 3-8-1 - PURPOSE. 
    Special events are an important part of Tolleson's economic, community and tourism well-being. Regulation is essential to promoting success, managing impacts and protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-2 - EXEMPTIONS. 
(A)  Special events occurring entirely on publicly-owned land over which the city does not have jurisdiction are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(B)  Sections 3-8-4 through 3-8-21 do not apply to special events organized, in whole or part, by the city. A special event for which the City solely provides funding or sponsorship is not a special event organized, in whole or part, by the city for purposes of this section. 
(C)  Nothing in this article shall limit the city's ability to enter into license agreements on such terms and conditions as the city determines to be favorable, for use of city property. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-3 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    APPLICANT means any person or organization that seeks a permit from the city to conduct a special event governed by this article. 
    CITY MANAGER means the City Manager as appointed pursuant to the City Code and includes the City Manager's designee. 
    CONCESSIONS means food, beverage, alcohol, merchandise or convenience items. 
    GRAND OPENING means the introduction, promotion or announcement of a new business, store, shopping center or office, or the announcement, introduction or promotion of an established business changing ownership or location. 
    SEASONAL SALES means an outdoor sale of seasonal materials, is limited to fireworks, pumpkins and Christmas trees. 
    SIDEWALK SALE is an outdoor sale conducted by the owner of a retail establishment of products normally sold within the retail establishment. 
    SPECIAL EVENT means an organized, temporary activity or series of temporary activities held outdoors, on public property or private property that is inconsistent with the legal use of the property under the city's zoning ordinance and open to the public by advertisement or invitation, with or without charge. Any reference to "special event" in the Code other than in this article shall mean "special event" as defined herein. 
    SPECIAL EVENTS ADMINISTRATOR means a city employee designated by the City Manager to administer the provisions of this article. 
    SPECIAL VEHICLE SALE means a short term or seasonal sale of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-4 - SPECIAL EVENT CRITERIA. 
(A)  Special event organizers shall ensure that a special event is conducted as follows: 
(1)  The special event provides a unique organized, civic, cultural, educational, entertainment or recreational activity or experience. 
(2)  The size, attendance and nature of the special event are suitable for the proposed location and duration. 
(3)  Traffic associated with the special event can be managed to accommodate expected special event attendance. 
(4)  Parking is provided or available to accommodate special event staff, participants and spectators. 
(5)  To protect the safety of special event staff, participants, spectators, and the public, adequate security and emergency medical services are provided, and all temporary structures are safe. 
(6)  Restroom facilities are provided or available to accommodate expected special event attendance. 
(7)  Trash is managed and removed in a timely manner after the special event and the site is left in the same or better condition than before the special event. 
(8)  Noise is managed to minimize the impact on neighboring residences and businesses. 
(9)  Economic and other impacts to other properties, residences and businesses are adequately addressed, so that the net aggregate impact of the special event on area businesses and residences is not negative. 
(10)  The special event is able to be accommodated for its duration and its location with required city services. 
(B)  The applicant shall demonstrate the ability to successfully carry out the proposed special event, including, if applicable, a past record of successful special event performance. 
(C)  The special event shall comply with applicable laws, ordinances and City policies, regulations and procedures. 
(D)  Additional criteria for special events on city property. For a special event on city property, in addition to the criteria in §§ (A) through (C) of this section, the special events administrator shall consider whether the special event: 
(1)  Partners with Tolleson businesses to encourage retail and/or restaurant sales; 
(2)  Attracts regional, national or international attendance; 
(3)  Promotes Tolleson in special event-related marketing; 
(4)  Features or includes entertainment or attractions of regional, national or international quality or interest; 
(5)  Provides civic or cultural benefits. 
(E)  Additional permits and inspections. The applicant shall obtain any and all additional permits and inspections required to conduct the special event or related activities, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Structural/building permit; 
(2)  Fireworks permit; 
(3)  Electrical permit; 
(4)  Tent permit; 
(5)  Special event liquor license; 
(6)  County and state health permits. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-5 - SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS. 
(A)  A special event permit is required when a special event: 
(1)  Is held on city property or impedes, obstructs, impairs, interferes or disrupts normal or usual use of city property, facilities or right-of-way; or 
(2)  Requires the use of any city resource or services that would not be necessary in the absence of such a special event; or 
(3)  Is a grand opening, sidewalk sale, seasonal sale or special vehicle seasonal sale. 
(B)  Special event permits shall be categorized as Class 1, Class 2 and Class 3 level permits depending on the level of city services necessary for the event. Class 1 and Class 2 level permits will require administrative approval only. Class 3 permits will require Council approval. 
(1)  Class 1: Special events and sales that have little to no impact on City resources, such as grand openings, sidewalk sales. 
(2)  Class 2: Special events and sales that have some impact on city resources but impact is minimal, such as, special vehicle sales or seasonal sales that remain mostly on private property; parades limited to sidewalks. 
(3)  Class 3: Special events and sales that have a high impact on city resources, such as a parade in city streets or rights-of-way, street fair, celebration, concert, or similar entertainment or recreational activity or experience. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-6 - SPECIAL EVENT LIMITS. 
(A)  A special event shall not occur more than ten consecutive or 24 total days during the calendar year and, of the 24 calendar days per year, no more than ten total days in any calendar quarter, unless otherwise provided by this article. 
(B)  The following restrictions shall apply to seasonal sales, special vehicle sales and sidewalk sales: 
(1)  Seasonal sales, which shall be limited to a maximum of 31 consecutive days unless a shorter time period is set by law; 
(2)  Special vehicle sales. Special vehicle sales are limited to two special vehicle sales within a three month period, lasting no more than 30 consecutive or 48 total days per year; 
(3)  Sidewalk sales, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Sidewalk sales may only be conducted in front of or adjacent to the retail establishment; and 
b.  A retail establishment shall not hold more than three sidewalk sales lasting no more than ten consecutive days per sale in a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-7 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  Permit application. An applicant shall complete a special event permit application in the form prescribed by the city and provide the following information, as applicable: 
(1)  Type and description of the special event; 
(2)  Name, address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant and contact person, if different from applicant; 
(3)  Proposed date of the special event, together with beginning and ending times; 
(4)  Proposed location, including site plan or drawing; 
(5)  Tents, generators, pyrotechnic and other fire hazard information; 
(6)  Estimated numbers of special event staff, participants, and spectators; 
(7)  Parking information; 
(8)  Vendor and concessions information; 
(9)  Noise information, including whether a band, DJ or PA system is involved; 
(10)  Sanitation information; 
(11)  Whether liquor will be present; 
(12)  Whether the special event is open to the public and whether fees, if any, will be charged to participants or spectators. 
(13)  Signature of the applicant. If the application is for an activity on private property, the property owner or an agent of the property owner with the property owner's authorization shall sign the application. 
(14)  Traffic and street closure information, including route map; 
(15)  Services requested from the city, including police, fire, and emergency medical services; 
(16)  Barricade plan; 
(17)  Insurance as prescribed in § 3-8-10; 
(18)  Notification plan. For applications involving street closures, the applicant shall use a form prescribed by the city to solicit comments or concerns regarding street closure from neighbors and businesses, as specified by the city, whose vehicular access to their property is affected by the street closure and submit to the city any such comments or concerns; 
(19)  Security plan. 
(B)  Timing of application. Applicants shall submit completed special event permit applications for Class 3 permits to the City at least 60 calendar days before the special event, for Class 2 permits, at least 15 days before the event, and for Class 1 permits, at least five days before the event for approvals. Applications that are not timely submitted may be denied unless the applicant demonstrates to the special events administrator that compliance within the deadline was impractical or impossible, or the special events administrator determines that the delayed application will not impair the city's ability to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(C)  Multiple jurisdictions: If a special event involves multiple governmental jurisdictions, the applicant is required to obtain all applicable written authorizations from other governmental jurisdictions related to the special event. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-8 - APPLICATION PROCESSING; TIME FRAMES. 
(A)  Considerations. The special events administrator shall make decisions on completed applications, including whether to impose permit conditions, based on whether the applicant has demonstrated that the applicable requirements in § 3-8-4 are satisfied. 
(B)  Application review time frames. The time frames by which the city will review and make a decision and administrative approvals on special event permit applications shall be posted on the city's website. 
(C)  Application withdrawal. An applicant may withdraw its application prior to the issuance of an approval or denial. The city may consider an application withdrawn if the applicant fails to provide requested information or explanation of why the information cannot be provided within 15 calendar days of the request. 
(D)  Special event cancellation. An applicant shall notify the special events administrator immediately once the applicant knows that a permitted special event will not occur. 
(E)  Misrepresentations. If the applicant makes a material misrepresentation on an application, such as a significant understatement of the anticipated number of participants, the applicant shall pay to the city any and all costs incurred by the city as a result of the misrepresentation. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-9 - FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES. 
(A)  Fee. A special event permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee set forth in the fee schedule approved by the City Council. Prior to permit issuance, the applicant shall also pay all applicable fees for permit issuance set forth in the fee schedule approved by City Council, including facility and right-of-way use fees. 
(B)  City support services. City support services shall be provided for special events as determined by the city to protect the health and safety of the public, and the costs of such services shall be paid by the applicant. 
(C)  Police, fire, emergency medical services, traffic and crowd control. The applicant shall provide police, fire protection, emergency medical services, and traffic and crowd control to the extent determined necessary by the police chief, the fire chief, or their designees, at applicant's own expense. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-10 - INSURANCE. 
    An applicant for a special event permit for use of city property shall submit to the special events administrator a certificate of insurance showing the city as an additional insured on insurance coverage issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Arizona with a rating specified by the City Manager, or designee, and showing coverage for the special event in the amount and form required by the City Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-11 - INDEMNIFICATION. 
    By issuing a special event permit, the city makes no guarantees and assumes no liability for the safety of participants in or spectators of a special event. The City Manager, or designee, may require as part of an application that the applicant agree to indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless for any and all costs, damages or other liabilities related to the special event. An indemnification letter is required for a Class 3 permit. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-12 - DECISION ON SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT APPLICATION; SPECIAL CONDITIONS. 
(A)  The special event administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the decision on the application. 
(B)  The special events administrator may approve an application subject to special event permit conditions the special events administrator determines are necessary to ensure the special event meets the requirements of this article. 
(C)  Reasons for denial specified. If a special event application is denied or a special condition imposed, the special events administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the action, including: 
(1)  An explanation of the applicant's right to appeal the action; 
(2)  The grounds for denial or special condition, including any citations to applicable Code provisions; 
(3)  If a denial, an explanation of the right to resubmit the application. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-13 - PERMIT REVOCATION. 
(A)  A permit may be revoked by the special events administrator or other City Manager designee for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with terms and conditions of the permit; 
(2)  The special event poses a threat to public health or safety; 
(3)  Declaration of a state of emergency. 
(B)  If a special event permit is revoked, the special events administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the action, including: 
(1)  Grounds for revocation, including any citations to applicable Code provisions; and 
(2)  Explanation of the right to appeal the action. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-14 - APPEAL OF DENIAL, SPECIAL CONDITION OR REVOCATION. 
(A)  Appeal. An applicant may appeal a denial, revocation, or special condition of Class 1 and 2 permits to the City Manager as follows: 
(1)  The appeal shall be filed within ten business days of the date of the permit decision; 
(2)  The appeal shall include the specific reasons for the appeal and any supporting documents. 
(B)  The City Manager shall make a decision on the appeal within ten business days of receiving the appeal. 
(C)  After considering the appeal, the City Manager may uphold, reverse or modify a permitting decision. 
(D)  There shall be no right of appeal for Class 3 permits. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-15 - TERMINATION OF SPECIAL EVENT. 
    The Chief of Police or designee may terminate a special event and disperse participants and spectators when authorized by law for any reason for which a special event permit or approval may be revoked under § 3-8-13 or if the special event is conducted in violation of any federal or state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-16 - UNAUTHORIZED ACTs. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Hold a special event that requires a permit under this article without obtaining the permit; 
(2)  Hold a special event that violates the terms and conditions of the special event permit or application; 
(3)  Hold a special event that violates other laws, including, but not limited to, laws relating to traffic regulations, disturbing the peace, public nuisance, unlawful assembly, and trespass. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-17 - AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE VIOLATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE; MEANS OF ENFORCEMENT. 
(A)  The City Manager or designee, a city police officer, a code inspector, the City Fire Chief or designee and the City Attorney may bring civil complaints under this article. 
(B)  Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil or criminal complaint. 
(C)  A city police officer or the City Attorney may issue criminal complaints to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-18 - JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE OF CITY COURT. 
(A)  The city court has jurisdiction over all civil complaints and criminal citations to enforce this article. 
(B)  The city court shall follow the Arizona Rules of Court for Civil Traffic Violation Cases for civil complaints to enforce this article, except where inconsistent with this article, local rules of the city court or rules of the Arizona Supreme Court. 
(C)  The city court shall follow the Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure for criminal actions to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-19 - CLASSIFICATION OF VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. 
(A)  A first violation of § 3-8-16(A)(1) shall be a civil offense with a minimum fine of $500.00. A second or subsequent violation within one year of a first violation is a class one misdemeanor and shall be punished, in addition to any other penalties authorized by law, by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 per violation. 
(B)  All other violations of this article shall be civil offenses with a minimum fine of $500.00 per violation except that a third or subsequent violation within one year of a first violation is a class one misdemeanor and shall be punished, in addition to any other penalties authorized by law, by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 per violation. 
(C)  The court shall not suspend any part of any fine required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-20 - RESTITUTION. 
    In addition to the penalties under § 3-8-19, the court shall impose restitution as part of its sentence to compensate the city for its costs to enforce this article and bring a special event into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-21 - ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION. 
(A)  The City Manager or authorized designee shall be responsible for administering and implementing this article. 
(B)  The City Manager may develop reasonable guidelines to implement this article. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
§ 3-8-22 - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
    Special events are subject to the requirements of the City Code and the city zoning ordinance with respect to the use of public-right-ways. 
(Ord. No. 578, N.S. , § 1, passed 1-9-2018) 
CHAPTER 4: - PUBLIC SAFETY 
ARTICLE 4-1: - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

§ 4-1-1 - CREATED; COMPOSITION. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department for the city, which shall consist of the Chief of Police and as many police officers as may, from time to time, be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the city. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall have powers and duties as set forth in § 2-3-34 of this Code. 
( Am. Ord. 538, N.S. , passed 4-8-2014) 
§ 4-1-2 - APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS. 
(A)  Police officers shall be appointed by the Chief of Police. 
(B)  It shall be the duty of the police to enforce the code of the city, statutes of the State of Arizona and to arrest the violators thereof, under the direction of the Chief of Police. 
§ 4-1-3 - COMPENSATION. 
(A)  The Chief of Police and police officers shall be compensated by virtue of an annual evaluation. 
(B)  The Chief of Police shall not receive any perquisites, commissions or compensations for services as chief of police, city marshal or tax collector, except as the city may prescribe. 
§ 4-1-4 - DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with the departmental rules and regulations per the City Code. 
§ 4-1-5 - ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY. 
    The members of the Police Department of the city are duly authorized to answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the city pursuant to mutual aid agreements and state statutes. 
ARTICLE 4-2: - POLICE RESERVE 

§ 4-2-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICE RESERVE. 
    There is hereby established the Police Reserve for the city as an auxiliary to the regular Police Department and as a component thereof. 
§ 4-2-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    POLICE. The Police Department of the city. 
    RESERVE. The Police Reserve of the city. 
§ 4-2-3 - APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS. 
    The members of the Reserve shall consist of United States citizens who are residents of the state, 18 years of age and over and appointed by the Chief of Police. Any member of the Reserve may have his or her authority revoked at any time by the Chief of Police. 
§ 4-2-4 - LIMITATIONS ON MEMBERSHIP. 
    The membership of the Reserve shall not exceed ten persons at any time, except in the case of a local or national disaster or emergency when the Chief of Police may appoint additional members to serve during a time of emergency. 
§ 4-2-5 - COMMAND AND CONTROL. 
    The Reserve shall be under the command and subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police or members of the police as the Chief of Police shall designate. 
§ 4-2-6 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The members of the Reserve shall render auxiliary support, without compensation, to the Police Department under the rules and regulations as the Chief of Police may prescribe. Members of the Reserve may be called to duty by the Chief of Police during the time of or in anticipation of any emergency situation or other occasion which, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, shall reasonably require the aid of personnel other than that of the regular Police Department to maintain peace and good order in the city. Members of the Reserve may also be called to duty at other times for training with the regular Police Department. Each member of the Reserve shall, before entering on the duties, be required to take an appropriate oath. Each member shall have the powers and authority of a peace officer during the time and only that time as the member is on duty in response to a call by the Chief of Police, subject to the limitations as may be prescribed under rules and regulations adopted by the Chief of Police and Council. 
§ 4-2-7 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The Chief of Police shall adopt rules and regulations expressly defining the powers and duties of the Reserve, but the powers and duties shall not be in excess of those accorded to the police, nor inconsistent therewith. 
§ 4-2-8 - INSIGNIA. 
    The Chief of Police shall issue to each member of the Reserve a badge of authority to be used by the member only while on duty. The badge shall be of a design as the Chief of Police may determine, but shall bear the word "RESERVE" across the face thereof. 
§ 4-2-9 - UNIFORMS. 
    The uniforms for members of the Reserves shall be similar to the uniform worn by the members of the regular Police Department of the city and shall be purchased and maintained by the members of the Reserves. Uniforms shall be worn by members only when on actual and authorized duty as police reserve officers. 
§ 4-2-10 - IMPERSONATIONS. 
    No person shall impersonate a police reserve officer, nor shall any person, undertake the duties of a police reserve officer without first being appointed by the Chief. 
§ 4-2-11 - CARRYING OF FIREARMS. 
    No member of the Reserves shall carry any firearms until the member has qualified for use of firearms and has actually received evidence of the qualification from the Chief. The authorized member shall carry firearms in a manner and at times as may be prescribed by the Chief. 
§ 4-2-12 - STIPEND. 
    Reserve officers shall receive a quarterly stipend to cover expenses, in an amount as set by the Police Department budget, from time to time. 
ARTICLE 4-3: - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

§ 4-3-1 - ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION. 
    There is hereby established and continued a Fire Department for the city which shall be operated and maintained by the city. The Department shall consist of a Fire Chief and as many firefighters, officers, reserves, volunteers and other personnel as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the Fire Chief for the safety and protection of the city. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall have the powers and duties as set forth in § 2-3-30 of this Code. 
( Am. Ord. 538, N.S. , passed 4-8-2014) 
§ 4-3-2 - COMPENSATION. 
    The Fire Chief and other officers and firefighters shall be compensated by virtue of an annual evaluation. The Fire Chief shall not receive any perquisites, commissions or compensations for services as Fire Chief, except as the Council may prescribe. 
§ 4-3-3 - DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The Fire Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with the departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be established by the Fire Chief for the professional and efficient standards, administration and operation of the Fire Department. 
§ 4-3-4 - ENTRY UPON ADJACENT PROPERTY. 
    It is lawful for any firefighter acting under the direction of the Chief or another officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire for the purpose of extinguishing the fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of the firefighter's duty, as hereinbefore provided. 
§ 4-3-5 - EQUIPMENT. 
    The Fire Department shall be equipped with apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property. Recommendations concerning apparatus and equipment shall be made by the Fire Chief and, after approval by the City Manager, the apparatus and equipment shall be purchased in a manner as may be designated by the Manager. All equipment of the Fire Department shall be safely and conveniently housed in a place or places as may be designated by the Fire Chief and approved by the City Manager. No person shall use any Fire Department apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully take away or conceal any article used in any way by the Department. No person shall enter any place where the fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless accompanied by, or having special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the Department. No fire apparatus or equipment shall be hired out except as authorized by the Council. 
§ 4-3-6 - EMERGENCY SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY. 
    The Council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish emergency services outside the city or enter into mutual aid or automatic aid agreements and the Fire Department is authorized to render emergency service pursuant to the terms of the agreements or contracts. 
§ 4-3-7 - ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
    All motor equipment of the Fire Department shall have right-of-way over all other traffic when responding to an emergency. No unauthorized vehicle shall follow within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Department nor drive into or park a vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to an emergency nor otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is stored or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire hose except upon specific orders from the Chief or other officer in charge where the hose is used. 
§ 4-3-8 - FIRE ALARMS. 
    Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm and for notifying all members of the Department so that they may promptly respond. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm. The Fire Department may assess a fee in an amount as set by Council for responding to excessive false alarms, as may be determined by Council. 
§ 4-3-9 - ORDERS OF FIRE CHIEF. 
    It is unlawful for any person to refuse to obey an order issued by the Fire Chief pursuant to his or her authority. 
§ 4-3-10 - INSPECTIONS. 
(A)  The Fire Chief or authorized designee may inspect buildings and premises within the city for the purpose of discovering fire hazards and all other conditions and facts relating to the purposes of the Fire Department. In the event that an inspection is made and fire hazards are discovered, the inspector shall serve written notice of the hazard on the owner or occupant of the building or premises. He or she shall retain a copy of the notice in the records of the Fire Department. Any person who maintains a fire hazard for 30 days after notice of such as provided herein shall be deemed to be maintaining a public nuisance. 
(B)  For the purpose of facilitating fire fighting, building inspections may be made by the Department officers, from time to time, to determine the arrangement of buildings with respect to one another, to familiarize themselves with the inside of every building and its contents, to study the best methods of attacking every building in case of fire and to note all new constructions. Records shall be kept of all inspections including notes and sketches. Those records shall be made a permanent part of the records of the Fire Department. 
ARTICLE 4-4: - CIVIL PREPAREDNESS AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 

§ 4-4-1 - PURPOSES. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(A)  Reduce vulnerability of people and the city to damage, injury and loss of life and property resulting from natural or manmade catastrophes, riots or hostile military or paramilitary action; 
(B)  Prepare for prompt and efficient rescue, care and treatment of persons victimized or threatened by disaster; 
(C)  Provide a setting conducive to the rapid and orderly start of restoration and rehabilitation of persons and property affected by disasters; 
(D)  Clarify and strengthen the roles of the Mayor, Council, Manager and city agencies in prevention of, preparation for, response to and recovery from disasters; 
(E)  Authorize and provide for cooperation in disaster prevention, preparedness, response and recovery; 
(F)  Authorize and provide for coordination of activities relating to disaster prevention, preparedness, response and recovery by agencies and officers of this city, agencies of the private sector and similar activities in which the federal government, the state and its political subdivisions may participate; and 
(G)  Provide a disaster management system embodying all aspects of pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster response. 
§ 4-4-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    CIVIL PREPAREDNESS. The organization, administration, trained manpower, facilities, equipment, material, supplies, programs, emergency plans, ability to execute emergency plans and all other measures necessary and incidental thereto relating to disaster prevention preparedness response and recovery by all governmental and private sector agencies to protect or save health, life or property. 
    DIRECTOR. The Director of Civil Preparedness. 
    DISASTER. The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property, or extreme peril to the safety of persons or property, resulting from any natural or manmade causes, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, blight, drought, famine, infestation, air contamination, epidemic, explosion, riot or other acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property, or hostile military or paramilitary action. 
    EMERGENCY. The existence of a disaster within the city limits requiring immediate action by the emergency forces of the city. 
    EMERGENCY FORCES. All city governmental and private sector agencies, volunteers, facilities, equipment, trained manpower and other resources required to perform civil preparedness functions. 
    LOCAL EMERGENCY. The existence of a disaster within the city limits, and the situation is or is likely to be beyond the capability and resources of the city as determined by the Mayor and which requires the combined efforts of other political subdivisions. 
    REGULATIONS. The orders, rules and emergency procedures deemed essential for civil preparedness. 
    STATE OF EMERGENCY. The duly proclaimed existence of a disaster within the state except a disaster resulting in a state of war emergency which is or is likely to be beyond the capabilities and resources of any single county, city or town, and requires the combined efforts of the state and the political subdivisions. 
    STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY. The situation which exists immediately whenever this nation is attacked or upon receipt by this state of a warning from the federal government indicating that an attack is imminent. 
§ 4-4-3 - CIVIL PREPAREDNESS ORGANIZATION. 
    The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to create a civil preparedness organization. The Director of Civil Preparedness shall be appointed by the Mayor. 
§ 4-4-4 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
(A)  The City Council: 
(1)  Shall have the power to make, amend and rescind regulations, not inconsistent with regulations promulgated by the governor, necessary for civil preparedness, which regulations shall have the full effect of this article when a copy is filed in the office of the City Clerk. Existing ordinances and regulations, or ordinances and regulations issued under authority of state law in conflict therewith, are suspended during the time and to the extent that they are in conflict; 
(2)  May appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for civil preparedness purposes; 
(3)  In the absence of specific authority in state emergency plans and procedures, the Council shall take emergency measures as deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, and amendments thereto; and 
(4)  In a state of war emergency, the Council may waive procedures and formalities required by law pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, incurring obligations, employing permanent and temporary workers, utilizing volunteer workers, renting equipment, purchasing and distributing supplies, materials and facilities and appropriating and expending public funds when the Council determines and declares that strict compliance with the procedures and formalities may prevent, hinder or delay mitigation of the effects of the state of war emergency. The city shall be exempt during the emergency from budget limitations prescribed under state law. 
(B)  The Mayor, in addition to the powers granted by other provisions of the law or city code, may by proclamation declare an emergency or a local emergency to exist due to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing, acts of the enemy or any other natural or manmade calamity or disaster, or in the event of a threat or occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property within the city. The proclamation may be rescinded by a majority of the Council after 24 hours. After declaration of an emergency, the Mayor shall govern, by proclamation, and impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Imposition of a curfew in all or any part of the city; 
(2)  Ordering the closing of any business; 
(3)  Closing, to public access, any building, street or other public place; and 
(4)  Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the city for assistance 
(C)  The Director: 
(1)  Is responsible in non-emergency periods to act on behalf of the Mayor and Council to develop a readiness for the city's civil preparedness and for coordinated operations in disaster situations; 
(2)  During emergencies, shall act as the principal advisor or aide to the Mayor on emergency operations. The Director's major responsibility is to assure coordination among emergency forces and with higher and adjacent governments by assuring that coordinated efforts operate effectively. The Director shall assist the Mayor in the execution of operations, plans and procedures required by the emergency; and 
(3)  Shall prepare a comprehensive disaster basic plan, which shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the Council upon the recommendations of the Director. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies be used to the fullest extent. 
(D)  The disaster plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law whenever emergencies, as defined in this article, have been proclaimed. 
§ 4-4-5 - MUTUAL AID. 
    In periods of local emergency as declared heretofore, the city is hereby granted full power to provide mutual aid to any affected area in accordance with local ordinances, resolutions, emergency plans or agreements therefore. The city may request from state agencies mutual aid, including personnel, equipment and other available resources to assist the city during the local emergency in accordance with emergency plans or at the direction of the Governor. 
§ 4-4-6 - IMMUNITY OF CITY AND REPRESENTATIVES THEREOF. 
(A)  This city shall not be liable for any claim based upon the exercise or performance, or the failure to exercise or perform, a discretionary function or duty on the part of the city or any employee of the city, excepting wilful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith of any employee, in carrying out the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, and amendments thereto. 
(B)  The immunities from liability, exemptions from laws, ordinances and rules, all pensions, relief, disability, worker's compensation and other benefits which apply to the activity of officers, agents or employees of the city when performing their respective functions within the limits of the city shall apply to them to the same degree and extent while engaged in the performance of any of their functions and duties extraterritorially under the provisions of this article, excepting willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
(C)  Volunteers duly enrolled or registered for services in a local emergency, a state of emergency or a state of war emergency, in carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any regulations issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, and amendments thereto, or any local ordinance, or performing any of their authorized functions or duties or training for the performance of their authorized functions or duties, shall have the same degree of responsibility for their actions and enjoy immunities as officers and employees of the state and its political subdivisions performing similar work. 
§ 4-4-7 - ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The Police Department shall enforce regulations issued pursuant to this article. 
§ 4-4-8 - PENALTY. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article or who refuses or willfully neglects to obey any lawful regulation or order issued as provided in this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and upon conviction, be subject to the penalties prescribed in § 1-1-8 of this Code. This provision, however, does not apply to the refusal of any private organization or members thereof to participate in an emergency, local emergency or state of emergency, as defined by this article. 
CHAPTER 5: - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 5-1: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 

§ 5-1-1 - LICENSE REQUIRED. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry on any trade, transaction privilege, calling, profession, occupation or business specified in this article without first having procured a license from the city or without complying with any and all regulations of the trade, calling, profession, business or occupation specified in this article. 
§ 5-1-2 - ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of the Building Department to prepare and to issue a license under this article for every person, firm, company or corporation liable to pay a license hereunder, and to state in each license the amount thereof, the period of time covered, the name of the person, firm or corporation for whom issued, the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business licensed, and the location or place of business where the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business is carried on. 
(B)  In no case shall any mistake of the city, in stating the amount of a license, prevent or prejudice the collection for the city of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a trade, calling, profession, occupation or business, subject to license under this article. 
§ 5-1-3 - INDIVIDUAL LICENSES. 
    A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate place of business in which any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business is carried on, and each license shall authorize the person obtaining the license to carry on, pursue or conduct only that trade, calling, profession, occupation or business described in the license, and only at the location or place of business which is indicated. 
§ 5-1-4 - POSTING OF LICENSES. 
(A)  Every person, firm, company or corporation having a license under the provisions of this article and carrying on a trade, calling, profession, occupation or business at a fixed place of business shall keep the license posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of the place of business. 
(B)  Every person having a license and not having a fixed place of business shall carry the license with him or her at all times while carrying on that trade, calling, profession, occupation or business for which the same was granted. 
(C)  Every person, firm, company or corporation having a license under the provisions of this article shall produce and exhibit the same, when applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. 
§ 5-1-5 - EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED. 
    The city shall have and exercise the power to make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of this article, and to enter free of charge at any time any place of business for which a license is required by this article, and to demand the exhibition of the license for the current term, from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of any business and, if the person shall, then and there, fail to exhibit the license, the person shall be in violation of this code. 
§ 5-1-6 - LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. 
    No license granted or issued under the provisions of this article shall be, in any manner, assignable or transferable to any other person, firm, company or corporation other than is therein mentioned or named. Any person desiring a transfer of a license to open a new business shall apply to the city for the license. 
§ 5-1-7 - PAYMENT. 
(A)  All taxes required by this article shall be paid in advance, in legal currency of the United States, to the city. No weekly, monthly, quarterly, semi-annual or annual license tax provided for in this article shall be prorated. 
(B)  The daily license tax provided for in this article shall be due and payable each day, in advance. 
(C)  The weekly license tax provided for in this article shall be due and payable on Monday of each week. 
(D)  The monthly license tax provided for in this article shall be due and payable on the first day of each month. 
(E)  The annual license tax provided for in this article shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. 243, N.S., passed 4-23-1985) 
§ 5-1-8 - LICENSE FEES. 
    The amount of the license fee required by this chapter shall be as follows: 
Carnival company $100 per day Circuses  Seating capacity 3,000 or less $150 per day  Seating capacity not over 4,000 $175 per day  Seating capacity not over 5,000 $200 per day  Seating capacity over 5,000 $250 per day Construction contractor - a person who undertakes to or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid, by himself or herself or with others, to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road or other improvements on real property within the city. The term "construction contractor" includes subcontractors, specialty contractors, prime contractors and any person receiving consideration for the general supervision or coordination of a construction project $60 annually Distributor of handbills, including dodgers, samples or printed advertising in any form, or sign tacking, except for business with fixed place of business within the city, per person $5 per day/ up to $25 maximum per day Licensed liquor sales  Distiller $300 annually  Brewer $300 annually  Winery $300 annually  On-sale retailer, spirituous liquor $400 annually  On-sale retailer, wine and beer $240 annually  On-sale retailer, beer $160 annually  Off-sale retailer, spirituous liquor $300 annually  Off-sale retailer, wine and beer $160 annually  Off-sale retailer, beer $120 annually  Club $300 annually  Hotel-motel, spirituous liquor $300 annually  Restaurant, spirituous liquor $300 annually Massage parlors or any business that includes or employs a licensed massage therapist $60 annually Movie theaters (showing obscene or x-rated films) $200 per day Palmistry, fortune telling - any person who carries on, practices or professes to practice the business or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, fortune telling, either of the past, present or future, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, prophesy, augury, divination, magic or necromancy, and demands or receives a fee for the exercise or exhibition of the art therein, directly or indirectly, either as a gift, donation or otherwise, or who shall render services free with the purchase of any article or merchandise, or who gives an exhibition thereof at any place where an admission fee is charged $200 
per month Salespersons, including canvassers, solicitors, demonstrators and peddlers without a fixed place of business within the city $120 annually Street merchant or fakir, no license to be issued without the approval of the Chief of Police $35 per day Street stands or sales $35 per day Street ballyhoos $35 per day  
(Ord. 243, N.S., passed 4-23-1985; Am. Ord. 292, N.S., passed 8-9-1988; Am. Ord. 447, N.S., passed 10-24-2006) 
§ 5-1-9 - BUSINESSES, OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS NOT SPECIFICALLY MENTIONED IN THIS ARTICLE. 
    For each and every profession, trade, calling, occupation or business not specifically named in this article, a license tax of $60 per year is hereby imposed and shall be collected as provided in this article. 
§ 5-1-10 - PAYMENT OF LICENSE TAX NOT EXCUSED BY PUNISHMENT FOR DOING BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE. 
    The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business without a license shall not excuse or exempt the person from the payment of any license tax due or unpaid at the time of the conviction. 
§ 5-1-11 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE. 
    Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city the violation of any law, rule, ordinance or resolution or other good cause. Any person whose license has been revoked may appeal the decision as provided by state statute. 
ARTICLE 5-2: - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS 

§ 5-2-1 - PURPOSE. 
    The City Council desires to regulate the activities of peddlers, solicitors and canvassers within the city in a manner so as to protect against fraudulent and criminal activity and to ensure to the city's residents the maximum amount of privacy and security in their homes that is permissible in light of recent court decisions mandating certain types and amounts of access to residents and residential areas by peddlers, solicitors and canvassers. It is, therefore, the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter to recognize the potential for fraudulent and criminal activity in connection with door-to-door peddling, soliciting and similar activities, as well as the unique character and nature of the city's residential neighborhoods, while providing opportunity for peddlers, solicitors and canvassers as mandated by law. This chapter should be interpreted so as to be in conformity with relevant state and federal court decisions including, but not limited to, Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc. v. Village of Stratton , 536 U.S. 150, 122 S. Ct. 2080, 153 L. Ed. 2d 205 (2002). 
§ 5-2-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CANVASSER. A person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: 
(1)  Attempting to enlist non-monetary support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, or other cause, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts a voluntary donation for or against such cause, or 
(2)  Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event or service. 
    COMMERCIAL . Shall mean and include the sale of goods or services for monetary compensation, consideration or profit. 
    PEDDLER. A person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of attempting to sell a good or service for a commercial purpose. 
    PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, incorporated association and any other legal entity. 
    SOLICITOR. A person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: 
(1)  Attempting to solicit funds for a particular patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, charitable, political, religious or other non-commercial purpose, or 
(2)  Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or service. 
§ 5-2-3 - HOURS OF OPERATION. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to enter upon any residential premises for the purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing earlier than 8:00 a.m. of any day or after 8:00 p.m. of any day. This section shall not be interpreted to grant any person permission to enter upon private property. 
§ 5-2-4 - TRESPASS. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to enter upon any residential premises for the purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing where there is posted a sign indicating "No Peddlers, Solicitors or Canvassers," "Do Not Disturb," "No Trespassing," or other sign indicating that the residents do not wish their privacy to be disturbed, and such sign is exposed to public view. 
§ 5-2-5 - WRITTEN RECEIPTS REQUIRED. 
    Any peddler or solicitor receiving money or anything having a value of $10 or more from any person under a sale of goods or service, or solicitation of funds made pursuant to a permit issued hereunder shall give to such person a written receipt, signed by the peddler or solicitor, showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the sale or solicitation is conducted, and the date and the amount received. 
§ 5-2-6 - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. 
    No person shall act as a peddler or solicitor within the city limits without first obtaining from the city a permit and identification card in accordance with this chapter. A canvasser is not required to have a permit or identification card but any canvasser wanting an identification card for the purpose of reassuring city residents of the canvasser's good faith shall be issued one upon request. 
§ 5-2-7 - EXEMPTIONS. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(A)  Payments required by law to be collected or paid. 
(B)  Payments to or from governmental agencies. 
(C)  Public utility employees in the performance of their employment duties. 
(D)  Persons engaging in the sale of newspaper subscriptions. 
(E)  Members of a nationally recognized youth organization including, but not limited to, the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America and the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, engaging in such organization's sponsored fundraising events. 
(F)  School children engaging in school authorized or sponsored fundraising activities. 
§ 5-2-8 - APPLICATION PROCEDURE. 
(A)  Filing an application. A written and signed application for the peddlers or solicitors permit shall be filed with the city in conformance with the standards set forth in this chapter, either grant or deny the requested permit within five business days of the date the application is made. In the event the city fails to act upon an application within the time prescribed herein, the permit shall be deemed denied. 
(B)  Contents of application. An application for a peddlers or solicitors permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual: 
(a)  The name, address, telephone number, date and place of birth, physical description and two satisfactory photographs (one inch by one inch) of the individual applying for the permit. One of the required photographs will be attached to the applicant's identification card issued pursuant to § 5-2-11 below, and the other will be retained by the city. 
(b)  The name, address, and telephone number of the individual applicant's employer or principal, if any, for whom the applicant will be conducting the permitted activity, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all officers, directors, general partners, managing members and all other persons with authority to participate directly and regularly in the management of the employer's or principal's business. 
(c)  The motor vehicle make, model, year, color and state license plate number of any vehicle which will be used by the applicant to conduct the permitted activity. 
(d)  Whether the applicant has used or been known by any other names or aliases within five years from the date that the application is submitted. 
(e)  Whether the individual applicant has been convicted of any felony involving fraud, dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct within five years from the date that the application is submitted. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual: 
(a)  The applicant's correct business or organization name, tax identification number (if applicable), address and telephone number for its principal office. 
(b)  The name, address and telephone number of all officers, directors, general partners, managing members and all other persons with authority to participate directly and regularly in the management of the applicant's business. 
(c)  The name, address, telephone number, date and place of birth, physical description and two satisfactory photographs (one inch by one inch) of each employee or agent who will be conducting the permitted activity. One of the required photographs will be attached to the employee's or agent's identification card issued pursuant to § 5-2-11 below, and the other will be retained by the city. 
(d)  The motor vehicle make, model, year, color and state license plate number of any vehicle which will be used by the applicant or the applicant's employees or agents to conduct the permitted activity. 
(e)  Whether any officer, director, general partner, managing member or other person with authority to participate directly and regularly in the management of the applicant's business, or any employee or agent who will be conducting the permitted activity, has used or been known by any other names or aliases within five years from the date that the application is submitted. 
(f)  Whether any officer, director, general partner, managing member or other person with authority to participate directly and regularly in the management of the applicant's business, or any employee or agent who will be conducting the permitted activity, has been convicted of any felony involving fraud, dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct within five years from the date that the application is submitted. 
(3)  In the case of an application for a peddlers permit, a complete description of the goods or services to be sold in the city, together with information describing the sales methods to be used and a copy of any written materials that will be furnished to residents. 
(4)  In the case of a solicitors permit, information describing the methods to be used to solicit funds and a copy of any written materials that will be furnished to residents for commercial purposes. 
(5)  The signature of the applicant. 
(C)  Change in information. If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted hereunder, there is any change in the information set forth in the application, the applicant shall notify the city in writing thereof within 24 hours after such changes. 
(D)  Fingerprints. Each individual applicant, and every officer, director, general partner, managing member and other person with authority to participate directly and regularly in the management of the applicant's business, employee and agent of an applicant who will be conducting the permitted activity, shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the Police Department for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check by the Department of Public Safety pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law (PL) 92-544, as amended. The Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. An applicant for a permit issued under this chapter shall pay an amount necessary to cover the costs of federal fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks. The specific amount of such additional fee shall be set by administrative order based upon information received from the Department of Public Safety as to the costs of fingerprint processing and record information checks. The fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be transmitted to the Department of Public Safety as required by A.R.S. § 41-1750, as amended. No fingerprinting fee paid pursuant to this subsection shall be returned to an applicant if the application is withdrawn or denied. 
(E)  Form of permit. Permits issued under this chapter shall bear the name and address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the number of the permit, dates within which the permittee may conduct the permitted activities and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city or any of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose, or of the person conducting the permitted activities. 
§ 5-2-9 - PERMIT ISSUANCE STANDARDS. 
(A)  No individual shall be issued a permit under this chapter if such individual: 
(1)  Knowingly makes any false or misleading statement in the course of applying for or renewing a permit. 
(2)  Has been convicted of any felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct within five years from the date that the application is submitted. 
(3)  Is under the age of 18 years. 
(4)  Has been denied a permit required by this chapter or had such a permit revoked, for a period of six months following the final denial or revocation decision. 
(B)  No person that is not an individual shall be issued a permit under this chapter if any of the following individuals would be disqualified from being issued a permit under division (A): 
(1)  Any officer or director, or employee or agent that will be conducting the permitted activity, of an applicant that is a corporation. 
(2)  Any general partner, or employee or agent that will be conducting the permitted activity, of an applicant that is a partnership. 
(3)  Any managing member, or employee or agent that will be conducting the permitted activity, of an applicant that is a limited liability company. 
(4)  Any person with authority to participate directly and regularly in the management of the applicant's business, or employee or agent that will be conducting the permitted activity, of an applicant that is any other legal entity. 
§ 5-2-10 - PERMIT EXPIRATION; NON-TRANSFERABILITY; ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL. 
(A)  Any permit issued under this chapter shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each permit expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal. The application must be received by the City Finance Department by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(B)  No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable between persons. 
(C)  No permit shall be issued or renewed under this chapter unless the permitee is in full compliance with all provisions of this code at the time of renewal. 
§ 5-2-11 - IDENTIFICATION CARDS. 
(A)  The city shall issue to each individual permitee, and to each employee or agent of a non-individual permitee who will be conducting the permitted activities, an identification card. Each identification card shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued, and the identification card holder shall obtain a new identification card on or before January 31 of the following year. 
(B)  The identification card shall include: 
(1)  The permit number, 
(2)  The name and address of the person issued the permit, 
(3)  The name and photograph of the individual issued the identification card, and 
(4)  A statement that the identification card does not constitute an endorsement by the city or any of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose, or of the person conducting the permitted activities. 
(C)  All identification cards must be signed by the city. 
§ 5-2-12 - DISPLAY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS AND PERMITS. 
    At all times that an individual is conducting activities subject to a permit under this chapter within the city, such individual shall carry on his or her person the identification card and a copy of the permit issued by the city for the permitted activities. Such individual shall display the identification card and copy of the permit upon request to any police officer, law enforcement official or other city official. 
§ 5-2-13 - PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION. 
(A)  The city may suspend any permit issued under this chapter for a specified period not to exceed 60 days, or revoke such permit, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conviction of the individual permitee, or employee or agent of the non-individual permitee who is conducting the permitted activities, of a felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct. 
(2)  When the permitee has knowingly made any false or misleading statement in any report or record required to be made or kept under this chapter. 
(3)  Any other violation of this chapter. 
(B)  The city shall give written notice of the revocation or suspension to the permitee, which statement shall contain the reasons for the revocation or suspension and, if applicable, the length of the suspension. Such notice shall be served pursuant to § 5-2-17 below. 
§ 5-2-14 - APPEAL FROM DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT. 
(A)  A person who has been denied a permit or whose permit has been revoked or suspended may appeal such decision to the City Manager, or authorized designee. The appeal shall be requested within ten days from the date on which such person is given notice of the determination from which the appeal is taken. The request shall be in writing, shall be filed with the City Manager, or authorized designee, and shall set forth specifically the grounds for such appeal. 
(B)  The City Manager, or authorized designee, shall conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The City Manager, or authorized designee, may, in his or her discretion, stay any revocation or suspension pending final determination of the appeal. 
(C)  The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the applicant or permitee to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she meets all requirements for holding a permit under this chapter. The City Manager, or authorized designee, shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issues. The City Manager, or authorized designee, shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(D)  The City Manager, or authorized designee, shall render a written decision within 30 days after the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and the applicant or permitee. The decision of the City Manager, or authorized designee, shall be final. 
§ 5-2-15 - AUTHORITY OF THE CITY. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as granting to the city, or to any other person, the authority to grant, deny, revoke, renew or suspend any permit by reason of either approval or disapproval of the philosophy, opinions or beliefs of the applicant, the permitee, or the person such applicant or permitee represents, or for any other reasons not specifically set forth in this chapter. 
§ 5-2-16 - VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. 
(A)  General . 
(1)  When two or more persons have liability to the city or are responsible for a violation of this chapter, their responsibility shall be joint and several. 
(2)  Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(B)  Civil (non-criminal) violations. It shall be a civil (non-criminal) violation, punishable as set forth below, for a person to: 
(1)  Fail to perform any act or duty required by any provision of this chapter; or 
(2)  Violate the terms and/or conditions of any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  Civil (non-criminal) penalties. 
(1)  Any person that commits a civil violation as set forth in division (B) above, shall be subject to a civil (non-criminal) action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect a civil penalty for a sum not to exceed $2,500 for each violation. In seeking the assessment of a civil penalty, the following criteria shall be considered: 
(a)  The seriousness of the violation; 
(b)  The economic benefit, if any, resulting from the violation; 
(c)  Any good-faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements; 
(d)  The economic impact of the penalty on the violator; and 
(e)  Such other factors as justice may require. 
(2)  The City Manager, or authorized designee, shall provide written notice and an opportunity to be heard to any person assessed a civil penalty under this chapter. Such notice shall be served pursuant to § 5-2-17 below. Within 15 days of service of the notice, such person shall pay the penalty or file a written request for a hearing with the City Manager's office. If a hearing is held, the City Manager or designee shall issue a written decision, and such decision shall be final. 
(D)  Criminal violations. It shall be a criminal violation, punishable as set forth below, for a person to: 
(1)  Intentionally or purposely fail to perform any act or duty required by any provision of this chapter; or 
(2)  Fail to perform any act or duty required by any provision of this chapter and such person has been previously found responsible, civilly or criminally, for a violation of this chapter. 
(E)  Criminal penalties. A person that commits a criminal violation as set forth in division (D) above, shall be subject to a criminal action in any court of competent jurisdiction and, if found guilty thereof, shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(F)  Enforcement of judgments. Any judgment for abatement, restitution or civil (non-criminal) penalties taken pursuant to this chapter may be enforced as any other civil judgment. 
(G)  Violations not exclusive. Violations of this chapter are in addition to any other violation enumerated within this code and in no way limit the penalties, actions or procedures which may be taken by the city for any violation of this chapter which is also a violation of any other provision of this code or any other applicable law. The remedies specified herein are cumulative and the City Manager, or authorized designee, or the City Prosecutor, may proceed under these or any other remedies authorized by law. 
§ 5-2-17 - SERVICE OF NOTICES. 
(A)  Any notice required to be given for any purposes under this chapter shall be given by either hand-delivery, or by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to the recipient's last known address. 
(B)  Notice is deemed effective on the date it is hand-delivered or three days after it is deposited in the United States mail, certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(C)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city from giving additional oral or written notice at its discretion. If the city does elect to give any additional notice in any instance, it shall not thereby become obligated to give such additional notice thereafter in the same or other situation. 
§ 5-2-18 - SEVERABILITY. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases and words of this article are severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word(s) of this article shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases and words of this article. 
ARTICLE 5-4: - AUCTIONS, JUNK DEALERS, PAWNSHOPS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 

§ 5-4-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    AUCTION HOUSE. Any establishment in which is carried on the business of auctioning articles for sale by public outcry and where the items offered for auction are sold immediately to the highest bidder. 
    DEALER OF PRECIOUS ITEMS. A person or entity engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of purchasing items previously owned by a person or entity other than the manufacturer or dealer whose business it is to sell such items to the public, including gold, silver, platinum or jewelry; flatware or holloware containing gold, silver or platinum; precious or semiprecious stones whether mounted or unmounted and pearls. 
    JUNK DEALER. Any person who collects or buys junk, including such items as rags, bottles, scrap metal, paper and any other material as is usually collected for salvage purposes, and where the person holds it for storage or offers it for sale, and shall include junk collectors. 
    PAWNSHOP. Any establishment in which is carried on the business of pawn brokerage, or the business of loaning money for the broker or for another person, receiving as security for payment thereof pawns or pledges of property, or the business of purchasing personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell, trade or exchange the article to vendors, their personal representatives or their assignees at a price agreed upon at or before the time of the purchase, whether the business be the principal or sole business so carried on or be merely incidental to, in connection with or a branch or a department of some other business. 
    SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling, trading or exchanging, or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares, merchandise or articles, whether the business be the principal or sole business so carried on, managed or conducted or be merely incidental to, in connection with, or a branch or department of some other business. This term shall not be construed to include trade-ins, dealers or auctioneers in articles or property, the transfer of title to which is required by the laws of the State of Arizona, to be evidenced by written instrument and recorded in the appropriate state and county office. 
    TRADE-IN. The acceptance, sale or disposal of used automobile tires, automobile batteries, farm implement parts, farm machinery parts or road equipment parts, mining equipment parts or automobile parts taken in part payment for new or reconditioned automobile tires, automobile batteries, farm implement parts, farm machinery parts, road equipment parts, mining equipment parts or automobile parts. Dealers exchanging articles in the course of service or construction work shall not be deemed to constitute the doing of any business defined under this term. 
(Am. Ord. 527, N.S., passed 10-9-2012) 
§ 5-4-2 - REGULATIONS. 
(A)  All businesses subject to this article shall be required to make and send within one week to the Chief of Police a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise or articles received on deposit in pawn, pledge, trade or exchange or by purchase as listed below: 
(1)  All firearms; 
(2)  All photographic equipment; 
(3)  All appliances, including radios, washers, television sets, sewing machines, toasters and all other identifiable appliances; 
(4)  All power tools; 
(5)  All watches and jewelry; 
(6)  All hand tools by group or set and description; 
(7)  All auto accessories and tires; and 
(8)  Gold, silver, platinum; flatware or holloware containing gold, silver or platinum; precious or semiprecious stones whether mounted or unmounted, and pearls. 
(B)  The weekly reports shall show the hours of the day and date when the articles were received, the signature of the seller and the seller's name and address as nearly as the same are known or can be ascertained by the auction house, junk dealer, pawnshop or secondhand dealer, together with a description of the seller, which description shall reveal the address, sex, approximate height, age, complexion, color of hair and any distinguishing marks of the person. The report filed by the auction house, junk dealer, pawnshop or secondhand dealer shall show the number of the pawn ticket, if any is given, the amount loaned for the article or the amount paid therefor, the quantity or number purchased and a brief description thereof. 
(C)  A record shall be kept by each auction house, junk dealer, pawnshop or secondhand dealer of the disposition of any of the above listed articles which they may have sold or exchanged. 
(D)  The Chief of Police, or his or her agents, or any proper city official, shall have the right to inspect the premises of any business covered by this article in order to investigate for and locate articles reported as lost, missing or stolen, and also the reports of the business to determine whether the provisions of this article are fully complied with by the owner or operator thereof. 
(Am. Ord. 527, N.S., passed 10-9-2012) 
§ 5-4-3 - SPECIAL PERMIT FEE. 
(A)  Each person carrying on a business, trade or practice herein defined shall, before engaging in the business, obtain a permit from the Treasurer and shall pay for the permit a fee as follows: 
Auction house $3000 per annum Pawnshop $3000 per annum Secondhand dealers $3000 per annum Junk dealers $3000 per annum Junk collectors $3000 per annum Dealer of precious items $3000 per annum  
(B)  All fees shall be payable semi-annually in advance. 
(C)  The special permit fees enumerated in division (A) above shall be in addition to the business license fee provided in § 5-1-8. 
(Am. Ord. 527, N.S., passed 10-9-2012) 
ARTICLE 5-5: - AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND GAME CENTERS 

§ 5-5-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any coin-operated device or game in which the element of chance predominates over the element of skill of a player. The terms shall include such things as flipperless pinball machines, computerized "21" machines, bingo machines and other similar devices. 
    GAME CENTER. 
(1)  A supervised public indoor amusement facility, the main use of which consists of six or more coin-operated mechanical, electrical or similarly controlled amusement devices for entertainment and amusement purposes. 
(2)  The devices may include, but shall not be limited to, amusement devices, skill games, shuffleboard, pool tables and other similar amusements. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-2 - SPECIAL USE PERMIT. 
(A)  Before an establishment may install an amusement device or a game center within the city limits, an application must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council. 
(B)  An application shall follow the procedure and guidelines as set forth in Chapter 5, Article 5-4, of this code, including a public hearing. 
(C)  Prior to granting approval for the installation of an amusement device or a game center, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council shall determine the following: 
(1)  The proposed location is not within 500 feet of any property being used for educational purposes by either the Tolleson Elementary or the Tolleson Union High School Districts; 
(2)  The location is in a district zoned for business; and 
(3)  The granting of the use permit will not have an adverse effect upon the community. 
(D)  The Planning and Zoning Commission or the Council may grant a conditional use permit or request the applicant to conform to specific requirements imposed by the Commission or the Council. 
(E)  Any location that had an amusement device or game center in existence on November 10, 1981, shall be considered a non-conforming use that shall be considered abandoned if the operator of the premises is delinquent for a period of 30 days in paying his or her business license or the special fees applicable to the amusement device, as set forth in § 5-5-8. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-3 - LICENSE REQUIRED. 
    No person, whether as owner, agent, operator or distributor either for himself or herself or for any other person, shall commence, practice, transact or carry on any amusement defined in this article without first having procured a use permit as provided in this article as well as the business license required by § 5-1-1. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-4 - ISSUANCE TO MINORS OR FELONS PROHIBITED. 
    No license under this article shall be issued to any person who is under legal age, or to any person who has been convicted of a felony within five years preceding date of application. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-5 - APPLICATIONS; DISPOSITION OF FEES. 
    Application for a license under this article shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Every application shall be accompanied by the required application fee. The application fee shall, upon the granting of a license, be applied to the total required license fee; provided that, in the event no license is issued, the application fee shall not be returned to the applicant, but shall be applied to cover the cost of processing the application. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-6 - INSPECTION OF PREMISES. 
    The application for an amusement license shall contain a statement by the applicant of at least three different times during each business day within a seven-day period when he or she will be available at the premises for which an application is made. The statement shall be for the purpose of allowing the premises to be inspected and to provide for the applicant to meet with the proper city officials making an inspection. Failure of an applicant to be at the premises at the time stated in his or her application shall be grounds, if the city finds that the absence was without a sufficient excuse, for cancellation of the application and forfeiture of the application fee. The Building Department shall have the right to periodically inspect the premises of the applicant. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-7 - RENEWALS OF LICENSES. 
    Renewal of amusement licenses shall not require an application fee. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-8 - FEES. 
(A)  The following fees shall be charged for applications and licenses under this article: 
Application Fee License Fee Amusement device (one to five games) $100, $50 per machine per year Game centers (six or more games) $100, $350 per year (all machines)  
(B)  Any amusement device or game center in existence as of November 10, 1981, shall not be required to pay an application fee, but shall be required to pay the license fee per machine or per center. 
(C)  All money paid as fees for applications or licenses issued under this article shall be paid in advance and shall be retained by the city. No refund of any fee or portion thereof shall be made if the license has been granted and later revoked. 
(D)  Annual amusement licenses issued pursuant to this article during a license year may have the license fee prorated to the nearest quarter, except that the license fee shall not be less than the application fee for the license. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-9 - TERM OF LICENSE. 
    Amusement licenses, unless specifically excepted, shall be issued for a period of one year and shall run from January 1 in each calendar year to December 31 next following, when they may be renewed; provided that, no license shall be renewed unless the licensee conforms with the provisions of this chapter including the provisions of § 5-5-2. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-10 - DISPLAY OF LICENSE. 
    All amusement licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. Licenses for film or videotape viewing devices or amusement devices or skill game machines shall be conspicuously displayed on each device or machine. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-11 - ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS GOVERNING LICENSES. 
    Every application for an amusement license and renewals thereof shall be processed and approved by city departments as shall be designated by administrative order. The administrative orders shall be uniform in their application for every class of license. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-12 - SPECIFICATIONS TO BE INCLUDED IN LICENSE. 
(A)  Applicants for each amusement device and skill game license and renewals of license shall file with the city one specification for each amusement device or skill game on forms provided by the city. The specification shall include the following: 
(1)  The brand or trade name of the game or device; 
(2)  Serial number of the game or device; 
(3)  A description of the manner of operation; 
(4)  Whether the mechanism is manual or mechanical; 
(5)  The number of balls or other objects that are used in the playing of the game; 
(6)  Proposed location of the game or device and operator's name; and 
(7)  Any other information that may be required on the forms provided by the city. 
(B)  The distributor or owner of each amusement device or skill game shall prepare the required specification and file it with the city. No amusement device or skill game that has not been described on a specification sheet, as provided in this section, shall be issued a license. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-13 - TRANSFER OF LOCATION. 
    In the event any licensed amusement device or skill game is transferred by the owner, agent, operator or distributor from the location designated on the specification sheet to any other location in the city, the owner, agent, operator or distributor shall, within 14 days of the transfer, notify the city of the new location of the licensed amusement device or skill game, and apply for a use permit and license at the new location pursuant to § 5-5-2. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-14 - SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; REINSTATEMENT. 
    Any amusement license issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended for a prescribed period of time, not to exceed 60 days, in the event of a failure on the part of a licensee to comply with the provisions of this article and upon recommendation of the Building Department. No suspended license shall be reinstated until an application fee has been paid. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
§ 5-5-15 - REVOCATION. 
    Any amusement license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked in the event of refusal on the part of a licensee to comply with the provisions of this article and upon recommendation of the Building Department. No license that has been revoked shall be reissued until a full license fee has been paid. 
(Ord. 203, N.S., passed 11-10-1981) 
ARTICLE 5-6: - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

§ 5-6-1 - FINDINGS, INTENT AND PURPOSE. 
(A)  The Council recognizes that some activities which occur in connection with sexually-oriented businesses are protected as expression under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Council further recognizes that First Amendment rights are among the most precious and highly protected rights, and wishes to act consistently with full protection of those rights. The Council is aware, however, that sexually-oriented businesses may and do generate secondary effects which are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)  Among these secondary effects are: 
(1)  Prostitution and other sex-related offenses; 
(2)  Drug use and dealing; 
(3)  Health risks through the spread of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases; and 
(4)  Infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of drug and sex related business activities, laundering of money and other illicit conduct. 
(C)  This article is not intended to interfere with legitimate expression, but to avoid and mitigate the secondary effects enumerated above. 
(D)  (1) Specifically, the Council finds that licensing of persons who operate and manage sexually- oriented businesses and persons who provide adult services will further the goals of this article by enabling the city to ascertain if an applicant is underage or has engaged in criminal or other behavior of the sort this article is design to limit. This information will enable the city to allocate law enforcement resources effectively and otherwise protect the community. 
(2)  The Council finds that limiting proximity and contact between adult service providers and patrons promotes the goal of reducing prostitution and other casual sexual conduct and the attendant risk of sexually-transmitted diseases. 
(3)  The Council finds the foregoing to be true with respect to places where alcohol is served and where it is not. 
(4)  The Council finds that individual and interactive sexual activities in adult video facilities pose a risk of sexually transmitted disease, especially AIDS, and that the booth configuration options of this article will reduce that risk. 
(5)  The Council finds that the harmful secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses are more pronounced when conducted continuously or during late night hours. 
(E)  The fees established for licenses and permits in this article are based on the estimated cost of implementation, administration and enforcement of the licensing program. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-2 - APPLICABILITY. 
    This article shall apply to all persons engaging in the activities described herein. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-3 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    ADULT SERVICE. Dancing, modeling, posing, massaging, wrestling, singing, reading, talking or listening, or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration in an adult service business by a person who is nude during all or part of the time that the person is providing the service. 
    ADULT SERVICE BUSINESS. A business establishment or premises where any adult service is provided to patrons in the regular course of business and as of one of its principal business purposes. 
    ADULT SERVICE PROVIDER or PROVIDER. Any person who provides an adult service. 
    ADULT VIDEO FACILITY. A commercial establishment where, for any consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassette projections, slides or other visual media characterized by depiction of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are shown in the regular course of business as a principal business purpose of the establishment. ADULT VIDEO FACILITY does not include a theater where all viewing occurs in a common area with seating for 50 or more persons. 
    BOOTH. A partitioned area, in which coin- or token-operated video machines, projectors or other electronically or mechanically controlled devices are used in the regular course of business to produce still or moving picture images characterized by depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    CABARET. A sexually-oriented business licensed to provide alcoholic beverages pursuant to a license described in A.R.S. § 4-209(B), and amendments thereto. 
    CITY CLERK. The Clerk of the City of Tolleson or the Clerk's designee. 
    EMPLOYEE. Any person hired, engaged or authorized to perform any service on the premises of an adult service business, including an adult service provider, whether denominated as an employee, independent contractor or otherwise. 
    ENTERPRISE. A corporation, association, labor union or other legal entity, as provided in A.R.S. § 13-105, and amendments thereto. 
    LICENSE. The license required by this article as a condition to conducting a sexually-oriented business. 
    LICENSEE. A person or enterprise holding a sexually-oriented business license issued under this article, including those persons required to provide information under § 5-6-6(C) of this article. 
    MANAGER'S STATION. A permanently designated area marked accordingly within a sexually- oriented business where a sexually-oriented business manager is located in the normal course of operations. 
    NUDE. Without opaque non-flesh colored fabric fully covering the genitals, pubic hair, vulva, mons veneris, anus, cleft of the buttocks, the areola and the part of the female breast below the top of the areola. 
    PATRON. A person invited or permitted to enter and remain upon the premises of a sexually-oriented business, whether or not for a consideration. 
    PERMIT. The permit required by this article to engage in the activities of an adult service provider or sexually-oriented business manager. 
    SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult service business or an adult video facility. 
    SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS MANAGER or MANAGER. A person on the premises of a sexually-oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of the business. 
    SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals, pubic hair, vulva, mons veneris, anus, cleft of the buttocks, female breasts below the top of the areola or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, sodomy, flagellation, bestiality, fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or the female breast, or any combination of the foregoing. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-4 - ADMINISTRATION. 
(A)  The administration of this article, including the duty of prescribing forms, is vested in the City Manager, except as otherwise specifically provided. The Chief of Police shall render assistance in the administration and enforcement of this article as may be requested by the City Manager or the City Clerk. 
(B)  License or permit applications made pursuant to this article shall be submitted to the Manager who shall grant, deny, suspend or revoke licenses or permits in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(C)  Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance. 
(D)  Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of three years from date of issuance. 
(E)  An applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the city for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and P.L. No. 92-544. The Arizona Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998; Am. Ord. 427, N.S., passed 7-26-2005) 
§ 5-6-5 - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(A)  A person or enterprise may not conduct a sexually-oriented business without first obtaining a sexually-oriented business license pursuant to this article. The license shall state the name of the license holder, the name, address and phone number of the licensed premises and the dates of issuance and expiration of the license. 
(B)  A sexually-oriented business for which a license has been issued pursuant to this article may conduct business only under the name or designation specified in the license. 
(C)  A licensee shall conduct business only at the address shown on the license. Each additional place of business shall require a separate license. 
(D)  A sexually-oriented business license shall be displayed on the premises in a manner as to be readily visible to patrons. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-6 - APPLICATION FOR SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE. 
(A)  An applicant for a sexually-oriented business license shall file in person at the office of the City Clerk an application, signed under oath by the applicant and notarized, accompanied by the fee required under § 5-6-21. An application shall be deemed complete when the City Clerk has received the required fees, all information required in division (C) below, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant and, in the case of a corporation or other business organization, photograph and fingerprints of all persons for whom information is required under division (C) below. 
(B)  Fingerprints and photographs shall be taken by a law enforcement agency and accompanied by a notarized verification by that agency. 
(C)  The application shall include the information called for in divisions (C)(1) through (9) below. If the applicant is an enterprise, it shall designate an officer or partner as applicant. In that case, in addition to the information required in divisions (C)(1) through (9) below for the applicant, the application shall include the state and date of formation of the organization and the information called for in divisions (C)(2) through (6) below with respect to each officer, director, general partner and all other persons with authority to participate directly and regularly in management of the business; provided that, the information need not be provided with respect to attorneys, accountants and other persons whose primary function is to provide professional advance and assistance to the licensee. 
(1)  The name, business location, business mailing address and phone number of the proposed sexually-oriented business establishment; 
(2)  The full true name and any other names, aliases or stage names used in the preceding five years; 
(3)  Current residential mailing address and telephone number; 
(4)  Written proof of age, in the form of a birth certificate, current drivers license with picture, or other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency; 
(5)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit relating to a sexually-oriented business or adult service, whether any license or permit has been revoked or suspended, and, if so, the reason or reasons therefor; 
(6)  All criminal charges, complaints or indictments in the preceding three years which resulted in a conviction or a plea of guilty or no contest for an "organized crime and fraud" offense under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 23, and amendments thereto; a "prostitution" offense under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 32, and amendments thereto; a "drug offense" under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 34, and amendments thereto; or a "sexual offense" under A.R.S. Title 13, §§ 1401 through 1406 or under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 14, and amendments thereto; or for conduct in another jurisdiction which if carried out in Arizona would constitute an offense under one of the statutory provisions enumerated in this division; 
(7)  The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process; 
(8)  The name(s) of the sexually-oriented business manager(s) who will have actual supervisory authority over the operations of the business; and 
(9)  An accurate, to scale, but not necessarily professionally drawn, floor plan of the business premises, and, in an application for an adult service business license, also clearly indicating the location of one or more manager's stations. 
(D)  The information provided pursuant to divisions (C)(5) and (6) above shall be supplemented, in writing, by certified mail to the City Clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-7 - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS MANAGER PERMIT. 
(A)  A person may not serve as a sexually-oriented business manager unless the person has first secured a sexually-oriented business manager permit under this article. 
(B)  Application for a sexually-oriented business manager permit shall be made in the same manner as application for a sexually-oriented business license, except that the applicant need provide only the information called for in § 5-6-6(C)(2) through (6). 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-8 - ADULT SERVICE PROVIDER PERMIT. 
(A)  A person may not work as an adult service provider unless the person has first obtained an adult service provider permit under this article. 
(B)  Application for an adult service provider permit shall be made in the same manner as application for a sexually-oriented business license, except that the applicant need provide only the information called for in § 5-6-6(C)(2) through (6). 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-9 - CONFIDENTIALITY. 
    The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license or permit under this article shall be maintained by the City Clerk and Manager on a confidential basis, except that the information may be disclosed to other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety function. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-10 - GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT. 
(A)  Within 45 days after receipt of an application for a sexually-oriented business license, the City Clerk shall mail to the applicant a license or a notice of intent to deny. If the City Clerk fails to do so, the license shall be deemed granted. 
(B)  Upon receipt of an application for a sexually-oriented business manager permit or an adult service provider permit, payment of the required fees and completion of photograph and fingerprinting requirements of this article, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a temporary permit. Within 30 days after issuance of a temporary permit, the City Clerk shall mail to the applicant a regular permit of a notice of intent to deny. 
(C)  The issuance of any license or permit does not waive any right of revocation or denial the city may have at the time of issuance. 
(D)  The City Clerk shall grant the license or permanent permit to an applicant who has completed all requirements for application, unless the City Clerk finds any of the following conditions. For purposes of this division, a person required to submit information pursuant to § 5-6-6(C) shall be deemed an applicant. 
(1)  The application is incomplete or contains a misrepresentation, false statement or omission; 
(2)  The applicant has failed to comply with applicable zoning or other land use ordinances of the city relating to the business or activity to be carried out under the license or permit, or is delinquent in payment of any city taxes, fees or other payments due in connection with the business or activity; 
(3)  The applicant is not at least 18 years of age; 
(4)  The applicant, or other person required to provide information under § 5-6-6(C), in the past three years has been convicted, or plead guilty or no contest with respect to a felony violation or two misdemeanor violations of one or more offenses in the categories stated in § 5-6-6(C)(6); and 
(5)  Within the past two years, a license or permit under this article held by an applicant, or other person required to provide information pursuant to § 5-6-6(C), has been revoked, or a similar license in another jurisdiction has been revoked on the basis of conduct which would be a ground for revocation of a license or permit issued under this article if committed in the city. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-11 - NON-TRANSFERABILITY. 
    Licenses and permits issued under this article are non-transferable. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-12 - ADULT SERVICE PROVIDER OR MANAGER WORK IDENTIFICATION CARD. 
    The City Clerk shall provide to all adult service providers and sexually-oriented business managers a work identification card. The card shall contain the number of the permit issued to that permittee and the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-13 - ADULT SERVICE BUSINESS; OPERATING REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  A person employed or acting as an adult service provider or manager shall have a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. A permit or a certified copy thereof for each manager or provider shall be maintained on the premises in the custody of the manager at all times during which a person is serving as a provider or manager on the premises. The permits shall be produced by the manager for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official. 
(B)  An adult service business shall maintain a daily log of all persons providing adult services on the premises. The log shall cover the preceding 12-month period and shall be available for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer during regular business hours. 
(C)  A person below the age of 18 years may not observe or provide an adult service. A person below the age of 18 years may not be present in an adult service business. 
(D)  A person may not provide an adult service in an adult service business except upon a stage elevated at least 24 inches above floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area thereof within which the adult service is provided, shall be a distance of at least six feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may be present. The stage or designated area thereof shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be located by a barrier or railing the top of which is at least three feet above floor level. A provider or patron may not extend any part of his or her body over or beyond the barrier or railing. 
(E)  An adult service provider, in the course of providing an adult service, may not perform or simulate any specified sexual activity. 
(F)  Adult services may not be provided between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. or between 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(G)  An adult service may not be provided in any location which is not visible by direct line of sight at all times from a manager's station location in a portion of the premises which is accessible to patrons of the adult service business. 
(H)  An adult service provider shall wear his or her adult service provider work identification card at all times while on the premises except while providing an adult service. The card shall be affixed to clothing on the front of the person and above waist level so that the picture and permit number are clearly visible to patrons. 
(I)  A sexually-oriented business manager shall be on the premises of an adult service business at all times during which any adult service is provided on the premises. The manager shall wear his or her identification card in the manner described in division (H) above. 
(J)  An employee may not touch the breast, buttocks, or genitals of a patron, nor may a patron touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of an employee. 
(K)  A patron may not place any money on the person or in or on the costume of an adult service provider while the adult service provider is nude. 
(L)  A sign, in a form to be prescribed by the City Clerk summarizing the provisions of divisions (C), (D), (J) and (K) above shall be posted near the entrance of an adult service business in a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(M)  A manager or licensee may not knowingly permit or tolerate a violation of any provision of this article. 
(N)  With respect to a cabaret, the requirements of this article shall apply to the extent that they are not in conflict with specific statutory or valid regulatory requirements applicable to persons licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(O)  No sexually-oriented business may be operated within 500 feet of any real property owned or occupied by a religious organization or school district. For purposes of this division, the measurement shall be made from the nearest point of the property owned or occupied by the religious organization or school district to the nearest point of the property proposed to be owned or occupied by the sexually- oriented business. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-14 - ADULT VIDEO FACILITY; OPERATING REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  An adult video facility shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle, as measured at the floor level. 
(B)  Each booth shall either: 
(1)  Be configured in a way that allows persons patrolling the area outside the booth to observe from outside the booth the activities of any occupant in the interior of the booth; or 
(2)  If not so configured, be equipped with a mirror or other device which allows persons patrolling the area outside the booth to observe from outside the booth the activities of any occupant of the interior of the booth. 
(C)  A sexually-oriented business manager shall be on the premises of any adult video facility at all times that the facility is open for business. The manager shall wear his or her identification card in the manner described in § 5-6-13(H) above. 
(D)  A patron may not engage in sexual activities on the premises of an adult video facility. 
(E)  A booth or viewing area shall not have any hole or aperture in any wall separating that booth or viewing area from another. 
(F)  A manager or licensee may not knowingly permit or tolerate a violation of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-15 - INSPECTION OF PREMISES. 
    Law enforcement officers of the city shall have the right to inspect the premises upon request during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-16 - SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT. 
    The City Clerk shall suspend a license or permit for a period of ten days if the licensee or permittee is convicted of violating a provision of this article. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-17 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT. 
    The City Clerk shall revoke a license or permit issued pursuant to this article if the licensee or permittee: 
(A)  Is convicted of three or more violations of this article in any 12-month period; and/or 
(B)  Is convicted or pleads guilty or no contest to an offense stated in § 5-6-6(C)(6). 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-18 - PROCEDURE FOR DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; APPEAL. 
(A)  If the City Clerk determines that grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit under this article, the Clerk shall notify the applicant, licensee or permittee (respondent) in writing of the Clerk's intent to deny, suspend or revoke, including a summary of the grounds therefor. The notification shall be by certified mail to the address on file with the City Clerk. Within ten working days of receipt of the notice, the respondent may provide to the City Clerk in writing a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked and may include a request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the City Clerk in the time stated, the notification shall be final administrative action of denial, suspension or revocation and notice of such will be sent to the permittee or licensee within five working days after expiration of the period for submitting a response. Within five working days after receipt of a response, the City Clerk shall either withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke, and send notification of the withdrawal to the respondent in writing by certified mail or shall schedule a hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee and shall send notification to the respondent, in writing, by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. If the City Clerk fails to send a timely notification either withdrawing the intent or scheduling a hearing, the intent to deny, suspend or revoke shall be deemed withdrawn. The hearing, if requested, shall be scheduled not less than 15 nor more than 20 working days after receipt by the City Clerk of the request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. The respondent may be represented by counsel. The rules of evidence shall not apply. The City Manager shall render a written decision within five working days after completion of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the decision by certified mail to the address of the respondent on file with the City Clerk. If more than 45 days elapse between receipt by the City Clerk of a request for a hearing and mailing by the City Manager of a final decision to the respondent, a decision in favor of the applicant, licensee or permittee shall be deemed to have been rendered. 
(B)  In the case of an intent to revoke, suspend or not renew a license or permit, or to deny a regular permit, the permittee or licensee may continue to function under the license or permit pending receipt of the final decision of the Manager. 
(C)  The decision shall be final at the end of five working days after it is mailed and shall constitute final administrative action. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-19 - JUDICIAL APPEAL. 
    Final administrative action to deny, revoke or not renew a license or permit may be appealed to the superior court by special action or other available procedure within 35 days after receipt of written notice of the decision. The city shall consent to expedited hearing and disposition. If a permittee or licensee pursues a judicial appeal from a final administrative action, that permittee or licensee may continue to function under the license or permit pending completion of judicial review. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-20 - LICENSE AND PERMIT RENEWAL. 
(A)  A license or permit may be renewed by filing an application for renewal, in writing, with the City Clerk. The application shall contain the information required to be submitted with an original application, including fingerprints and a photograph; provided that, a renewal application need not contain any other information that has been provided in a previous application and has not changed since the time of the most recent application. An application for license renewal shall be received by the City Clerk not less than 45 days before the expiration of the license. An application for permit renewal shall be received by the City Clerk before expiration of the permit. 
(B)  The City Clerk may deny an application for renewal for the reasons and in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 5-6-10. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-21 - FEES. 
(A)  An original application for a sexually-oriented business license shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500 and by a license fee in the amount of $500. The license fee will be refunded if the license is denied. An application for renewal shall be accompanied by the amount of the license fee. 
(B)  An application for issuance or renewal of an adult service provider permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $100. 
(C)  An application for issuance or renewal of sexually-oriented business manager permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $150. 
(D)  A duplicate or certified copy of a license, permit or identification card shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of a fee of $10. 
(E)  A fee of $25 shall be paid at the time of fingerprinting for each set of fingerprints to be provided for by the City Clerk under § 5-6-6. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-22 - OTHER REGULATIONS. 
(A)  A license or permit required by this article is in addition to any other licenses or permits required by the city, the county or the state to engage in the business or occupation. 
(B)  Persons engaging in activities described in this article shall comply with all other ordinances and laws, including the city zoning ordinance, as may be required, to engage in a business or profession. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-23 - PENALTY. 
(A)  Violation of any requirement or prohibition stated in this article is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction as prescribed in § 1-1-8 of this code. 
(B)  A licensee which is an enterprise shall be subject to a fine of not more than $20,000. 
(C)  In addition to other penalties, a sexually-oriented business which operates without a valid license shall constitute a public nuisance which may be abated by a suit for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-6-24 - SEVERABILITY. 
    Each section and each provision or requirement of any division of any section of this article shall be deemed severable and the invalidity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other portion. 
(Ord. 365, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
ARTICLE 5-7: - ADULT BOOKSTORE BUSINESSES 

§ 5-7-1 - FINDINGS, INTENT AND PURPOSE. 
(A)  The Council recognizes that some activities which occur in connection with adult bookstore businesses are protected as expression under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Council further recognizes that First Amendment rights are among the most precious and highly protected rights, and wishes to act consistently with full protection of those rights. The Council is aware, however, that adult bookstore businesses may and do generate secondary effects which are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)  Among these secondary effects are: 
(1)  Prostitution and other sex-related offenses; 
(2)  Drug use and dealing; 
(3)  Health risks through the spread of AIDS and other sexually-transmitted diseases; and 
(4)  Infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of drug- and sex-related business activities, laundering of money and other illicit conduct. 
(C)  This article is not intended to interfere with legitimate expression but to avoid and mitigate the secondary effects enumerated above. 
(D)  Specifically, Council finds that licensing of adult bookstore businesses will further the goals of this article by enabling the city to ascertain if an applicant has engaged in criminal or other behavior of the sort this article is design to limit. This information will enable the city to allocate law enforcement resources effectively and otherwise protect the community. 
(E)  The fees established for licenses and permits in this article are based on the estimated cost of implementation, administration and enforcement of the licensing program. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-2 - APPLICABILITY. 
    This article shall apply to all persons engaging in the activities described herein. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-3 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    ADULT BOOKSTORE. A commercial establishment: 
(1)  Which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
(a)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(b)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products. 
(2)  Which regularly excludes all minors from the premises or a section thereof because of the sexually explicit nature of the items sold, rented or displayed therein. 
    CITY CLERK. The Clerk of the City of Tolleson or the Clerk's designee. 
    EMPLOYEE. Any person hired, engaged or authorized to perform any service on the premises of an adult service business, including an adult service provider, whether denominated as an employee, independent contractor or otherwise. 
    ENTERPRISE. A corporation, association, labor union or other legal entity, as provided in A.R.S. § 13-105, and amendments thereto. 
    LICENSE. The license required by this article as a condition to operating an adult bookstore. 
    LICENSEE. A person or enterprise holding an adult bookstore license issued under this article, including those persons required to provide information under § 5-7-6(C) of this article. 
    PATRON. A customer or person invited or permitted to enter and remain upon the premises of a adult bookstore business. 
    SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal; 
(2)  The appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, or areola of the female breast; or 
(3)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
    SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in divisions (1) through (3) above. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-4 - ADMINISTRATION. 
(A)  The administration of this article, including the duty of prescribing forms, is vested in the City Manager, except as otherwise specifically provided. The Chief of Police shall render assistance in the administration and enforcement of this article as may be requested by the City Manager or the City Clerk. 
(B)  License applications made pursuant to this article shall be submitted to the Manager who shall grant, deny, suspend or revoke licenses in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(C)  Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance. 
(D)  An applicant for an adult bookstore license shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the city for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. 41-1750 and P.L. No. 92-544. The Arizona Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998; Am. Ord. 428, N.S., passed 7-26-2005) 
§ 5-7-5 - ADULT BOOKSTORE LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(A)  A person or enterprise may not operate an adult bookstore without first obtaining an adult bookstore license pursuant to this article. The license shall state the name of the license holder, the name, address and phone number of the licensed premises and the dates of issuance and expiration of the license. 
(B)  An adult bookstore business for which a license has been issued pursuant to this article may conduct business only under the name or designation specified in the license. 
(C)  A licensee shall conduct business only at the address shown on the license. Each additional place of business shall require a separate license. 
(D)  An adult bookstore business license shall be displayed on the premises in a manner as to be readily visible to patrons. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-6 - APPLICATION FOR AN ADULT BOOKSTORE LICENSE. 
(A)  An applicant for an adult bookstore license shall file in person at the office of the City Clerk an application, signed under oath by the applicant and notarized, accompanied by the fee required under § 5-7-17. An application shall be deemed complete when the City Clerk has received the required fees, all information required in division (C) below, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant and, in the case of a corporation or other business organization, photograph and fingerprints of all persons for whom information is required under division (C) below. 
(B)  Fingerprints and photograph shall be taken by a law enforcement agency and accompanied by a notarized verification by that agency. 
(C)  The application shall include the information called for in divisions (C)(1) through (7) below. If the applicant is an enterprise, it shall designate an officer or partner as applicant. In that case, in addition to the information required in divisions (C)(1) through (7) below for the applicant, the application shall include the state and date of formation of the organization and the information called for in divisions (C)(2) through (6) below with respect to each officer, director, general partner, manager and all other persons with authority to participate directly and regularly in management of the business; provided that, the information need not be provided with respect to attorneys, accountants and other persons whose primary function is to provide professional advance and assistance to the licensee. 
(1)  The name, business location, business mailing address and phone number of the proposed adult bookstore business establishment; 
(2)  The full true name and any other names or aliases used in the preceding five years; 
(3)  Current residential mailing address and telephone number; 
(4)  Written proof of age, in the form of a birth certificate, current drivers license with picture or other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency; 
(5)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license relating to an adult bookstore, whether any license has been revoked or suspended, and, if so, the reason or reasons therefore; 
(6)  All criminal charges, complaints or indictments in the preceding three years which resulted in a conviction or a plea of guilty or no contest for an "organized crime and fraud" offense under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 23, and amendments thereto; a "prostitution" offense under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 32, and amendments thereto; a "drug offense" under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 34, and amendments thereto; or a "sexual offense" under A.R.S. Title 13, §§ 1401 through 1406 or under A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 14, and amendments thereto; or for conduct in another jurisdiction which if carried out in Arizona would constitute an offense under one of the statutory provisions enumerated in this division; and 
(7)  The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(D)  The information provided pursuant to divisions (C)(5) and (6) of this section shall be supplemented, in writing, by certified mail to the City Clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-7 - CONFIDENTIALITY. 
    The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license or permit under this article shall be maintained by the City Clerk and Manager on a confidential basis, except that the information may be disclosed to other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety function. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-8 - GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE. 
(A)  (1) Within 45 days after receipt of an application for an adult bookstore business license, the City Clerk shall mail to the applicant a license or a notice of intent to deny. 
(2)  If the City Clerk fails to do so, the license shall be deemed granted. 
(B)  The issuance of any license does not waive any right of revocation or denial the city may have at the time of issuance. 
(C)  The City Clerk shall grant the license to an applicant who has completed all requirements for application, unless the City Clerk finds any of the following conditions. For purposes of this division (C), a person required to submit information pursuant to § 5-7-6(C) shall be deemed an applicant. 
(1)  The application is incomplete or contains a misrepresentation, false statement or omission; 
(2)  The applicant has failed to comply with applicable zoning or other land use ordinances of the city relating to the business or activity to be carried out under the license, or is delinquent in payment of any city taxes, fees or other payments due in connection with the business or activity; 
(3)  The applicant is not at least 18 years of age; 
(4)  The applicant, or other person required to provide information under § 5-7-6(C), in the past three years has been convicted, or plead guilty or no contest with respect to a felony violation or two misdemeanor violations of one or more offenses in the categories stated in § 5-7-6(C)(6); and 
(5)  Within the past two years, a license under this article held by an applicant has been revoked, or a similar license in another jurisdiction has been revoked on the basis of conduct which would be a ground for revocation of a license issued under this article if committed in the city. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-9 - NON-TRANSFERABILITY. 
    Licenses issued under this article are non-transferable. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-10 - ADULT BOOKSTORE BUSINESS; OPERATING REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  A person below the age of 18 years may not be employed by an adult bookstore business. A person below the age of 18 may not be present in an adult bookstore business. 
(B)  A manager or licensee may not knowingly permit or tolerate a violation of any provision of this article. 
(C)  (1) No adult bookstore business may be operated within 500 feet of any real property owned or occupied by a religious organization or school district. 
(2)  For purposes of this division, the measurement shall be made from the nearest point of the property owned or occupied by the religious organization or school district to the nearest point of the property proposed to be owned or occupied by the adult bookstore business. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-11 - INSPECTION OF PREMISES. 
    Law enforcement officers of the city shall have the right to inspect the premises upon request during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-12 - SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT. 
    The City Clerk shall suspend a license for a period of ten days if the licensee is convicted of violating a provision of this article. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-13 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE. 
    The City Clerk shall revoke a license issued pursuant to this article if the licensee: 
(A)  Is convicted of three or more violations of this article in any 12-month period; and/or 
(B)  Is convicted or pleads guilty or no contest to an offense stated in § 5-7-6(C)(6). 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-14 - PROCEDURE FOR DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; APPEAL. 
(A)  If the City Clerk determines that grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this article, the Clerk shall notify the applicant, licensee (respondent), in writing, of the Clerk's intent to deny, suspend or revoke, including a summary of the grounds therefor. The notification shall be by certified mail to the address on file with the City Clerk. Within ten working days of receipt of the notice, the respondent may provide to the City Clerk in writing a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the license should not be denied, suspended or revoked and may include a request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the City Clerk in the time stated, the notification shall be final administrative action of denial, suspension or revocation and notice of such will be sent to the licensee within five working days after expiration of the period for submitting a response. 
(B)  Within five working days after receipt of a response, the City Clerk shall either withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke, and send notification of the withdrawal to the respondent, in writing, by certified mail or shall schedule a hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee and shall send notification to the respondent, in writing, by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. If the City Clerk fails to send a timely notification either withdrawing the intent or scheduling a hearing, the intent to deny, suspend or revoke shall be deemed withdrawn. The hearing, if requested, shall be scheduled not less than 15 nor more than 20 working days after receipt by the City Clerk of the request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. The respondent may be represented by counsel. The rules of evidence shall not apply. The City Manager shall render a written decision within five working days after completion of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the decision by certified mail to the address of the respondent on file with the City Clerk. If more than 45 days elapse between receipt by the City Clerk of a request for a hearing and mailing by the City Manager of a final decision to the respondent, a decision in favor of the applicant, licensee or permittee shall be deemed to have been rendered. 
(C)  In the case of an intent to revoke, suspend or non-renew a license or permit, or to deny a regular permit, the permittee or licensee may continue to function under the license or permit pending receipt of the final decision of the City Manager. The decision shall be final at the end of five working days after it is mailed and shall constitute final administrative action. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-15 - JUDICIAL APPEAL. 
(A)  Final administrative action to deny, revoke or non-renew a license may be appealed to the superior court by special action or other available procedure within 35 days after receipt of written notice of the decision. 
(B)  The city shall consent to expedited hearing and disposition. 
(C)  If a permittee or licensee pursues a judicial appeal from a final administrative action, that permittee or licensee may continue to function under the license or permit pending completion of judicial review. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-16 - LICENSE RENEWAL. 
(A)  A license may be renewed by filing an application for renewal, in writing, with the City Clerk. The application shall contain the information required to be submitted with an original application, including fingerprints and a photograph; provided that, a renewal application need not contain any other information that has been provided in a previous application and has not changed since the time of the most recent application. An application for license renewal shall be received by the City Clerk not less than 45 days before the expiration of the license. 
(B)  The City Clerk may deny an application for renewal for the reasons and in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 5-7-8. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-17 - FEES. 
(A)  An original application for an adult bookstore business license shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500 and by a license fee in the amount of $500. The license fee will be refunded if the license is denied. An application for renewal shall be accompanied by the amount of the license fee. 
(B)  A duplicate or certified copy of a license shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of a fee of $10. 
(C)  A fee of $25 shall be paid at the time of fingerprinting for each set of fingerprints to be provided for by the City Clerk under § 5-7-6. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-18 - OTHER REGULATIONS. 
    A license required by this article is in addition to any other licenses or permits required by the city, the county or the state to engage in the business or occupation. Persons engaging in activities described in this article shall comply with all other ordinances and laws, including the city zoning code, as may be required, to engage in a business or profession. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-19 - PENALTY. 
(A)  Violation of any requirement or prohibition stated in this article is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction as prescribed in § 1-1-8 of this code. 
(B)  A licensee which is an enterprise shall be subject to a fine of not more than $20,000. 
(C)  In addition to other penalties, an adult bookstore business which operates without a valid license shall constitute a public nuisance which may be abated by a suit for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-7-20 - SEVERABILITY. 
    Each section and each provision or requirement of any division of any section of this article shall be deemed severable and the invalidity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other portion. 
(Ord. 366, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
ARTICLE 5-8: - ESCORTS AND ESCORT BUREAUS 

§ 5-8-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    APPLICANT. The person owning, operating and/or conducting the business to be licensed, including all persons financially interested in the business, the manager(s) or other individual(s) principally in charge of the operation of the business, and the responsible managing officer designated pursuant to this article. 
    CITY CLERK. The Clerk of the City of Tolleson or his or her designee. 
    CONSIDERATION. Money or money's worth. 
    ESCORT. Any person who for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission or salary, is held out to the public as available for hire to consort with or to accompany another or others to social affairs, places of amusement or entertainment, within any place of public resort, or within any private quarters. 
    ESCORT BUREAU. Any person who for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes, refers or offers to furnish or refer escorts, or provides, or offers to introduce, patrons to escorts. 
    ESCORT BUREAU RUNNER. Any person, not an escort, who for a salary, fee, hire, reward or profit, as the agent for either an escort bureau or a patron, contacts or meets with escort patrons or escort bureaus at any location other than the established open office, as defined hereunder, whether that person is employed by the escort bureau or any business, or is self employed. 
    LICENSEE. A person who is the holder of a valid license under this article. A LICENSEE includes an agent, servant, employee or other person while acting on behalf of that licensee whenever the licensee is or would be prohibited from doing or performing an act or acts under this article. 
    OFFER TO PROVIDE ACTS OF SEXUAL CONDUCT. To offer, propose or solicit to provide sexual conduct to a patron. The definitions include all conversations, advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that the acts were to be provided. 
    OPEN OFFICE. An office at the licensed escort bureau address from which escort business is transacted; to qualify as an open office it is required that: 
(1)  Business hours be established and posted and that the office be open to the public and patrons or prospective patrons during business hours and that the office be accessible to business invitees, business license officials and law enforcement officer through a security system during all other hours that escorts are working; 
(2)  The office is managed by the owner or a management employee of the owner having authority to bind the bureau to escort and patron contracts and adjust patron and consumer complaints; 
(3)  All telephone lines and numbers listed to the escort bureau, or advertised as escort bureau numbers, terminate at the open office and at no other location; 
(4)  An index of all employees and escorts be kept in the open office; and 
(5)  All business records be kept in the open office including records of escort calls and referrals, stating the name and address, including hotel or motel room, of the patron, the date and time of referral, name of escort sent and whether the referral resulted in an escort service and the total fee received from the patron, if any. 
    PERSON. Any individual, or any firm, partnership, corporation or association of any kind. 
    PERSON FINANCIALLY INTERESTED. For a corporation, any person who is an officer or a director or any shareholder holding more than 5% of the shares thereof; and for a non-corporate business any person who shares in any financial gain attributable to the business as a proprietor or owner or on the basis of a percentage in excess of 5% of gross or 10% of net revenue. 
    SERVICE ORIENTED ESCORT. An escort who: 
(1)  Operates from an open office; 
(2)  Does not employ or use an escort bureau runner; 
(3)  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided or work for an escort bureau which so advertises; and 
(4)  Does not offer, solicit, agree to provide, or provide sexual conduct. 
    SERVICE ORIENTED ESCORT BUREAU. An escort bureau which: 
(1)  Maintains an open office at an established place of business; 
(2)  Does not use an escort bureau runner; 
(3)  Does not advertise, offer, solicit, agree to or provide sexual conduct to a patron; and 
(4)  Employs or provides only escorts who possess escort identification cards. 
    SEXUAL CONDUCT. Engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral genital contact or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic region, buttock or female breast of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of another person. 
    SEXUAL GRATIFICATION. Sexual conduct, as defined herein. 
    SEXUALLY-ORIENTED ACTS. Sexual conduct, as defined herein. 
    SEXUALLY-ORIENTED ESCORT. An escort who: 
(1)  Employs an escort bureau runner as an employee, agent or independent contractor; 
(2)  Works for, as an agent, employee or independent contractor, or is referred to a patron by a sexually-oriented escort bureau; 
(3)  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for as an agent, employee or independent contractor, or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises; 
(4)  Solicits, offers, agrees to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron; or 
(5)  Accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee in addition to the fee charged by the escort bureau. 
    SEXUALLY-ORIENTED ESCORT BUREAU. An escort bureau which: 
(1)  Engages in advertising to make the prospective patron believe that acts of sexual conduct or sexual stimulation will be provided; 
(2)  Uses as escorts persons known to have violated the law regarding prostitution; 
(3)  Does not maintain an open office; 
(4)  Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor, or uses an escort bureau runner; 
(5)  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided or that escorts which provide sexual conduct will be provided, referred or introduced to a patron; 
(6)  Solicits, offers or agrees to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to a patron; 
(7)  Employs, contracts with or provides or refers escorts who do not possess escort identification cards as required herein; 
(8)  Does not deliver contracts to every patron or customer; or 
(9)  Employs, contracts with, or refers or provides to a patron, a sexually-oriented escort. 
    SEXUAL STIMULATION. To excite or arouse the prurient interest or to offer or solicit acts of sexual conduct, as defined under "offer to provide acts of sexual conduct." 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-2 - APPLICABILITY. 
    This article shall apply to all persons engaging in the activities described herein. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-3 - ESCORT BUREAU; LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as, conduct, manage, operate or maintain an escort bureau unless licensed pursuant to this article. 
(B)  It shall further be unlawful for any person to operate a business which has been licensed under this article while the license for that business is suspended. 
(C)  It shall also be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as, conduct, operate, manage or maintain a sexually-oriented escort bureau, regardless of license. A separate license is required for each location and name by which the escort bureau conducts business or advertises. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-4 - LICENSE TERM; NON-TRANSFERABILITY. 
    The term of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article is one year. All licenses issued pursuant to this article are non-transferable. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-5 - APPLICATION FOR ESCORT BUREAU LICENSE; CONTENTS; REQUIRED FEES. 
(A)  An applicant for an escort bureau license shall file an application with the City Clerk accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. 
(B)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, the application shall contain the name and address of the activity and the following information about the applicant, any person financially interested in the activity to be licensed, any authorized local agents and any managing employee of the activity to be licensed. 
(1)  The name, including any aliases, business trade names or styles; 
(2)  Present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers, as applicable; 
(3)  Each residence and business address for the five-year period immediately proceeding the date of filing of the application and the inclusive dates of each address; 
(4)  Arizona driver's license; 
(5)  Valid proof of age and that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(6)  Heights, weight, color of eyes and hair and date of birth; 
(7)  Two current two-inch by two-inch photographs; 
(8)  The business, occupation or employment history for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
(9)  Information as to whether the individual or business has ever been refused any similar license or permit or has had any similar license or permit issued to the individual or business in the city or elsewhere revoked or suspended, and the reason or reasons therefor; 
(10)  All prior criminal convictions excepting minor traffic offenses; 
(11)  Fingerprints. An applicant for an escort bureau license shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the city for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. 41-1750 and P.L. No. 92-544. The Arizona Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(12)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names, residence addresses and dates of birth of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than 5% of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses and dates of birth of each of the partners, including limited partners and profit interest holders. If the applicant is a limited partnership, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the certificate of limited partnership. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this division pertaining to corporations shall apply. The corporation or partnership applicant shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. The designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(13)  A description of any service to be provided together with a declaration that the services to be provided shall not involve those of a sexually-oriented escort or escort bureau; and 
(14)  The names and residential addresses of all persons employed as escorts. 
(C)  The City Clerk shall have a reasonable period of time in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant and process the application through various city departments. 
(D)  The City Clerk shall grant the license upon the following circumstances: 
(1)  The required fees have been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of facts in the application; 
(4)  That neither the applicant, if an individual, nor any person financially interested if a corporation, nor any of the partners, including limited partners, nor the holder of any profit interest, nor the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed escort bureau, nor any individual employed or contracted with to be an escort or to provide escort services has been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere to or guilty to any felony, or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within five years prior to the issuance of the license; 
(5)  The applicant has not had a license similar to the one issued pursuant to the provisions of this article issued by another authority, suspended or revoked within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
(6)  The escrow bureau complies with all applicable laws of the city, county and state; 
(7)  The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is at least 18 years of age; and 
(8)  The applicant has not had a license issued pursuant to this article suspended or revoked within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of filing of the application. 
(E)  The City Clerk shall deny the license application if all of the requirements set forth in division (D) above have not been met. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998; Am. Ord. 429, passed 7-26-2005) 
§ 5-8-6 - ESCORTS; UNLAWFUL TO WORK AS; EXCEPTION. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as an escort within the city unless employed by a licensed escort bureau or licensed as an escort bureau. It shall also be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as a sexually-oriented escort, regardless of license. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-7 - ESCORT LICENSE IDENTIFICATION CARD. 
    Each escort bureau licensee shall be issued identification cards in its name and in the names of each person who shall engage in the activity of an escort on its behalf. This card must be carried on the person of any individual while the person is engaged in the activity of an escort within the city. The identification card shall be displayed upon request of any police officer or other law enforcement official. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-8 - ESCORT BUREAU DUTIES. 
(A)  The escort bureau shall provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of service to be performed, the length of time the services shall be performed, the total amount of money the services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. 
(B)  The escort bureau shall maintain an open office at the licensed location. The street address of that office shall be included in all patron contracts. Private rooms or booths where the patron may meet with the escort shall not be provided at the open office or at any other location by the escort bureau. 
(C)  The escort bureau, in terms of licensing consequences, is responsible and liable for the acts of all its employees and subcontractors including, but not limited to, telephone receptionists and escorts who are referred by that bureau while the escort is with the patron. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-9 - ADVERTISING WITHOUT A LICENSE. 
(A)  It is unlawful to advertise or hold out to the public the availability of an escort or escort bureau without obtaining a license therefor as provided in this article, whether the actual business of escorts or escort bureau, as defined in this article, is performed. 
(B)  The escort bureau license number must be prominently displayed in advertisements. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-10 - INFORMATION UPDATE. 
    Any changes in information required to be submitted by this article must be given to the City Clerk within ten days of any change. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-11 - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to provide escort services as described in this article to individuals under 18 years of age unless written authorization by a parent or legal guardian is issued to the escort when acting as such. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-12 - RENEWAL OF LICENSES. 
(A)  Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period of not to exceed one year on written application to the City Clerk made at least 45 days prior to the expiration date of the current valid license. 
(B)  The renewal application shall be on a form provided by the City Clerk and shall contain all of the information required by § 5-8-5(B). 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-13 - FEES. 
    A non-refundable application fee in the amount of $85 shall accompany each application for an escort. A non-refundable application fee in the amount of $195 shall accompany each application for an escort service bureau. Upon approval an initial license fee of $50 shall be assessed. A renewal fee of $25 shall accompany each renewal application. A fee of $2 shall accompany each request for the issuance of an escort identification card. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-14 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE, GROUNDS AND PROCEDURE; APPEAL. 
(A)  Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be revoked upon any one or more of the following grounds. 
(1)  The licensee, any employee, agent or any other person connected or associated with the license as a partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager, or any "person financially interested," as defined in § 5-8-1, has violated any provision of this article in conducting an activity licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The licensee, any employee, agent or any other person connected or associated with the licensee as a partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager, or any "person financially interested," as defined in § 5-8-1, has made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application for any license required in this article. 
(3)  The licensee has been convicted, subsequent to the issuance of any license of a crime which is either a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or has offered or agreed to or rendered the service of a sexually-oriented escort. 
(4)  The licensee has violated a provision of this article in conducting a licensed activity pursuant to this article. 
(5)  The licensee is a corporation and is not or is no longer qualified to transact business in the State of Arizona. 
(B)  To revoke a license, the City Clerk shall notify the licensee either by hand delivery or in writing by mail to the address as shown on the application or otherwise more recently of record, that the license or permit is revoked. The cause for the revocation shall be set forth in the notice. 
(C)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the license shall terminate if the licensee fails to pay any license fee owed either when due or by the end of any renewal period. 
(D)  Appeals from the revocation or termination of a license as provided for in this article may be appealed in accordance with § 5-8-15 below. 
(E)  A revoked license shall be surrendered to the City Clerk on demand at the expiration of the appeals process. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-15 - APPEALS PROCEDURE. 
(A)  If the Clerk determines that grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this article, the Clerk shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent), in writing, of the Clerk's intent to deny, suspend or revoke, including a summary of the grounds therefor. Within ten working days of receipt of the notice, the respondent may provide to the Clerk, in writing, a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the license should not be denied, suspended or revoked and may include a request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the Clerk in the time stated, the notification shall be final administrative action of denial, suspension or revocation and notice of such will be sent to the licensee within five working days after expiration of the period for submitting a response. Within five working days after receipt of a response, the Clerk shall either withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke, and send notification of the withdrawal to the respondent, in writing, by certified mail or shall schedule a hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee and shall send notification to the respondent, in writing, by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. If the Clerk fails to send a timely notification either withdrawing the intent or scheduling a hearing, the intent to deny, suspend or revoke shall be deemed withdrawn. The hearing, if requested, shall be scheduled not less than 15 nor more than 20 working days after receipt by the Clerk of the request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. The respondent may be represented by counsel. The rules of evidence shall not apply. The City Manager shall render a written decision within five working days after completion of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the decision by certified mail to the address of the respondent on file with the Clerk. If more than 45 days elapse between receipt by the Clerk of a request for a hearing and mailing by the City Manager of a final decision to the respondent, a decision in favor of the applicant or licensee shall be deemed to have been rendered. In the case of an intent to revoke, suspend or non renew a license, or to deny a license, the applicant or licensee may continue to function under the license pending receipt of the final decision of the City Manager. The decision shall be final at the end of five working days after it is mailed and shall constitute final administrative action. 
(B)  Final administrative action to deny, revoke or non-renew a license may be appealed to the superior court by special action or other available procedure within 35 days after receipt of written notice of the decision. The city shall consent to expedited hearing and disposition. If a licensee pursues a judicial appeal from a final administrative action, that licensee may continue to function under the license pending completion of judicial review. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-16 - PENALTY. 
(A)  Violation of any requirement or prohibition stated in this article is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction as prescribed in § 1-1-8 of this code. 
(B)  A licensee which is an enterprise shall be subject to a fine of not more than $20,000. 
(C)  In addition to other penalties, an escort or escort bureau that operates without a valid license shall constitute a public nuisance which may be abated by a suit for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
§ 5-8-17 - SEVERABILITY. 
    Each section and each provision or requirement of any division of any section of this article shall be deemed severable and the invalidity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other portion. 
(Ord. 368, N.S., passed 3-11-1998) 
ARTICLE 5-9: - SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING EPHEDRINE OR PSEUDOEPHEDRINE, NORSEUDOEPHEDRINE AND/OR PEHENYLPROPANOLAMINE 

§ 5-9-1 - PLACEMENT OF PRODUCT. 
    Person(s) selling products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norseudoephedrine and/or pehenylpropanolamine shall keep the products behind a counter or otherwise in a manner that is inaccessible to the public and in an area where the products are monitored to prevent theft, or unauthorized or uncontrolled purchases. 
(Ord. 433, N.S., passed 1-10-2006) 
§ 5-9-2 - PURCHASER LOG. 
    Person(s) making a retail sale of a product containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norseudoephedrine and/or pehenylpropanolamine shall require acceptable photo identification from the purchaser and shall record in a purchaser's log, the purchaser's name, date of birth, address, and quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norseudoephedrine and/or pehenylpropanolamine product purchased. 
(A)  For purpose of this article, acceptable photo identification means any of the following: 
(1)  Current drivers license or picture identification card issued by this or any other state; 
(2)  A current passport; 
(3)  A current tribal identification card; or 
(4)  A current military identification card. 
(B)  The purchaser log shall be kept confidential and made available, upon written request, only to law enforcement personnel (local, state, or federal) and others authorized by law or court order to receive the information. The purchaser log shall be maintained for a period of six months unless otherwise directed by law enforcement personnel, law, or court order. 
(Ord. 433, N.S., passed 1-10-2006) 
§ 5-9-3 - DEFINITION. 
    For purposes of this article, a product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine includes any compound, mixture or preparation that contains any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norseudoephedrine and/or pehenylpropanolamine. Product packaging that lists ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norseudoephedrine and/or pehenylpropanolamine as an active ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that it is a product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine. 
(Ord. 433, N.S., passed 1-10-2006) 
§ 5-9-4 - PENALTY. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both a fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
(Ord. 433, N.S., passed 1-10-2006; Ord. 567, N.S., passed 11-22-2016) 
§ 5-9-5 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any section, division, or clause of this article shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, divisions and clauses shall not be affected. 
(Ord. 433, N.S., passed 1-10-2006) 
ARTICLE 5-10: - REGISTRATION OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY 

§ 5-10-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this § 5-10-1, except where the context of their use clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    OWNER. Any individual, association, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment trust. 
    RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY. One or more properties that are used solely as leased or rented property for residential purposes. If the property is a space rental, mobile home park, residential rental property includes the rental space that is leased or rented by the owner of that rental space, but does not include the mobile home or recreational vehicle that serves as the actual dwelling if the dwelling is owned and occupied by the tenant of the rental space and not by the owner of the rental space. 
(Ord. 492, N.S., passed 6-22-2010) 
§ 5-10-2 - STATE REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  An owner of residential rental property within the city shall maintain with the Maricopa County Assessor information required pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 33, Chapter 17, Article 1, as amended, in a manner to be determined by the Assessor. The owner shall update any information required by this section within ten days after a change in the information occurs. The following information shall be maintained: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the property owner; 
(2)  If the property is owned by a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment trust, the name, address and telephone number of any of the following: 
(a)  For a corporation, a corporate officer; 
(b)  For a partnership, a general partner; 
(c)  For a limited liability company, the managing or administrative member; 
(d)  For a limited partnership, a general partner; 
(e)  For a trust, a trustee; or 
(f)  For a real estate investment trust, a general partner or an officer. 
(3)  The street address and parcel number of the property; and 
(4)  The year the building was built. 
(B)  An owner of residential rental property who lives outside the state of Arizona shall designate and record with the Maricopa County Assessor a statutory agent who lives in Arizona and who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner. The owner shall designate the agent in a manner to be determined by the Assessor. The information shall include the name, address and telephone number of the agent. 
(C)  Residential rental property shall not be occupied if the information required by this section is not on file with the Maricopa County Assessor. If the owner has not filed the information required by this section with the Assessor and the residential rental property is occupied by a tenant and the tenant chooses to terminate the tenancy, the tenant shall deliver to the landlord, owner or managing agent of the property a written ten-day notice to comply with this section. The notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery. If the owner does not comply with this section within ten days after receipt of the notice, the tenant may terminate the rental agreement and the landlord shall return all prepaid rent to the tenant. Security deposits shall be returned in accordance with A.R.S. § 33-1321(D). The landlord shall return those monies by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery to the tenant within ten days after the termination of the rental agreement. This division (C) applies to any existing lease and to any new lease after August 25, 2004. Notwithstanding this division (C), an owner is in compliance with this division only if the owner had filed the information required by division (A) of this section with the Maricopa County Assessor. 
(D)  All records, files and documents that are required by this section are public records. 
(Ord. 492, N.S., passed 6-22-2010) 
§ 5-10-3 - ENFORCEMENT. 
    The City Manager, or authorized designee, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 492, N.S., passed 6-22-2010) 
§ 5-10-4 - VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. 
(A)  Violations . 
(1)  It shall be unlawful, punishable by civil sanctions as set forth below, for any owner of residential rental property to fail to perform any act or duty required by any provision of this article. 
(2)  When two or more persons have liability to the city or are responsible for a violation of this article, their responsibility shall be joint and several. 
(B)  Penalties . 
(1)  For residential rental property that is acquired by an owner after the date of the notice of assessed valuation and the notice prescribed by A.R.S. § 42-15103 and until the issuance of the next notice of assessed valuation, the city shall assess a civil penalty of $1,000 against a person who fails to comply with this section, plus an additional $100 for each month after the date of the original violation until compliance occurs. The court shall not suspend any portion of the civil penalty provided by this division (1). The court shall also impose all other fees and surcharges applicable under state statutes and this code. 
(2)  Notwithstanding division (B)(l) above, if a person complies within ten days after receiving the complaint that notices the violation, the court or hearing officer shall dismiss the complaint and shall not impose a civil penalty, a fee or a surcharge. 
(3)  Except for newly acquired residential rental property as prescribed by division (B)(l), if a residential rental property owner fails to register with the Maricopa County Assessor as prescribed by this section, the city may impose a civil penalty in the amount of $150 per day for each day of violation after the date of the most recent notice of assessed valuation and the notice prescribed by A.R.S. § 42-15103. The court shall also impose all other fees and surcharges applicable under state statutes and this code. If a person complies within ten days after receiving the notice from the Maricopa County Assessor, the court or hearing officer shall dismiss the complaint and shall not impose a civil penalty, a fee or a surcharge. 
(C)  Enforcement of Judgments. Any judgment for civil penalties taken pursuant to this article may be enforced as any other civil judgment. 
(D)  Non-exclusive Violations. Violations of this article are in addition to any other violation enumerated within this code and in no way limit the penalties, actions or procedures which may be taken by the city for any violation of this article which is also a violation of any other provision of this code or any other applicable law. The remedies specified herein are cumulative and the city may proceed under these or any other remedies authorized by law. 
(Ord. 492, N.S., passed 6-22-2010) 
CHAPTER 6: - TRAFFIC CODE 
ARTICLE 6-1: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 6-1-1 - MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
    Any road, highway, alley, pipeline or other construction requiring the use of traffic control barricades and other warning signals shall follow the procedures and guidelines as set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices , 2003 edition, published by the Federal Highway Administration, which is, by reference, incorporated into this code as if completely set forth herein. 
(Ord. 161, N.S., passed 11-22-1977) 
ARTICLE 6-2: - ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER 

§ 6-2-1 - DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT. 
    It shall be the duty of the Police Department to provide for the enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to assist in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out all duties specially imposed upon the Police Chief by this article. 
§ 6-2-2 - RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS. 
(A)  The Police Chief shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all alleged offenses. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and, from that time on, the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(B)  All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all forms. 
(C)  All records and reports pertaining to traffic records shall be public records. 
§ 6-2-3 - POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS. 
    It shall be the duty of the Police Department to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to accidents. 
§ 6-2-4 - TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Police Department shall conduct studies of accidents and determine remedial measures and recommend measures if Council approval is necessary. 
§ 6-2-5 - TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS. 
(A)  The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. 
(B)  The Police Department shall receive and properly file all accident reports according to state law or under any law of the city, but all accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the city. No report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request of any person making the report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction to prove compliance with the laws requiring the making of any report. 
(C)  The reports may be furnished in the interest of the party upon request to the Chief of Police and upon payment of a service charge of $5. 
ARTICLE 6-3: - TRAFFIC CONTROL 

§ 6-3-1 - DIRECTING TRAFFIC. 
(A)  The Police Department is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal. 
(B)  Police officers and members of the Fire Department on duty, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
§ 6-3-2 - OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. 
    No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this article. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the police or of any Fire Department official. 
§ 6-3-3 - USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED. 
    No person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when crossing, the person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
§ 6-3-4 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
(A)  The Police Chief, with the approval of the Council, shall place and maintain traffic control devices, signs and signals when and as required under the traffic regulations of the city to make effective the provisions of the regulations and may place and maintain additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(B)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the city, unless otherwise directed by the Police Chief, subject to the exceptions granted in this article or by state law. 
§ 6-3-5 - AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND MARK TRAFFIC LANES. 
(A)  The Police Chief is hereby authorized, on approval by the Council: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his or her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at any other places as he or she may deem necessary; 
(2)  To establish safety zones of a kind and character and at places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at the places as he or she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the city. 
(B)  Pedestrians shall not cross streets or roadways other than at a marked or unmarked crosswalk on Van Buren Street, nor shall any pedestrian crosswalk any intersection diagonally and, whenever practical, a pedestrian shall cross upon the right half of the crosswalk. 
§ 6-3-6 - AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS. 
(A)  The Police Chief is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at the intersections and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(B)  When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications. 
§ 6-3-7 - AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS. 
(A)  The Police Chief, on approval by the Council, is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at the intersections. The making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or the signs may be removed when the turns are permitted. 
(B)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any sign. 
§ 6-3-8 - LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not, upon any other street, so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
§ 6-3-9 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS. 
(A)  The Council shall, by resolution, designate any street or alley that is limited to one-way traffic. 
(B)  When any resolution of the Council designates any one-way street or alley, the Police Chief shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof and no regulation shall be effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
§ 6-3-10 - REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS. 
(A)  The Council shall designate through streets, intersections where stops are required and intersections where vehicles shall yield the right-of-way. 
(B)  When the Council designates any through street or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way, the Police Chief shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at every location where a vehicle must stop or yield the right-of-way. 
§ 6-3-11 - DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS. 
    Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this article, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the signs unless directed to proceed by the Police Chief or a traffic control signal. 
§ 6-3-12 - PROCESSIONS. 
(A)  No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without first notifying the city at least five days in advance and all requests shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march, destination and any other regulations as the Police Chief may set forth therein. 
(B)  A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by the methods as may be determined and designated by the Police Chief. 
(C)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or the Police Chief. 
(D)  Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
§ 6-3-13 - UNNECESSARY VEHICLE NOISE. 
    No person shall intentionally operate any vehicle at a speed on a curve or turn or accelerate or decelerate the vehicle in a manner as to create loud and unnecessary noise through the squealing of tires upon the pavement or to cause damage to the roadway. No person shall, through the use of a horn or any other device, equipment or part located on or in the vehicle, create loud and unnecessary noise. 
§ 6-3-14 - AVOIDING TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. 
    No person shall drive upon or through any property such as a service station, parking area, vacant lot or similar property to avoid obedience to traffic regulations or traffic control devices. 
§ 6-3-15 - SPEED LIMITS. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable to all streets within the city, except when the city, as provided by this article and as authorized by state law, declares upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or certain areas. The Council shall have the authority to alter the speed regulations on specific streets as requested by the Police Chief. 
§ 6-3-16 - ALTERATION OF STATE SPEED LIMITS. 
    It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed limit permitted by state law on the following streets or intersections is greater than, or less than is reasonable under existing conditions. It is declared that the maximum speed limits, when signs are posted giving notice thereof, shall be as hereinafter set forth on those streets, parts of streets or intersections: 91st Avenue from north city limits to south city limits shall be 35 mph. 
§ 6-3-17 - OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON VACANT LOTS. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle on, or across, or park on any portion of an unpaved or unstabilized vacant lot or area unless the property is dustproofed pursuant to city code or zoning code or the site has been issued a Maricopa County permit for the control of fugitive dust from dust generating operations. 
(B)  No person shall operate any vehicle, including an off-highway vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle, or an off-road recreational motor vehicle, on an unpaved surface that is not a public or private road, street or lawful easement and that is closed by the landowner by rule or regulation of a federal agency, this state, a county or municipality or by proper posting if the land is private land. 
(C)  This section does not apply to the operation of vehicles used in the normal course of business or the normal course of government operations. 
(D)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. In addition to or in lieu of a fine pursuant to this section, a judge may order a person to perform at least eight but not more than 24 hours of a community restitution course or to complete an approved safety course related to the off-highway operation of motor vehicles, or both. 
(Ord. 468, N.S., passed 3-11-2008) 
ARTICLE 6-4: - PARKING RULES 

§ 6-4-1 - METHOD OF PARKING. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the Council, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the right hand curb. 
§ 6-4-2 - BLOCKING TRAFFIC. 
(A)  No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street in the city in a manner or under the conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may stop temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of passengers or, when necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals as authorized by the Police Chief. 
(B)  No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a private driveway except for the loading or unloading of materials and not then unless the loading or unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
§ 6-4-3 - PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS. 
    When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any designated place for one hour before school opens until one hour after school closes on any school day. 
§ 6-4-4 - AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING. 
    The Police Chief, upon approval by the Council, may erect signs requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left hand curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited by ordinance and restricting parking in any way that may be necessary. When the signs are erected, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to the signs. 
§ 6-4-5 - PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. 
    No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not, or for an owner to permit his or her vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk in the city. 
§ 6-4-6 - PARKING FOR DISPLAY OR WORKING ON VEHICLES. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale, displaying advertising, displaying commercial exhibits, washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated by emergency. 
§ 6-4-7 - PARKING IN CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING CODE. 
    No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any motor vehicle upon any lot or area within the city, except in conformance with the zoning code of the city. 
§ 6-4-8 - PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any the law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of the parking, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where and for the time during which the violation occurred. 
§ 6-4-9 - PARKING TRUCKS, TRAILERS AND HORSE TRAILERS ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle with a rated chassis capacity in excess of one ton or a tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, livestock trailer or bus on a local or collector street in a residential zone in the city except during the process of loading or unloading the vehicle. 
(Ord. 181, N.S., passed 5-13-1980) 
§ 6-4-10 - RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS RESERVED FOR THE PHYSICALLY DISABLED. 
(A)  No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space set aside either on public or private property and identified for use only by persons with physical disabilities, unless the vehicle has displayed thereon a distinguishing insignia or numbered plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol issued, pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-2409 and amendments thereto. 
(B)  Division (A) above shall apply only to those parking spaces that are identified with standard signs or other markers as designated and approved by the Council. 
ARTICLE 6-5: - TRUCKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 582 N.S. , § 1, passed September 11, 2018 amended art. 6-5, §§ 6-5-1-6-5-3 in its entirety. Former art. 6-5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 563, N.S. , passed June 14, 2016. 

§ 6-5-1 - TRUCK TRAFFIC JURISDICTION; DEFINITION. 
(A)  This article shall apply to users of streets within the boundaries of the city and under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(B)  Users of highways within the boundaries of the city, which are the state highway system, and under the jurisdiction of the State of Arizona shall comply with the requirements of state law and, upon the compliance, are exempt from this article. 
(C)  This article shall not apply to fire apparatus, urban mass transit transportation system vehicles, vehicles of a municipal or governmental body or agency or recreational vehicles. 
(D)  In this article, unless the context otherwise requires, TRUCK means a vehicle with motive power, but not operated on rails, which is designed and/or used primarily for carrying property other than the effects of the driver and which has a gross vehicle weight of ten or more tons, with or without a trailer. 
(Am. Ord. 582 N.S. , § 1, passed September 11, 2018) 
§ 6-5-2 - TRUCK TRAFFIC RESTRICTED. 
(A)  Trucks shall not be permitted to travel northbound on 91st Avenue between Van Buren and Latham Streets, except for the delivery or pickup of merchandise, materials, or furnishing equipment to or from a specific location on that portion of 91st Avenue situated between Van Buren and Latham Streets, or to or from a specific location on a collector or local street that can be reasonably accessed only from 91st Avenue. 
(B)  Trucks shall not be permitted to travel in either direction on Van Buren Street between 91st and 99th Avenues, except for the delivery or pickup of merchandise, materials, or furnishing equipment to or from a specific location on that portion of Van Buren Street situated between 91st and 99th Avenues, or to or from a specific location on a collector or local street that can be reasonably accessed only from Van Buren Street. 
(C)  Each violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall be deemed to be a separate offense and violation, regardless whether the violation occurs on the same day of another violation by the same driver. 
(D)  A driver of a truck, upon being stopped by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official and cited or warned of a violation of this section, shall thereafter proceed to a route off of 91st Avenue or Van Buren Street, as applicable, by the shortest and most direct practicable route, utilizing streets and highways other than collector or local streets. Failure of the driver to comply with this requirement shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(Ord. 582 N.S. , § 1, passed September 11, 2018) 
ARTICLE 6-6: - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES 

§ 6-6-1 - WHEN VEHICLES MAY BE IMPOUNDED. 
    Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a street, alley or roadway to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Department, or otherwise maintained by the city under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(A)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(B)  When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
(C)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street, alley or roadway and is so parked as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; and 
(D)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street, alley or roadway for a period in excess of 72 hours. 
§ 6-6-2 - UNOCCUPIED VEHICLES. 
    Any unoccupied vehicle of any kind or description found violating any provisions of any of the laws of the city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles shall be impounded by any police officer and removed from the street, alley or roadway and kept in custody upon the direction of the Chief of Police. The vehicle may be recovered by the owner when the owner has furnished evidence of the owner's identity and ownership, signed a receipt and shall be responsible for the towing and storage fees. The payment of the removal and storage charges shall not release the owner or driver of the vehicle from any other penalty imposed for violation of the traffic laws of the city. 
§ 6-6-3 - NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT TO BE SENT TO OWNER. 
    Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street, alley or roadway as authorized in this article and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer shall give or cause to be given as soon as possible, notice to the owner of the fact of the removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. In the event any vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage. 
ARTICLE 6-7: - ABANDONED, JUNK AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned and junk vehicles, see A.R.S. Title 28, Ch. 11 

§ 6-7-1 - PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the outdoor parking and storage of automobiles, recreational vehicles, boats, trailers and other vehicles. This article is adopted to promote safe vehicular traffic, to preserve peace and good order, to promote the aesthetic beauty of the community and hence the value of the property therein; and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Tolleson. For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    ABANDONED (OR INOPERATIVE, DISCARDED OR JUNKED) VEHICLES . 
(1)  Any vehicle that is: 
(a)  Being held or used for the purpose of resale of used parts there from or for the purpose of reclaiming for use some of the materials therein for the purpose of disposing of the same; or 
(b)  Wrecked, discarded or dismantled; or 
(c)  In such a condition as to cost more to repair and place in operating condition than its reasonable market value after such repair; or 
(d)  Left unattended for more than 72 hours on property of another, if left without permission of the property owner, or for more than 48 hours within the public right-of-way of any highway, road, street or other public thorough fare, and shall constitute prima facie evidence of abandonment, under A.R.S. § 28-4801 et seq. 
(2)  With respect to any vehicle not required to be licensed or not usually used on the public highways, the fact that such vehicle has remained unused for more than six months and is not in condition to be removed under its own power shall be presumptive evidence that such vehicle is an abandoned, junked and/or inoperative vehicle. 
(3)  The fact that a vehicle does not display a current motor vehicle registration or license plate shall be presumptive evidence that such vehicle is not in any condition for legal use upon the public right-of-way of any highway, road, street or other public thoroughfare. 
(4)  An owner of a vehicle subject to this definition may present evidence to the city demonstrating, pursuant to the requirements of A.R.S. §§ 28-4832 and 28-2481 et seq. , that the vehicle is eligible for licensing and therefore not an abandoned vehicle under this article and state law. 
    ANTIQUE, CLASSIC OR HISTORIC AUTO. A motor vehicle owned and operated as an exhibition piece or collector's item, not used or used for daily transportation and manufactured more than 25 years prior to the current calendar year, eligible to be registered or duly registered with the State of Arizona as prescribed by A.R.S. § 28-2484. 
    BOAT . A vessel capable of carrying one or more people and intended for use on the water. 
    BUILDING. A permanent, essentially boxlike structure having a roof and enclosing walls complying with the Tolleson Building Code. As used in this article, the word BUILDING refers to principal buildings and accessory buildings unless specifically distinguished. 
    CAMPER/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A motorized, self-propelled vehicle containing sleeping and other facilities for habitation. 
    COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any licensed vehicle used in conjunction with any business or trade. 
    CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE. A commercial vehicle customarily used in the construction trades, including but not limited to vehicles used for excavation and moving of earth and vehicles used for hauling construction materials. 
    DRIVEWAY. An asphalt, concrete or other hard surface, generally constructed between the road and a garage or dwelling used for parking of vehicles. 
    DWELLING. A building designed or used as living quarters for one or more families. 
    FAMILY. One or more persons occupying the premises and living as a single housekeeping unit. 
    MOTORCYCLE, SNOWMOBILE, ATV, JET SKI. Unenclosed motorized vehicles having seats or saddles for the use of riders. 
    PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, on public or private property outside of a building. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE . Any vehicle used for recreational purposes, including all-terrain vehicles, boats, boat trailers, camper trailers, jet skis, motorcycles, motor homes and snowmobiles. 
    SEMI-TRACTOR . A short truck with a body containing only a cab for the driver, used to haul commercial, detachable trailers. 
    SEMI-TRACTOR-TRAILER . A combination trucking unit consisting of a tractor and a trailer or semitrailer. 
    SEMITRAILER . A detachable trailer for hauling commercial freight, having its forward end supported by the rear of its truck tractor when attached. 
    STORAGE . The parking of a licensed vehicle for a period in excess of nine consecutive days, unless otherwise restricted. The parking of an unlicensed vehicle for any period of time, except as exempted herein. The incidental movement of a vehicle on or off the property shall not affect the calculation of the nine-day time period. 
    TRAILER, BOAT . A trailer intended for the purpose of moving boats from place to place. 
    TRAILER, CAMPER . A trailer containing sleeping and other facilities for habitation and intended to be towed or carried by another vehicle. 
    TRAILER, UTILITY . A trailer generally used for the hauling of miscellaneous household and yard materials. 
    UNLICENSED VEHICLE . Any vehicle that is without a current registration or license, including any inspection required for lawful registration or license. 
    VEHICLE . A machine or vessel propelled by other than human power, designed to travel along the ground or water by use of wheels, treads or other mechanical means to transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, camper/RV, tractors, trailers, motorcycles, boats and wagons. 
    VEHICLE HEIGHT . A vehicle height will be determined by measuring from the ground surface to the top of the vehicle, as stored. 
    VEHICLE LENGTH . A vehicle length will be determined by the physical measurement of the outside dimension of said vehicle, i.e., a boat will be measured from the bow to the stern, a camper/RV will be measured from bumper to bumper, a utility trailer or camper trailer will be measured front to rear excluding the trailer tongue, a boat trailer will be measured from the rear to the point of the bow support excluding the tongue. 
(Ord. 214, passed 6-8-1982; Am. Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-2 - ABANDONED, INOPERATIVE, DISCARDED, JUNKED OR UNLICENSED VEHICLES. 
(A)  The outside storage of abandoned, inoperative, discarded, junked or unlicensed vehicles on privately owned properties within the City of Tolleson is unsightly and constitutes an attractive nuisance to children and a peril to their safety. This article is intended hereby to protect public health and safety and to curb the deterioration of the community environment. 
(B)  No property shall be used for the outside storage of abandoned, inoperative, discarded, junked or unlicensed vehicles except as may be otherwise permitted in this code. There is allowed a maximum of one abandoned vehicle on such property. This vehicle can be only located in the rear of the property as "rear" is defined by the Tolleson Zoning Ordinance. Further, it shall be in a location which is completely screened on all sides by fencing or shrubbery, such that it is not visible from any street adjacent to the property. The screening shall be approved by the Chief Building Official or the Building Inspector or designee and his or her decision shall be final as to the adequacy of the screening. 
(C)  No dismantled, partially dismantled vehicles or parts of vehicles shall be stored outside on any property within the city except as otherwise permitted within this code. 
(D)  No person shall abandon any vehicle within the City of Tolleson and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstance as to reasonably cause such vehicle to appear to have been abandoned. 
(E)  No camper/RV, camper trailer or boat shall be used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-3 - OUTSIDE STORAGE OR PARKING OF COMMERCIAL OR CONSTRUCTION VEHICLES. 
(A)  No commercial or construction vehicle of any length shall be stored outside on any public or private property within the city for a period in excess of eight hours, unless used in conjunction with construction on said property. 
(B)  No commercial vehicle having an overall length in excess of 20 feet, nor any semitractor, semi-tractor-trailer, semitrailer or construction vehicle of any length shall be parked on any public or private property in a residential district unless temporarily in connection with a bona fide commercial service, sales or delivery to such property. 
(C)  A commercial vehicle which is not a semitractor, semi-tractor-trailer, semitrailer or construction vehicle having an overall length of 20 feet or less, may be parked or stored outside on private property in a residential district subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Only one such vehicle per family may be parked or stored on any lot containing the dwelling of such family. 
(2)  Such vehicle shall only be parked or stored on the driveway or in the garage. 
(3)  Such vehicle shall belong to an owner or occupant of the premises upon which it is being parked or stored. 
(Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-4 - OUTSIDE PARKING OR STORAGE OF LICENSED VEHICLES. 
(A)  Licensed and registered vehicles parked or stored outside on private property not otherwise regulated by this code shall be either: parked on a driveway surface; in a garage or as per prescribed in the Tolleson Zoning Ordinance. 
(B)  Licensed vehicles parked on public property shall be parked consistent with Article 6-4, Parking Rules, of the Tolleson City Code and so as not to create a hazard, impede the flow of traffic and emergency vehicles or create a nuisance to adjacent properties. The determination of hazard, impedance or nuisance shall be made by the Chief of Police and the Director of the Building Department, or their designees. In instances of imminent danger the vehicle shall be removed immediately by the owner or shall be removed by the city at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-5 - STORAGE ON VACANT OR OCCUPIED PROPERTY. 
    No more than a maximum of one antique or classic or historic vehicle or recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or other vehicles as prescribed herein this code shall be parked or stored on any privately owned vacant property or occupied property, so as to be visible, in a residential district or as prescribed in this code. 
(Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-6 - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE. 
    The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any private property within the corporate limits of the city upon which the storage is made and also the owner of an abandoned vehicle, including recreational vehicles, boats, trailers and other vehicles in storage beyond the maximum prescribed in this code shall jointly and severally be responsible for abating the nuisance. 
(Ord. 214, passed 6-8-1982; Am. Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-7 - NOTICE TO ABATE. 
    Any owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or other person who fails, neglects or refuses to abate the nuisance shall be notified, in writing, by certified mail (return receipt requested) by the City Manager or his or her representative to abate the nuisance within 15 days from the date appearing on the written notice. 
(Ord. 214, passed 6-8-1982; Am. Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-8 - FAILURE TO ABATE; CITATION OR REMOVAL OF VEHICLE. 
    When the owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or other person to whom notice in this article has been mailed fails, neglects or refuses for more than 15 days from the date appearing on the notice to abate the nuisance, the City Manager may authorize the Chief Building Official to issue a citation for the violation or authorize the Chief Building Official or his or her representative to remove the abandoned motor vehicles or other vehicles from the premises, and dispose of the vehicles according to the provisions of the Arizona Revised Statutes relating to abandoned vehicles, including providing a report to the Superintendent of the Motor Vehicle Division of the Arizona State Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. 214, passed 6-8-1982; Am. Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
State Law reference- Abandoned and junk vehicles; disposition of, see A.R.S. Title 28, Ch. 11 
§ 6-7-9 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS. 
(A)  If there is any conflict between these specific provisions and any other provision of this code, it is the intention of the City Council that these specific provisions in this article be controlling. 
(B)  In the event the owner claims that the vehicle in question is being repaired, the repairs shall be done only under a carport or a garage or in the back yard or in an area completely screened in accordance with this article and the Tolleson Zoning Ordinance. There shall be no repairs of motor vehicles and other vehicles in the front yards of residential districts within the city limits. 
(Ord. 214, passed 6-8-1982; Am. Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-10 - APPEAL PROCEDURE. 
    Any citizen who is not satisfied with the determination and interpretation of these provisions by the Police Department, the City Manager, the Chief Building Official and/or the Building Inspector or any staff member of the city shall have the right to appeal and request a variance to the Board of Adjustment. The procedure for appeal shall be the same as applying for a variance as set forth in the Tolleson Zoning Ordinance pertaining to applications for variance through the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. 214, passed 6-8-1982; Am. Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011) 
§ 6-7-11 - PENALTY. 
(A)  Every owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or other person who fails, neglects or refuses to abate the aforementioned nuisance as provided shall also be guilty of a class two misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be punished by a fine of not more than $300 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment. 
(B)  Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 214, passed 6-8-1982; Am. Ord. 504, N.S., passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 567, N.S., passed 11-22-2016) 
ARTICLE 6-8: - MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLES 

§ 6-8-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE. A coaster, scooter, any other alternatively fueled device (excluding battery operated toy carts designed for children under the age of eight years to ride in or on) or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor or engine and which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28, and amendments thereto, as a "motor vehicle," "motor-driven cycle" or "motorized wheelchair." 
    MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD. A self-propelled device which has a motor or engine, a deck on which a person may ride and has at least two wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28, and amendments thereto, as a "motor vehicle," "motor-driven cycle" or "motorized wheelchair." 
§ 6-8-2 - APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC LAWS. 
(A)  All traffic laws shall apply to persons riding motorized play vehicles and motorized skateboards. Every person operating a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to the vehicles, or by the traffic regulations in this article and except as to those provisions which, by their nature, can have no application. 
(B)  This section shall not be construed to require the licensing or registration of motorized play vehicles or motorized skateboards, the licensing of motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard operators, or the carrying of insurance covering accidents involving motorized play vehicles or motorized skateboards. 
(C)  It is unlawful for any person operating a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard not to obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other traffic direction devices that are applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
§ 6-8-3 - RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS, GUARDIANS AND CUSTODIANS. 
    No parent, guardian or custodian of a child, shall authorize or knowingly permit any child to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
§ 6-8-4 - PROHIBITED AREAS OF OPERATION. 
    No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard: 
(A)  On any sidewalk, except for use in crossing a sidewalk by the most direct route to gain access to any public or private road or driveway; 
(B)  In any city parking structure or city park, except for use on public roadways within the park, or designated hike/bike trails; 
(C)  On any public property that has been posted or designated by the owner of the property as an area prohibiting the use of skateboards; 
(D)  On any public roadway consisting of a total of four or more marked traffic lanes, or having an established speed limit of greater than 25 mph; and 
(E)  On any private property of another, or any public property, which is not held open to the public for vehicle use, without the written permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession of the property or the authorized agent of either. 
§ 6-8-5 - GENERAL OPERATING RESTRICTIONS. 
(A)  No child under the age of 13 shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard without being in the immediate supervision of the child's parent, guardian or custodian. 
(B)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard in excess of the speed that is reasonable and prudent under existing circumstances, or the lawfully posted limit, whichever is the least. 
(C)  The operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard, approaching a sidewalk, bicycle path, bicycle lane or multi-use path in order to cross such, shall yield the right-of-way to all other users. 
(D)  No operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard shall allow passengers when the motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard is in motion. 
(E)  No person operating or riding upon a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard shall attach himself or herself or the motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard in any manner to any other vehicle. 
(F)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard while carrying any package, bundle or article which prevents the operator from keeping both hands on the steering mechanism at all times. 
(G)  No person, other than the owner, shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard without the written permission of the owner. 
(H)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard that has been structurally altered from the original manufacturer's design. 
(I)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard in a crosswalk. 
(J)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard while towing or pulling another person or object. 
§ 6-8-6 - OPERATING RESTRICTIONS ON ROADWAY. 
(A)  A person operating a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard on a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic, at the time and place and under the then existing conditions, shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except under the following conditions and when the movement can be made in safety: 
(1)  If overtaking and passing a bicycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  If preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private roadway or driveway; 
(3)  If reasonably necessary to avoid hazardous conditions ahead in the roadway; and 
(4)  If the lane in which the person is operating the motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard is too narrow for a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard and a bicycle or another vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane. 
(B)  No operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard shall transport extra fuel in a separate container or alter the fuel reservoir from the original manufacturer's design. This includes the prohibition of physically attaching fuel packs or containers to the operator's person. 
(C)  Persons operating motorized play vehicles or motorized skateboards on the roadway shall not ride more than two abreast. 
§ 6-8-7 - REQUIRED SAFETY EQUIPMENT. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard without a head lamp emitting a beam and a red rear reflector anytime from one-half of an hour prior to sunset and one-half of an hour after sunrise, or any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly identifiable objects, persons or vehicles on the roadway. 
(1)  A headlamp shall emit a white light and be visible from the front at a distance no less than 500 feet. 
(2)  A rear red reflector shall be visible when illuminated by a vehicle headlamp from a distance of not less than 300 feet. 
(3)  A rear red lamp visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the rear red reflector. 
(B)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard unless it is equipped with a brake, which enables the operator to make a braked wheel(s) skid on pavement. 
(C)  Any operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard under the age of 18 years being operated on a roadway shall, at all times, wear a protective helmet on his or her head in an appropriate and safely secured manner. The helmet should at a minimum meet the standards of testing and safety requirements for the bicycle industry. 
(D)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard without wearing footwear. The footwear must have a sole and completely cover the feet and toes. 
(E)  The operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard shall wear, at all times, eye protection. 
CHAPTER 7: - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE 7-1: - GENERAL OFFENSES 

§ 7-1-1 - DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS. 
    It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards, awnings or other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3) 
§ 7-1-2 - DEFACING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any person to deface any public property, including, but not limited to, writing or drawing thereon, or painting or pasting thereon, or attaching thereto any handbill or advertisement or other drawing or scratch, to mar, disfigure or defile the property or the floors or walls thereof. A complaint may be filed against any person in violation of this section by any citizen or any police officer or other public official of the city who witnesses the incident. 
(B)  It is unlawful for any person to deface any private property, by writing or drawing thereon, or by painting or pasting thereon, or attaching thereto any handbill or advertisement or other drawing or to scratch, mar, disfigure or defile the property or the floor or walls thereof without the express permission of the owner of the property. In the event of a violation of this section, the owner or the person entitled to possession may file with the city court a complaint against an individual who violates this section of the code. 
(C)  In the event of a violation of this section by a juvenile, the juvenile's parents or other persons with whom the juvenile resides or who have custody over the juvenile shall be likewise cited and shall be subject to the fines provided in § 1-1-8 of this code. 
(D)  In addition to the fines provided in § 1-1-8 of this code, the Chief Magistrate or Juvenile Court Judge may impose other appropriate sentencing, including the requiring of public service time within the city limits, cleaning up graffiti, picking up waste and other papers and providing for any other community service as the Court deems appropriate. 
(E)  The Council is specifically authorized to offer a reward for the apprehension of parties who might be guilty of violation of this section and to solicit reward funds and other cooperation from the citizens and business community of the city. 
(Ord. 218, N.S., passed 12-14-1983) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(21) 
§ 7-1-3 - DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIALS ON THOROUGHFARES. 
    It is unlawful for any person, either willfully or maliciously or carelessly or negligently to drop, throw, place or scatter upon any street, alley, avenue, sidewalk or public place in the city, any nails, tacks, broken glass, glass bottles or any instrument or thing whatsoever of the nature as to be capable of injuring persons or property. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3) 
§ 7-1-4 - EXCAVATIONS TO BE COVERED. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the city without providing a sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable obstruction around or in front of the excavation during the day. 
(B)  It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other excavation of more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot, without substantial curbing, covering or protection. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3) and (21) 
§ 7-1-5 - FIREWORKS. 
(A)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  CONSUMER FIREWORK . Fireworks as defined as such by A.R.S. § 36-1601, as amended. 
(2)  DISPLAY FIREWORK . Fireworks as defined as such by A.R.S. § 36-1601, as amended. 
(3)  EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE . The reasonable costs directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident. 
(4)  FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, including a consumer firework, display firework or permissible consumer fireworks as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601, but not including novelty items as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601 and this code. 
(5)  NOVELTY ITEMS . Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices, sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601, as amended. 
(6)  PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks of the same title as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601. 
(7)  REASONABLE COSTS . Reasonable costs may include, but is not limited to, the costs of providing police, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident. 
(8)  SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY . A monitored performance of display fireworks open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Chief or authorized designee. 
(B)  Use of fireworks prohibited; exceptions . 
(1)  The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the city is prohibited, except the use of permissible consumer fireworks is allowed from June 24 through July 6 and December 24 through January 3 each year. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of a supervised public display of fireworks. 
(3)  Permits may be granted by the Fire Chief or authorized designee for conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such supervised public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does not endanger persons, animals or property. A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked, during time periods of high fire danger warnings. The Fire Chief or authorized designee has authority to impose conditions on any permits granted. 
(4)  Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the Fire Chief or authorized designee is a civil offense punishable by a base civil fine of $250 for each violation. 
(C)  Sale of fireworks . 
(1)  No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age. 
(2)  No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law. 
(3)  Sales of permissible consumer fireworks. The sale of permissible consumer fireworks is allowed from May 20 through July 6 and December 10 through January 3 each year. 
(D)  Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks; civil penalty. 
(1)  Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the following: 
(a)  The use of fireworks, including permissible consumer fireworks, except novelty items as defined by city code and state law, is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city, except the use of permissible consumer fireworks is allowed from June 24 through July 6 and December 24 through January 3 each year. 
(b)  Consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state law may not be sold to persons under the age of 16. 
(2)  Signs required under this section shall be placed at each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale. 
(3)  The Fire Chief or authorized designee shall develop regulations concerning the size and color of the required signs and shall develop a model sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the city's website and filed with the City Clerk's office. 
(4)  Failure to comply with § 7-1-5(D)(1) or (2) of this section is a civil offense punishable by a base fine of up to $250. 
(E)  Authority to enforce violations of this section; means of enforcement. 
(1)  The Fire Chief or authorized designee, a city police officer, a city code enforcement officer or the City Prosecutor may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this section designated as civil offenses. 
(2)  Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil or criminal complaint. 
(3)  A city police officer or the City Prosecutor may issue criminal complaints to enforce this section. 
(F)  Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks . 
(1)  A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable for the expenses, including reasonable costs, of any emergency response that is required by such use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation(s) of this section is prima facie evidence of liability under this section. 
(2)  The reasonable costs or expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person liable for those expenses pursuant to § 7-1-5(F)(1) of this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed. 
(G)  Penalty. Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this section, the penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement imposed by this section is a civil penalty of $1,000.00. 
(Ord. 501, N.S., passed 11-9-2010; Am. Ord. 543, N.S. , passed 6-24-2014) 
§ 7-1-6 - FENCES; BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC RAZOR RIBBON. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the city any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire and/or razor ribbon. 
(B)  Any fence is hereby declared a public nuisance and subject to abatement by order of the city's Court. 
(C)  This section does not apply to underground invisible pet fences, which are hereby specifically exempted. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(21) 
§ 7-1-7 - INTERFERING WITH OR HARASSING POLICE DOGS. 
(A)  While a police service dog is being caged, kenneled, transported, exhibited, exercised or engaged in discharging or attempting to discharge any lawful duty or function, it is unlawful to and, no person shall, either: 
(1)  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly kill, injure, strike, interfere with, harass or bait, or attempt to recklessly kill, injure, strike, interfere with, harass or bait a police service dog; or 
(2)  Cause or direct any animal to attack or otherwise interfere with or harass the police service dog. 
(B)  A police officer may destroy an animal attacking a police service dog if no lesser means are reasonably available to prevent injury to the police service dog. 
(C)  A POLICE SERVICE DOG , as used in this section, shall mean any dog which is a member of the Police Department K-9 unit. 
(Ord. 299, N.S., passed 11-28-1989) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(12) 
§ 7-1-8 - LIQUOR IN PARTIALLY FILLED CONTAINERS. 
    It is unlawful for a person to have in his or her possession a partially filled container of spirituous liquor in a public place or street and to be engaged in activities that would constitute loitering or vagrancy under state law. This section shall include persons sitting in or driving automobiles in the city with partially filled containers of spirituous liquor in their possession. This section shall not apply to the sale of spirituous liquors on the premises of and by a retail liquor licensee, nor shall it apply to persons/parties possessing an authorized city permit for alcoholic beverages in a city park. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3) and (24) 
§ 7-1-9 - LOITERING. 
    It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner, manager or his or her authorized representative, to interfere individually or collectively with free enjoyment of property by the owners thereof; or interfere with the conduct of any lawful business by obstructing the entrance to the business or by obstructing free passage of persons or merchandise or commodities within the place of business or by obstructing service rendered by the business to its customers. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(24) 
§ 7-1-10 - MINORS. 
(A)  (1) It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to idle or loiter upon the streets or public places of the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or some person of lawful age having legal custody of the person. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor to encourage or allow the minor to idle or loiter upon the streets or public places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless accompanied by the parent or guardian. 
(2)  This section does not apply to a minor who is: 
(a)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(b)  Involved in an emergency; 
(c)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence; 
(d)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(e)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law. 
(B)  (1) It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow a juvenile to violate the provisions of this section. 
(2)  It shall not constitute a defense hereto that the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or supervision of the juvenile, coming within the provisions of this section, did not have actual knowledge of the presence of the juvenile in, about or upon any place in the city away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the juvenile, if the parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision of the juvenile in the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, should have known of the unlawful acts of the juvenile. 
(C)  (1) In addition to any other powers, any law enforcement officer who arrests a juvenile for violating any of the provisions of this chapter is also empowered to demand of the parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision of the juvenile that the parent, guardian or other person come and take the juvenile into custody. Should there be a failure of the parent, guardian or other person to take custody of the juvenile, the officer may then be empowered to take the juvenile home. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision of the juvenile to fail or refuse to take the juvenile into custody after the demand is made. 
(Ord. 567, N.S., passed 11-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. §§ 9-240(B)(3) and 9-276(A)(1) 
§ 7-1-11 - NOISE. 
(A)  It is a public nuisance and it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating or in control of any restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show, store or any place of public amusement, entertainment or accommodation, to play or permit to be played any music or musical instrument or instruments whether played by individuals, orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box or other mechanical device or means in a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the senses, or so as to disturb the slumber, peace and quiet, or otherwise interfere with or annoy the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any person in the neighborhood and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance inflicted is unequal. 
(B)  It is unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound truck, loud speaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with loud speaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle, unless the person in charge of the vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the city to operate any vehicle so equipped. 
(C)  It is unlawful for a street vendor to ring bells, blow whistles, blow horns, play music or use any noise making device in connection with the vending of any products of any nature within the city. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(13) 
§ 7-1-12 - OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW. 
    It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstruction which prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3) 
§ 7-1-13 - OFFENSIVE BUSINESS. 
    It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any slaughterhouse or make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep or any other kind of animal, or establish or maintain any soap factory, render tallow or pursue, maintain or carry on any other business or occupation offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health within the limits of the city without first obtaining the approval of the Council. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(21) 
§ 7-1-14 - PROSTITUTION. 
    It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution or by word, sign or action make known or call attention that the person is a prostitute or make any public meretricious display or to solicit any person to visit or patronize a prostitute or place of prostitution. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(17) 
§ 7-1-15 - SEARCHLIGHTS. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate within the city any incandescent or arc type searchlight, beacon light or similar lighting device designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light into the sky for a distance in excess of one-half mile unless permission is obtained from the Council. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency searchlights or beacons operated pursuant to public authority. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(21) 
§ 7-1-16 - PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF POSTERS, CARDS, SIGNS, HANDBILLS, PLACARDS AND OTHER NOTICES GENERALLY. 
(A)  Generally. 
(1)  No person shall paste, fasten or in any manner affix to any street, curb, sidewalk, public improvement or other publicly owned or controlled place within the city, any drawing, writing, handbill, placard, poster, dodger or notice of advertisement. 
(2)  No person shall write, paint, paste, post or tack any card, sign, notice, handbill, dodger or advertisement in, on or upon any tree, post, pole, fence, wall, building, premises or other property owned by, or belonging to, or in charge of another person without first having obtained from the person so owning or in charge, custody or control thereof, permission to do so. 
(3)  No person shall paste, post, tack, place or display, or cause or permit to be pasted, posted, tacked, placed or displayed any sign, card, notice handbill or advertisement on any pole, fence, or at any place within any public right-of-way or easement. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, it may be rebuttably presumed that the owner, manager, distributor, provider, or responsible party of any business, product, or service which is the subject of a sign, notice, card, handbill, or advertisement has caused the sign, card, handbill, notice or advertisement to be placed within the right-of-way. 
(5)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a civil sanction of not less than $250 nor more than $2,500. The $250 minimum sanction shall not be waived. Each sign, card, handbill, notice, or advertisement placed within the right-of-way shall constitute a separate violation. 
(B)  Placement on utility poles. It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any street light pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole within the city without first obtaining authorization from the Council and the utility company that owns or operates the pole. 
(Ord. 363, N.S., passed 2-10-1998) 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3) 
§ 7-1-17 - WATER; FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of water in the quantity as to cause flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or to create a hazardous condition to the traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the city. 
(B)  It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in a quantity as to cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to the traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the city through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any irrigation structure, delivery ditch or waste ditch in which the person has a vested right or interest or through the willful or negligent failure of the person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or her. 
State Law reference- Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3) 
§ 7-1-18 - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE; MISUSE OF; VIOLATIONS. 
(A)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to misuse the emergency telephone service. 
(B)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    EMERGENCY. A situation in which property and/or human health or life are in jeopardy and the prompt summoning of aid is essential. 
    EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE. A telephone system utilizing a single three-digit number "911" for reporting fire, medical or other emergencies. 
    MISUSE OF THE EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE. Repeatedly calling "911" for non-emergency situations or falsely reporting an emergency to "911." 
    REPEATEDLY. Four or more times within a 30 day period. 
(C)  Penalty. Violation of this section shall be a class one misdemeanor. The Court shall impose as restitution the amount incurred of any unnecessary response resulting from the misuse of the emergency telephone system by any political subdivision of this state or the city. 
§ 7-1-19 - OBSCENE CONDUCT. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or stool in any place open to public view. 
§ 7-1-20 - SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT RESPONSE TO DISRUPTIVE PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS. 
(A)  If a City of Tolleson police officer responds to any disruptive party, gathering or event anywhere within the city limits, and the police officer determines there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, any person responsible for the disruptive party, gathering or event (responsible party) is liable for the reasonable costs of a second or subsequent response by the police to that incident or for a response to the same location for another disruptive party, gathering or event within a 90 day period. 
(B)  If a City of Tolleson police officer responds to any disruptive party, gathering or event, and the police officer determines there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the officer shall issue the responsible party a written warning advising that a second or subsequent response within 90 days will result in liability for the reasonable costs of the second or subsequent police response. 
(C)  The second or subsequent police response, may also result in the arrest or citation of violators of state law or City of Tolleson Code of Ordinances. 
(D)  A responsible party is not liable for costs under this section unless issued the written notice required by division (B). The owner of the property where a disruptive party, event or gathering occurred is liable under this section if the city sent the owner the notice required by division (B) and a subsequent disruptive party, gathering or event occurs within 90 days of mailing the notice to the owner. 
(E)  The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract. 
(F)  The city may waive the costs of a second or subsequent response if any responsible party initiates a request for a police response and assists the police in dispersing persons attending the disruptive party, gathering or event. 
(G)  For purposes of this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  (a) Reasonable costs includes the salaries of the responding police officers, at the salary then in effect for each classification of each individual officer, for the amount of time actually spent in responding to or remaining at the party, gathering or event; appropriate overhead; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers; and the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property; 
(b)  A person's liability under this section shall not exceed $1,000 for each incident; however, the city does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for reasonable costs exceeding $1,000 through other legal remedies or procedures; 
(2)  A DISRUPTIVE PARTY, GATHERING OR EVENT means a group of five or more persons who have assembled or are assembling in a manner which constitutes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property. This includes, but is not limited to, excessive noise, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, public drunkenness, the service of alcohol to underage persons, fights, disturbances of the peace and litter. 
(3)  RESPONSIBLE PARTY means a person who owns the property, any person in actual or lawful control or possession of the premises, and any person who organized the party, gathering, or event. If two or more persons are responsible for the party, gathering or event such persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the reasonable costs of a second or subsequent response. If the person responsible for the party, gathering or event is a minor, the parents or guardian having custody or control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the reasonable costs of a second or subsequent response. 
(H)  Hearing procedures. 
(1)  A person liable for the costs of a police response under this section may, within ten days of receipt of notice of the costs imposed, request a hearing with the Chief Magistrate. 
(2)  Hearing officers may preside over hearings required by this section and the hearing officer shall set a time and place for the hearing as soon as practicable. 
(3)  The hearing shall be conducted in an informal process to determine whether there is a sufficient factual and legal basis to impose the costs of the police response and the reasonableness of the amount. The rules of evidence shall not apply, provided that the decision of the hearing officer shall in all cases be based upon substantial and reliable evidence. All parties to the hearing shall have the right to present evidence. The Police Department shall have the burden of establishing by a preponderance of evidence that the costs of the police response should be imposed and the amount is reasonable under the circumstances. 
§ 7-1-21 - URBAN CAMPING. 
(A)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  CAMP. To reside in or use public park, public street, or public place for living accommodation purposes; including, but not limited to, activities such as erecting tents or any other structure providing shelter, digging or breaking earth, laying down bedding for purposes of sleeping, using camp paraphernalia, storing personal belongings, starting a fire, regularly cooking or preparing meals, bathing, or living in a parked vehicle. 
(2)  CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
(3)  PUBLIC PARK. A park, parkway, trail, recreational area, playground or open space area established, maintained or administered by the city. 
(4)  PUBLIC STREET. All public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public walls, public parking lots and public parking structures. 
(5)  PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all public plazas, including city hall, city facilities, schools, attractions, monuments and any improved or unimproved public area. 
(B)  Prohibited acts. No person shall camp in any public park, public street or public place, except when specifically authorized by a special use permit issued under the authority of the city manager or his authorized designee. 
(C)  Abandoned camp paraphernalia. Any camp paraphernalia left unattended within or adjacent to a public park, public street, or public place shall be confiscated and held by the police department. The police department will make reasonable attempts to locate and notify the owner. If the owner fails to claim the confiscated camp paraphernalia within 30 days of confiscation by the police department, the camp paraphernalia will be deemed abandoned and disposed of by the police department. 
(D)  Penalty. Violations of any provision of this section are a class 1 misdemeanor subject to the penalties prescribed in § 1-1-8 of this code. 
( Ord. 545, N.S. , passed 9-9-2014) 
§ 7-1-22 - HORSES, MULES AND OTHER PACK ANIMALS. 
    No person may bring a horse, mule or other pack animal into a park or preserve except on designated bridle trails or paths, equestrian areas, or other areas designated by the City Manager or his designee. If horses, mules or other pack animals are permitted in any area, they shall be properly restrained, under control and ridden in a safe manner. No horses, mules, or other pack animals shall be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any fixed object other than a designated hitching rail. This section shall not apply to a Law Enforcement Officer or person acting at the direction of a Law Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. 553, N.S. , passed 4-28-2015) 
§ 7-1-23 - PROHIBITION OF WHEELED DEVICES IN PUBLIC PLACES. 
    No person shall operate a skateboard, conventional or in-line roller skates, bicycle, wagon, or other wheeled vehicle or device in a public park, public right-of-way or public facility where one or more signs are posted prohibiting such activity, or in a manner which causes injury to any person or damage to public or private property. 
(Ord. 554, N.S. , passed 5-12-2015) 
ARTICLE 7-2: - GRAFFITI 

§ 7-2-1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for abatement of graffiti from public and private property to reduce blight and deterioration within the city, protect public safety, and to expedite removal of graffiti from structures on both public and private property. 
(B)  The City Council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The increase of graffiti on both public and private property, is creating a condition within the city which results in blight and deterioration of property values and of the comfortable enjoyment of life and property for adjacent and surrounding residents and owners, and contributes to the overall detriment of the city. 
(2)  Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to public safety which must be abated to alleviate the detrimental impact of graffiti on the city, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. 
(3)  Certain categories of graffiti which incite violence, are especially harmful and must be removed as quickly as possible to avoid or minimize harm to persons and the whole community. 
(Ord. 351, N.S., passed 6-27-1996) 
§ 7-2-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
    BROAD TIP MARKER. Any marker or similar implement which has a writing surface which is one-half of an inch or greater. 
    GRAFFITI. A drawing or inscribing a message, slogan, sign or symbol or mark of any type that is made on any public or private building, structure or surface and that is made without permission of the owner. 
    GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. An aerosol paint container, broad tip marker, paint stick, graffiti stick or bleeder. 
    PAINT STICK , GRAFFITI STICK or BLEEDER. An implement containing paint, wax, epoxy or other similar substance. 
    RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee or other person having the right to control the property. 
(Ord. 351, N.S., passed 6-27-1996) 
§ 7-2-3 - POSSESSION/PRODUCTION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS AND GRAFFITI PROHIBITED. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly possess any graffiti implement with the intent to use the implement for the purpose of committing criminal damage. 
(B)  No person may place graffiti on any public or private building or other real or personal property. 
(C)  Violation of this section by an adult is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a term of not less than 48 hours in jail and not less than 80 hours of community service. Violation of this section by a juvenile is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable as provided for in A.R.S. Title 8. 
(Ord. 351, N.S., passed 6-27-1996) 
§ 7-2-4 - LIMITING ACCESS TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS. 
(A)  No person other than a parent or legal guardian shall sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(B)  (1) Evidence that a person, his or her employee or agent demanded and was shown acceptable evidence of majority and acted upon the evidence in a transaction or sale is a defense to any prosecution under this section. 
(2)  This section does not apply to the transfer of graffiti implements from parent to child, guardian to ward, employer to employee, teacher to student or in any other similar relationship when the transfer is for a lawful purpose. 
(C)  Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a term of not less than 48 hours in jail and not less than 80 hours of community service. 
(Ord. 351, N.S., passed 6-27-1996) 
§ 7-2-5 - STORAGE AND DISPLAY OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS. 
(A)  No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a business, where aerosol paint containers or broad tip markers are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for sale aerosol paint containers or broad tipped markers, shall store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, the aerosol spray paint containers and broad tip markers in an area that is accessible to the public without employee assistance in the regular course of business pending legal sale or other disposition. 
(B)  Nothing herein shall preclude the storage or display of aerosol paint containers and broad tip markers in an area viewable by the public so long as the items are not accessible to the public without employee assistance. 
(C)  Violation of this section is a civil offense, subject to a fine of not less than $500. 
(Ord. 351, N.S., passed 6-27-1996) 
§ 7-2-6 - GRAFFITI PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL. 
(A)  Graffiti prohibited. All sidewalks, walls, buildings, fences, signs and other structures or surfaces shall be kept free from graffiti when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(B)  Notice of violation. If it is determined by the city that graffiti exists on property in violation of this section, the city shall, in writing, notify the responsible party with a notice of violation. The notice shall provide a maximum of ten business days to abate the graffiti. The notice may be served by certified mail, personal service or by posting the subject property and publishing the notice in the official city paper. 
(C)  Contents of notice of violation. The notice of violation shall identify the property in violation and shall generally describe the location of the graffiti, and shall direct that the graffiti be abated within ten business days of receipt of the notice. The notice shall state that, in the event the responsible party fails to abate the graffiti within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the city shall abate the graffiti and may bill the responsible party for the costs. The notice shall state that the responsible party may appeal the notice by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within the same time period given to abate the graffiti. 
(D)  City's authority to abate. If the responsible party fails to abate the graffiti as required by the notice of violation, the city may proceed to abate the graffiti and may bill the responsible party for the costs thereof. The city or its authorized private contractor is expressly authorized to enter private property and abate graffiti thereon in accordance with this section. The City Police Department shall assist in the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. 351, N.S., passed 6-27-1996) 
§ 7-2-7 - PENALTIES. 
    A magistrate or judge shall not suspend any part or all of the imposition of community service required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 351, N.S., passed 6-27-1996) 
ARTICLE 7-3: - LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PARKS 

§ 7-3-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    PUBLIC PARK. A park, parkway, trail, recreational area, playground or open space area established, maintained or administered by the city. 
    SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. Alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer, any malt liquor, malt beverage, absinthe or compound or mixture of any of them, or of any of them with any vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing alcohol and any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which produces intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits and beverages containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume. 
§ 7-3-2 - LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PARKS PROHIBITED. 
    It is unlawful for any person to consume or have in his or her possession any spirituous liquor in a public park unless the person shall have obtained a permit from the city authorizing them to possess or consume spirituous liquors in public parks or are members of a group or organization which has obtained a permit. 
§ 7-3-3 - PERMIT FOR LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PARKS. 
    The city is empowered to issue permits authorizing the consumption and possession of spirituous liquors in public parks and to adopt rules and procedures for the issuance of the permits. 
§ 7-3-4 - PERMIT APPLICATION. 
    Application for a permit shall be submitted to the city, with a $2 per group fee, at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of the activity involving the consumption of spirituous liquors. 
§ 7-3-5 - CLEAN UP. 
    All permits issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to the applicant cleaning up the park area which they used immediately after the event. The city may require a reasonable deposit to insure clean up and appropriate conduct. 
§ 7-3-6 - GLASS CONTAINERS. 
    No glass beverage containers of any type, whether used for liquor or for soft drinks, shall be permitted in any city parks. 
ARTICLE 7-4: - WEAPONS 

§ 7-4-1 - POSSESSION OF FIREARMS BY MINORS. 
(A)  It is unlawful for a minor who is unaccompanied by a parent, grandparent or guardian or a certified hunter safety instructor or certified firearms safety instructor acting with the consent of the minor's parent, grandparent or guardian from knowingly possessing or carrying on the minor's person, within the minor's immediate control or in or on a means of transportation a firearm in any place that is open to the public or on any street or highway or on any private property except private property that is owned or leased by the minor or the minor's parent, grandparent or guardian. 
(B)  This prohibition shall not apply to a minor who is 14, 15, 16 or 17 years of age and who is engaged in any of the following: 
(1)  Lawful hunting or shooting events or marksmanship practice at established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited; 
(2)  Lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm for the purpose of lawful hunting; 
(3)  Lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for the purpose of shooting events or marksmanship practice at established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited; and 
(4)  Any activity that is related to the production of crops, livestock, poultry, livestock products, poultry products or ratite or storage of agricultural commodities. 
§ 7-4-2 - EMPLOYEES AND INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS. 
    It is unlawful for any city employee or independent contractor retained by the city to posses a firearm while acting within the course and scope of their employment or contract. This prohibition shall not apply to law enforcement officers or animal control enforcement agents. 
§ 7-4-3 - POSSESSION OF FIREARMS IN PARKS. 
(A)  Parks and preserves of one square mile or less. It is unlawful for any person to possess a firearm in any city park or preserve that is one square mile or less in area, unless the person holds a valid concealed weapons permit issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112 and amendments thereto. A notice shall be posted at each park or preserve, which notice shall state as follows: 
"Carrying a firearm in this park is limited to persons who possess a permit issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112." 
(B)  Parks and preserves that are more than one square mile in area. It is unlawful for any person to possess a firearm in any designated developed or improved area of a city park or preserve that is more than one square mile in area, unless the person holds a valid concealed weapons permit issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112 and amendments thereto. A notice shall be posted at each designated developed or improved area, which notice shall state as follows: 
"Carrying a firearm in this developed or improved area is limited to persons who possess a permit issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112." 
(C)  Definition of "developed or improved area." 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, DEVELOPED OR IMPROVED AREA means an area of property developed for public recreation or family activity, including picnic areas, concessions, playgrounds, amphitheaters, racquet courts, swimming areas, golf courses, zoos, horseback riding facilities and boat landing and docking facilities. 
(2)  DEVELOPED OR IMPROVED AREA does not include campgrounds, trails, paths or roadways except trails, paths and roadways directly associated with and adjacent to designated developed or improved areas. 
(D)  Notice. Any notice that is required by this section shall be conspicuously posted at all public entrances and at intervals of one-fourth mile or less where the park, preserve or developed or improved area has an open perimeter. 
(E)  Exceptions. Any limitation imposed pursuant to this section shall not apply to a person: 
(1)  Engaged in a permitted firearms or hunter safety course conducted in a park by a certified hunter safety instructor or certified firearms safety instructor; 
(2)  At a properly supervised range, as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3107, and amendments thereto, at a permitted shooting event, at a permitted firearms show or in a permitted hunting area; 
(3)  Legally transporting, carrying, storing or possessing a firearm in a vehicle; 
(4)  Going directly to or from an area where the person is lawfully engaged in hunting, marksmanship practice or recreational shooting; 
(5)  Traversing a trail head area in order to gain access to areas where the possession of firearms is not limited; and/or 
(6)  Using trails, paths or roadways to go directly to or from an area where the possession of firearms is not limited and where no reasonable alternate means of access is available. 
§ 7-4-4 - DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS IN PARKS AND PRESERVES. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in a city park or preserve except: 
(A)  As allowed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 4, and amendments thereto; 
(B)  On a properly supervised range, as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3107 and amendments thereto; 
(C)  In an area recommended as a hunting area by the Arizona Game and Fish Department and approved and posted as required by Chief of Police. Any area may be closed when deemed unsafe by the Chief of Police or the Director of the Arizona Game and Fish Department; 
(D)  To control nuisance wildlife by permit from the Arizona Game and Fish Department or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; 
(E)  By special permit of the Chief of Police; 
(F)  As required by an animal control enforcement agent in performing duties specified in Chapter 9 of this code; and 
(G)  In self-defense or defense of another person against an animal attack if a reasonable person would believe that deadly physical force against the animal is immediately necessary and reasonable under the circumstances to protect oneself or the other person. 
§ 7-4-5 - VIOLATIONS. 
    Violations of any provision of this article are a class 2 misdemeanor subject to the penalties prescribed in § 1-1-8 of this code. 
CHAPTER 8: - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE 8-1: - REFUSE COLLECTION; GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL 
IN GENERAL 

§ 8-1-1 - PURPOSE AND SCOPE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(A)  Protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city; 
(B)  Protect the environment by establishing minimum standards for the safe and sanitary collection, storage, treatment, transportation, processing and disposal of refuse and recyclables generated within the city; and 
(C)  Establish fees for the city's refuse, green waste and recycling program, inspection, collection and disposal services to recover the city's costs to provide the services. 
(Am. Ord. 500, N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
§ 8-1-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    ALLEY. A public passageway affording a secondary means of access to abutting property for utility and emergency vehicles. 
    ANIMAL WASTE. All waste from household pets, stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken coops, veterinary establishments and other waste of a similar nature. 
    ASHES. All residue from the burning of any combustible material, specifically excluding ashes from medical waste or hazardous waste. 
    AUTOMATED COLLECTION PROGRAM. The city's automated refuse collection program, automated recycling program and/or automated green waste collection program. 
    AUTOMOTIVE PARTS. Any part or combination of parts of any kind of motor vehicle, including but not limited to tires, batteries, seats, engines, fuel tanks, doors, auto glass and upholstery. 
    AUTHORIZED REFUSE COLLECTOR. The city or any contractor operating within the city under a valid refuse service permit. 
    BUILDING MATERIALS. All garbage, trash, debris, rubble, soil and excess materials from any construction, demolition, repair or remodeling operations, whether on private, public, residential or commercial premises, whether to the primary structure or any other structure, and whether produced by the work or at the direction of the property owner, contractor, subcontractor, agent, or any other party. 
    BULK TRASH. Residential refuse and yard waste produced by city residents on or in their residential premises within the city, that has been properly prepared for collection by the city's residential bulk trash collection program, if any. BULK TRASH shall specifically exclude building materials, commercial refuse, contaminated material, hazardous material, household food waste, cement/concrete, dirt or landscape material and medical waste. 
    BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any public or private place, building or enterprise utilized for the conduct of business or industry, including non-profit organizations, schools and multiple dwelling units and specifically excluding single family residential units and duplexes. 
    CHAPTER. Article 8-1 of the Tolleson City Code, as amended. 
    COMMERCIAL REFUSE. Any refuse produced by the operation of or as a byproduct of any business, without regard to whether the business is licensed in the city, or whether the business activity is conducted in a public business, private residence, within the city, or any other location. 
    CONTAMINATED MATERIALS. Any materials which, when prepared for one of the acceptable forms of collection described in this chapter, contain materials which are not acceptable under that particular form of collection. 
    CONTRACTOR. Any person or entity other than the city, who removes, collects, hauls, or transports within the city any refuse of another person or entity, including recyclable materials, hazardous materials, or medical waste, or any other types of waste, for disposal, salvage, recycling or any other purpose. 
    DIRECTOR. The Director of the Field Operations Department or the Director's authorized designee, as applicable. 
    GARBAGE. All putrescible materials, except sewage and body wastes, including all organic wastes that have been prepared for or intended to be used as food or have resulted from the preparation of food, including all substances from all public and private establishments and residences. 
    GREEN WASTE. Yard waste and other refuse produced as the result of typical residential or commercial yard installation and maintenance, including all brush, tree trimmings, grass, leaves or similar landscaping or plant material of an organic nature, but specifically excluding lumber, rigid pipe, dirt, rock, brick, cement and concrete. 
    HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the state to be hazardous, as that term is defined by or pursuant to federal or state law. HAZARDOUS MATERIAL includes but is not limited to medical wastes, herbicides, pesticides, explosives, and radioactive, toxic, flammable or corrosive materials. 
    LITTER. All garbage, trash and debris not properly prepared for collection under this code. 
    MEDICAL WASTE. Materials defined as medical waste by A.R.S. § 49-701. 
    MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS. Properties with three or more dwelling units on one parcel of property, specifically excluding duplexes, and specifically including triplexes, apartments, condominiums, town homes, mobile home parks, trailer parks, rooming houses and boarding houses. 
    PRIVATE PREMISES. Any land and/or structure owned by any person(s) other than the United States, a state, a county, the city, or any political subdivision of the United States. 
    PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all public streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    PUTRESCIBLE MATERIALS. Solid waste which is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances from odors or gases and capable of providing food for or attracting birds, insects, snakes, rodents or animals capable of transferring a diseased bacterium or virus from one organism to another. 
    RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Refuse that has been set aside or separated from other refuse for the purpose of being collected and recycled, and which is, at the Director's discretion, acceptable recyclable material. ACCEPTABLE RECYCLABLE MATERIAL may include the following materials if clean and dry: paper, cardboard, chipboard, plastic containers made from polyethylene terephthalate ("PETE") or high density polyethylene ("HDPE"), steel food cans, aluminum cans, disposable aluminum bake ware and aluminum foil. ACCEPTABLE RECYCLABLE MATERIAL shall specifically exclude: 
(1)  Garbage, hazardous materials and medical waste; 
(2)  Plastic bags, film or sheeting; 
(3)  Any plastic not made from PETE or HDPE; 
(4)  Any organic material other than acceptable paper, newsprint, cardboard and chipboard; 
(5)  Contaminated materials; 
(6)  Any foam products; 
(7)  Any type of automotive parts; and 
(8)  Any other trash which, at the Director's discretion, is deemed unacceptable. 
    RECYCLING CONTAINER. A container owned by the city for use as part of the city's recycling program, if any. 
    REFUSE. Garbage and trash acceptable for collection and placed in city-issued containers under the provisions of this code, including recyclable materials. 
    REFUSE CONTAINER. A container owned by the city and made available for use as part of the city's automated refuse collection program. 
    REFUSE SERVICE PERMIT. A permit issued to a contractor under the provisions of this code. 
    RESIDENTIAL REFUSE. Household garbage and trash produced by city residents on or in their residential premises within the city, specifically excluding: 
(1)  Building materials, whether from construction, demolition, repair or remodeling, whether on or off the residential premises, and whether to the primary residential structure or any other structures; 
(2)  Commercial refuse, whether produced at the residence or at any other location; 
(3)  Hazardous materials; 
(4)  Medical waste; 
(5)  Car parts or metal waste; and 
(6)  Landscape waste such as but not limited to soil, rocks, cement or concrete. 
    SOLID WASTE INSPECTOR. Any police officer, code enforcement officer, or other city employee with written authorization from the Director to inspect public and private properties, to issue citations and to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    TRASH. All nonputrescible solid waste, including both combustible and noncombustible solid waste material, excluding ashes, hazardous waste and medical waste. 
    WHITE GOODS. Appliances acceptable for collection under the city's white goods collection program, if any. WHITE GOODS shall include ovens, stoves, washers, dryers and water heaters, and shall specifically exclude smaller household appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners and electronic equipment. 
    YARDWASTE. Refuse produced as the result of typical residential or commercial yard installation and maintenance, including grass, brush and tree trimmings, but specifically excluding lumber, rigid pipe, dirt, rock, brick, cement and concrete. 
(Am. Ord. 500, N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
§ 8-1-3 - COLLECTION AGENCY. 
    The city, or other authorized refuse collector, shall collect, remove, salvage, transport and dispose of all refuse within the city. 
§ 8-1-4 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
    The Director shall make the schedules, rules and regulations concerning the collection, disposal and hauling of refuse, recyclable materials and other wastes by any party; or relating to the operation of any transfer station, disposal site, recycling or waste reduction program or other similar activities or facilities. Copies of the rules and regulations shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk and in the office of the Director. The rules and regulations shall be made available to the public upon request. 
§ 8-1-5 - USE OF SERVICE REQUIRED. 
    No person or business establishment within the city shall be permitted to avoid or refuse to accept refuse collection service, and the failure of any party to accept the service shall not exempt that party from the payment of the charges for the service. 
(A)  Substitution of service. In the event that the Director determines that the city is unable to reasonably and safely provide collection services to certain residents, establishments or areas, the Director may substitute another means of collection or require the person to seek service from another source. Any person providing the service shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Producers conditionally exempt. This chapter shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse has accumulated, from personally salvaging, collecting, conveying and disposing of the refuse without a permit, provided the producers or owners comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any governing law or ordinance. 
(C)  Contractors conditionally exempt. Every person engaging in the business of contracting, except refuse collection, is authorized to personally collect, remove and appropriately dispose of wastes incidental to the contracting business without a permit. 
§ 8-1-6 - TYPES OF SERVICE. 
(A)  Single family residences. The city shall provide weekly automated residential refuse, residential green waste and residential recyclable materials collection services to single-family residences. Each residence receiving service under this division shall be provided containers for individual use and curbside collection. Additionally, the residents may request additional collections and/or containers, subject to the discretion of the Director. Any bulk trash services shall be provided as determined by the Director. 
(B)  Duplexes. The city shall provide weekly automated residential refuse, residential green waste and residential recyclable materials collection services to duplex residences. Each residence receiving automated collection services under this division shall be considered a single unit for the purposes of this chapter, and shall be provided containers for individual use and curbside collection. Any bulk trash services shall be provided as determined by the Director. 
(C)  Multiple dwelling units. An authorized refuse collector shall provide commercial refuse collection service to multiple dwelling units with three or more dwelling units on one parcel of property, unless otherwise permitted by the Director. 
(D)  Business establishments. An authorized refuse collector shall provide commercial refuse collection service to business establishments as required by state, county and city regulations. If the business establishment is serviced by an authorized refuse collector other than the city, the service schedule shall be set by the contractor and customer subject to approval by the Director. 
(E)  Miscellaneous services. The city may provide additional or variant services, including, but not limited to residential bulk trash and white goods collection, for a reasonable fee, as shall be determined by the Director. 
(Am. Ord. 500, N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
§ 8-1-7 - COLLECTION HOURS. 
    The hours of refuse collection shall be as designated by the Director. 
§ 8-1-8 - FEES. 
    Fees for city's automated refuse, green waste and recyclable materials collection services shall be established by the City Council as part of the annual budget process or as otherwise adopted by City Council resolution. 
(A)  Collection. Fees for city's automated refuse, green waste and recyclable materials collection services shall be collected monthly and charged against the occupant or owner of each premises within the city after the time that the occupant or owner requests collection service from the city. The city shall be authorized to collect fees and fines in the following manner. 
(1)  Water service provided by city. On all premises where water service is provided by the city, fees for the city's automated refuse, green waste and recyclable materials collection services and associated fines shall be added to and collected as a part of the city water bill, and the sum shall become delinquent upon the same date as the water bill. If the balance is not paid when due, the water service to the premises may be shut off and the service shall not be restored without payment in full. 
(2)  Water service not provided by city. On all premises where water service is not provided by the city, fees for the city's automated refuse, green waste and recyclable materials collection services and associated fines shall be paid to the City Water Department in the manner provided for the payment of water bills. 
(B)  Penalty for late payment. A delinquent bill shall be subject to a penalty equal to one and one- half percent per month on any outstanding unpaid balance. 
(C)  Lien for unpaid charges. Any charges imposed by the city pursuant to this article, if not paid by the date on which they are due, shall constitute a lien on the property, lot or tract of land to which service was rendered. 
(1)  Notice of lien. Upon delinquency, the city shall give notice to the user and the owner, if known, of the property, which notice shall indicate that the city will record a lien against the subject property unless all past due charges are paid. 
(2)  Costs added; lien recorded. If delinquent charges are not paid within 30 days of notice, the city shall record in the office of the Maricopa County Recorder a notice and claim of lien. The city shall then promptly send by certified mail, a copy to the user, and the owner if known at their last known mailing address. The notice and claim of lien shall contain the following: 
(a)  A description of the property sufficient for identification; 
(b)  The name of the utility user and recorded owner of the property if known; and 
(c)  The amount owed. At the time as the lien is recorded, the cost of preparing, processing and releasing the lien shall be added to the amount then due. 
(3)  Effect of lien. From and after the date of its recording in the office of the County Recorder, the lien shall attach to the property until paid. A sale of the property to satisfy the lien shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The city shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the lien in the Superior Court at any time after its recording, but failure to enforce the lien by the action shall not affect its validity. The recorded notice and claim of lien shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein and the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof. 
(4)  Prior recording no bar to lien. A prior recording for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar to the subsequent recording of a lien for the purposes, and any number of the liens on the same property may be enforced and in the same action. 
(5)  No lien if account in tenant's name. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, no lien shall be recorded against any single-family residence which is occupied by a tenant in whose name the account has been established. 
(D)  Collection by civil suit. Delinquent charges may also be collected by a civil suit instituted at the request of the City Manager at any time after the charges become delinquent, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary. The remedies provided by this article shall be cumulative and supplemental to other remedies provided under this chapter. 
(Am. Ord. 500 N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
§ 8-1-9 - CONTAINERS. 
    All materials prepared for collection shall be stored in a city-approved container until removed by the city or an authorized refuse collector, unless those materials are properly prepared for the city's bulk trash collection service, if any. 
(A)  City ownership of city-provided containers. The city may furnish refuse and recyclable containers for the accumulation, storage and collection of refuse. All the containers are owned by the city, and the city may remove or replace the container without notice to the user. 
(B)  Users responsible for maintenance and proper use. Any user of a city-provided container shall be required to use and maintain the container as follows: 
(1)  Cleaning. The user shall be responsible for keeping the container reasonably clean. This means that the user shall maintain the container free of intense odors, evidence of flies in any stage of development, and any other nuisance or threat to public health. 
(2)  Reporting damage or loss. The user shall be responsible for reporting any container damage or loss to the city. 
(3)  Proper and safe use. The user shall not damage the container intentionally, or use the container for any purpose other than those specified in this code. The user shall not use the container in any manner which is unsafe, or which a reasonably prudent person would believe is unsafe. 
(4)  Should a resident or user move then the container is to remain with the property. At no time shall the container be removed if the resident/user moves. 
(C)  Unauthorized use. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, any refuse in any container which that person is not entitled to use as a property owner, resident or tenant. 
COLLECTION 

§ 8-1-20 - ACCEPTABLE MATERIALS. 
    Only properly prepared materials shall be acceptable for collection under this chapter. 
§ 8-1-21 - UNACCEPTABLE MATERIALS. 
    Unacceptable materials will not be collected under this article, may subject the producer to a fine under this chapter, and may be removed by the city at the producer's expense as set forth in this chapter. 
(A)  Prohibited materials. The following materials are unacceptable for collection under any collection program described in this chapter: 
(1)  Improperly prepared materials. No material which would be acceptable if properly prepared for collection shall be acceptable if not properly prepared for collection. Improperly prepared for collection shall include otherwise acceptable materials which are set out for collection at the wrong time or in the wrong place. 
(2)  Tires and other automotive parts. No tires or other auto parts shall be acceptable. Automotive parts includes any part or combination of parts of any kind of motor vehicle, including but not limited to tires, batteries, seats, engines, fuel tanks, doors, auto glass and upholstery. 
(3)  Dirt, rock, masonry, and the like. No waste soil, sod, dirt, rocks, gravel, cement, concrete, masonry blocks, bricks, tile or any other similar materials shall be acceptable. 
(4)  Gardening and landscape business waste. No landscapers, tree trimmers, lawn maintenance businesses or similar operators may dispose of yardwaste or any other refuse in refuse containers unless the waste is generated solely from the grounds of the property and the property owner or manager has approved the disposal. 
(5)  Fire hazards. No hot ashes, hot cinders, burning matter, loose sawdust, flammable or volatile liquids, or any other material which presents a fire hazard shall be acceptable. 
(6)  Hazardous material. Hazardous material such as but not limited to fluorescent bulbs. 
(7)  Medical waste. Medical waste. 
(8)  Contaminated materials. Contaminated material. 
(9)  Building material. Building materials such as but not limited to roofing material. 
(10)  Paint, varnish and the like. Paint, varnish or any other liquid item. 
(B)  Special prohibitions for residential collections. Commercial refuse shall be unacceptable for collection under any of the city's residential collection programs. Residences receiving collection under any of the city's collection programs are limited to one inversion of the container being serviced, per collection day. 
§ 8-1-22 - AUTOMATED RESIDENTIAL REFUSE COLLECTION. 
(A)  Generally. All materials prepared for the city's automated residential refuse collection program shall be prepared for collection and disposed of in accordance with this section. 
(B)  Proper preparation for collection. All residential refuse prepared for collection by the city's automated residential refuse collection program shall be prepared for collection as follows. 
(1)  Placement. Containers set out for collection must be placed in the street in front of the house to which they are assigned, with the wheels adjacent to the curb of the sidewalk, and the lid opening toward the street. Where there is no sidewalk, the container must be placed at the edge of the street, within two feet of the pavement or improved road, as applicable. Containers will not be collected from private property, or when placed within ten feet of a vehicle, mailbox or other obstruction to safely perform collection as determined by the Director. At no time may containers be left on the sidewalk. Containers must also be pulled back onto property the same day that collection occurs. 
(2)  Time. Containers must be placed in the proper location for collection by 5:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. Containers set out late will not be serviced. Containers may be set out after 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding collection and must be removed from the collection location by sunset on the same day of collection. 
(3)  Lid must be closed. The lids of containers set out for residential refuse collection must be entirely closed. 
(4)  Refuse must be bagged. All refuse prepared for residential refuse collection must be bagged and securely tied to exclude flies and other pests. Spillage during collection of unbagged refuse will be the responsibility of the resident. 
(5)  Weight limit. The contents of the container must weigh no more than 250 pounds. 
(6)  Container contents. The contents of the container must be arranged so that they fall out easily when inverted by authorized collection vehicles. The city shall not be required to remove any materials which remain in the container after one inversion. 
(7)  One dump. Only one dump per customer for each of the scheduled collections. 
§ 8-1-23 - AUTOMATED RESIDENTIAL GREEN WASTE COLLECTION. 
(A)  Generally . All materials prepared for the city's automated residential green waste collection program ("Green Collection") shall be prepared for collection and disposed of in accordance with this section. 
(B)  Proper preparation for collection. All residential green waste prepared for collection by the city's automated residential green waste collection program shall be prepared for collection as follows. 
(1)  Placement . Containers set out for automated residential green waste collection service must be placed in the street in front of the house to which they are assigned, with the wheels adjacent to the curb of the sidewalk, and the lid opening toward the street. Where there is no sidewalk, the container must be placed at the edge of the street, within two feet of the pavement or improved road, as applicable. Containers will not be collected from private property, or when placed within ten feet of a vehicle, mailbox or other obstruction to safely perform collection as determined by the Director. At no time may containers be left on the sidewalk. Containers must also be pulled back onto property the same day that collection occurs. 
(2)  Time . Containers must be placed in the proper location for collection by 5:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. Containers set out late will not be serviced. Containers may be set out after 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding collection and must be removed from the collection location by sunset on the same day of collection. 
(3)  Lid must be closed . The lids of containers set out for automated residential green waste collection must be entirely closed. 
(4)  Green waste must be bagged. All green waste prepared for automated residential green waste collection, except for tree limbs and brush longer than one foot in length, must be bagged and securely tied to exclude flies and other pests. Spillage during collection of unbagged green waste will be the responsibility of the resident. 
(5)  Weight limit . The contents of the container must weigh no more than 250 pounds. 
(6)  Container contents . The contents of the container must be arranged so that they fall out easily when inverted by authorized collection vehicles. The city shall not be required to remove any materials which remain in the container after one inversion. 
(7)  One dump. Only one dump per customer for each of the scheduled collections. 
(Ord. 500, N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
§ 8-1-24 - AUTOMATED RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING COLLECTION. 
(A)  Generally. All materials prepared for the city's automated residential recycling collection program shall be prepared for collection and disposed of in accordance with this section. 
(B)  Proper preparation for collection. All residential recyclable materials prepared for collection by the city's automated residential recycling collection program shall be prepared for collection or disposal as follows: 
(1)  Placement. Containers set out for collection under this section must be placed in the same location and manner as described for the placement of containers set out for automated residential refuse collection. 
(2)  Time. Containers must be placed in the proper location for collection by 5:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. Containers set out late will not be serviced. Containers may be set out after 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding collection and must be removed from the collection location by sunset on the same day of collection. 
(3)  Lid must be closed. The lids of containers set out for residential recycling collection must be entirely closed. 
(4)  Recyclable materials must not be bagged. Recyclable materials must not be bagged and must be placed in the container in a manner that they separate under the normal operating procedures of the applicable materials recovery facility. 
(5)  Weight limit. The contents of the container must weigh no more than 250 pounds. 
(6)  Free from obstructions. The contents of the container must be arranged so that they fall out easily when inverted by authorized collection vehicles. The city shall not be required to remove any materials which remain in the container after inversion for collection. Cardboard must be cut down in a manner where it allows for material to flow out of the container. 
(7)  No contamination. Only recyclable materials shall be collected by the city's residential recycling collection program. 
(Am. Ord. 500, N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
§ 8-1-25 - RESIDENTIAL BULK TRASH COLLECTION. 
(A)  Generally. All materials prepared for the city's residential bulk trash collection program, if a program exists, shall be prepared for collection and disposed of in accordance with this section. 
(B)  Proper preparation for collection. All residential bulk trash materials prepared for collection by the city's residential bulk trash collection program shall be prepared for collection or disposal as follows. 
(1)  Placement. Materials set out for bulk trash collection must be placed in the street in front of the producer's property. At no time may bulk trash be left on the sidewalk, if any. Other than as described in this section, materials will not be collected from private property, or when placed within ten feet of a vehicle, mailbox or other obstruction to safe collection as determined by the Director. 
(2)  Time. Materials set out for collection under this section must be placed in the proper location for collection no later than 5:00 a.m. on the first day of the designated collection period. Materials set out late will not be collected. Materials may be set out no more than 48 hours before the first day of the designated collection period. 
(3)  Frequency. Frequency of shall be determined by Council, City Manager or Director. Once city staff has completed a particular area they will not return until the next scheduled collection period for that area. 
(4)  White goods. If white goods collection service is provided by the city, the doors on the goods must be removed or secured. White goods which may contain refrigerant, such as refrigerators and air conditioners, shall not be acceptable for collection under this section. Disposal is the responsibility of the resident. 
(5)  Yardwaste. Yardwaste must be properly prepared for collection as follows: 
(a)  Grass, leaves and the like. Any small, light yardwaste such as grass and leaves must be secured in bags or boxes in a manner so as to prevent litter. 
(b)  Brush, limbs, trunks and the like. Long items, such as tree limbs, trunks and the like, must be free of metal such as stakes, staples and wire, and must be stacked roughly parallel to the street. Other than palm fronds, each piece must be no more than four feet in length, no more than six inches in diameter, and weigh no more than 50 pounds. 
(c)  Palm fronds. Palm fronds may exceed four feet in length, and must be neatly stacked, roughly parallel to the street. 
(d)  Cactus and the like. Cactus and other thorned plants must be set out for collection in cardboard boxes or other sturdy containers which are sufficiently strong to protect the public and work crews from injury. 
(6)  Weight and volume limits. Any bag, box or other container set out for collection under this section, together with its contents, shall weigh no more than 50 pounds and have a volume of no more than 20 gallons. The volume of all materials set out for collection from a residence for any one collection period shall not exceed three cubic yards, excluding acceptable white goods. At the Director's discretion, the city may remove materials in excess of the limits described in this section. 
(7)  Free from hidden hazards. Any materials set out for collection must be clearly visible and identifiable. No materials shall be commingled in a way that presents a safety hazard to the public or work crews. Any glass must be set out for collection in cardboard boxes or other sturdy containers which are sufficiently strong to protect the public and work crews from injury. 
(8)  Box or container will be removed. Any box or container placed out for collection under this section will be removed as part of the uncontained material. Any containers of glass, cactus or other sharp material must not be covered by any other material. 
(Am. Ord. 500, N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
§ 8-1-26 - COMMERCIAL REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE. 
(A)  Generally. All commercial refuse prepared for commercial refuse collection shall be prepared in accordance with this section. This section shall apply to all business establishments serviced within the City of Tolleson, whether serviced by the city or any other authorized refuse collector. Business establishments shall be required to contract with an authorized refuse collector to dispose of all trash produced onsite. 
(B)  Proper preparation for collection. All commercial refuse shall be prepared for collection or disposal as follows. 
(1)  Placement. Containers set out for collection in a manner which poses a safety hazard is prohibited and the containers shall not be serviced. The placement of commercial refuse containers shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic and shall be reachable by the automated collection vehicles without danger to persons or property. If the commercial refuse is to be collected by the city, the placement of commercial refuse containers shall be at a location designated by the Director or authorized designee. 
(2)  Time. Commercial refuse bins must be accessible from the proper location for collection by 5:00 a.m. on the designated collection day(s). 
(3)  Lid(s) must be closed. The lids of containers set out for commercial refuse collection must be entirely closed. Any spillage shall be the responsibility of the owner/manager to clean. 
(4)  Garbage and litter hazards must be bagged. All refuse prepared for commercial refuse collection must be bagged and securely tied to exclude flies and pests. 
(5)  Weight limit. If the business establishment is serviced by the city, the container, together with its contents, must weigh no more than 400 pounds per container. 
(6)  Container contents. The contents of the container must be arranged so that they fall out easily. Items that are found in the container that are on the listed in the unacceptable materials list will result in no service until the time as the business owner/manager returns the container to acceptable compliance. 
(Am. Ord. 500, N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
§ 8-1-27 - COMMERCIAL REFUSE COLLECTION PERMIT. 
    Any contractor, before providing any type of commercial refuse collection service within the city, shall first obtain a valid business license and refuse collection permit from the city. The permits must be renewed annually. 
(A)  Obtaining a refuse collection permit. Permits for collection of refuse or recycling from business establishments within the city may be issued by the city under the following conditions. 
(1)  Application. The contractor must submit a properly completed application for commercial refuse collection permit to the city. The contractor's application shall include the name, business address and telephone numbers of all owners, partners, general managers and the principal officer, as well as emergency telephone numbers, business references and any other information as deemed necessary. The application shall identify each vehicle(s) to be licensed for operation under the permit, and be amended as necessary any time the contractor's vehicle use changes. 
(2)  Approval of equipment and qualifications. The contractor is required to supply evidence satisfactory to the Director that the contractor possesses the necessary equipment and qualifications to collect, transport and dispose of commercial refuse or any other wastes in a manner satisfactory to the Director and in conformity with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws, rules and regulations. 
(3)  Vehicle requirements. All vehicles used for refuse collection, hauling or transporting within the city must be inspected at the time of initial permit application, and, at the time of each permit renewal, be approved by the city and meet the following requirements. 
(a)  All vehicles must be in good condition and may be subject to Maricopa County Vector Control inspections just as city refuse vehicles are required. 
(b)  Vehicles shall be maintained and operated in a clean and neat manner so as to prevent refuse from spilling, leaking and blowing from the vehicle. 
(c)  The outside of each vehicle must be clearly identified by a number unique to the vehicle in letters no smaller than six inches in height and the name and telephone number of the contractor operating the vehicle. 
(d)  Any open-top roll-off container must have a cover which prevents refuse or contents from spilling or flowing onto the roadway. 
(e)  When driven and operated by one person, front loading refuse packers used in the collection, transportation, disposal of refuse shall be equipped with an approved backup protection device. Audible backup alarms do not meet this requirement. 
(f)  No vehicle shall be painted or identified in a manner which may lead an ordinarily observant person to confuse the equipment with the city's sanitation division. 
(4)  Permit surety. Before issuing a permit under the provisions of this section, the city shall require the contractor, as a condition to the issuance of the permit, to post a cash performance surety in the amount of $5,000. This surety shall be conditioned upon the payment of any charges incurred by the city in correcting any failure by the contractor to perform in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. At the time that the contractor ceases to collect refuse or recyclables within the city, the contractor shall request a refund of the surety and, if appropriate pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the full amount of $5,000 will be refunded. 
(5)  Vehicle fee. Before issuing a permit under this section, the contractor shall pay a nonrefundable fee of $1,000 per vehicle used in the collection of refuse within the City of Tolleson. The vehicle fee is thereafter due annually. 
(6)  Certificate of insurance. 
(a)  The contractor obtains and maintains in full force and effect public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of: 
1.  One million dollars for personal injury or death to any one person; 
2.  One million dollars for personal injuries or death sustained by all persons in any one accident; and 
3.  Five hundred thousand dollars for property damage; arising from any single occurrence, arising from any error, omission or act, negligent or intentional, by the contractor or its employees or agents in collection, hauling and/or disposal activities within the city. 
(b)  The city shall be named as an additional insured. A certificate of insurance shall be furnished to the city at the time of permit application, and at any time when so requested by the city. The form and coverage shall be subject to city approval. 
(B)  Operations under permit. At all times, contractors operating under a commercial refuse collection permit shall display the permit through the front windshield of each vehicle providing service under the permit. 
(1)  Permit not transferable. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable. Permits shall be issued for one year commencing July 1 and ending June 30. Applications for renewal shall be made at least 60 days prior to expiration of current permit. Applicable fees may be prorated monthly on permits issued during the fiscal year. 
(2)  Allowances for charities. The vehicle fees, and/or surety requirements of this section may be waived by the Director for any charitable or philanthropic organization engaged in salvaging or recycling, provided that no part of the revenue from the operation insures to the personal benefit of any person. Charities shall be required to meet all other requirements of this section. 
(C)  Cause for revocation and suspension. The city may revoke or suspend a commercial refuse collection permit and claim the permit surety as follows. 
(1)  Failure to comply with permit requirements. The city may suspend or revoke a contractor's permit at any time the contractor is not in compliance with every requirement of permit approval under this chapter. 
(2)  Failure to give proper notice. The city may suspend a contractor's permit at any time the contractor fails to give notice of intent to commence or discontinue service, according to this division. Except in an emergency or other situation approved by the Director, the contractor shall provide the city with written notice of intent to service any business establishment at least 30 days before commencing service. The notice shall include the name and address of the establishment, number and size of refuse containers, roll-off bodies, or compactors, the intended days of collection, a copy of the contractor's valid commercial refuse collection permit, and a copy of the valid collection vehicle license for each vehicle to be used in service of that business establishment. The contractor shall provide the city and the business establishment with 30 days written notice before discontinuance of service. The Director may, at the Director's discretion, waive the time requirements of this division. 
(3)  Failure to comply with the law. The city may suspend or revoke any permit authorized or required by this chapter, whenever it is found that the holder of the permit, or user of the collection, recycling, or disposal services, commits a violation of the laws of the state, the county, this chapter, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, or fails to fully reimburse the city its costs associated with the remedying of any violation of any applicable health codes and ordinances of the city, county, state, and federal government. 
(D)  Suspension or revocation of permit. When a permit has been suspended under this chapter, the permit shall remain suspended until the time as the permit surety is fully reimbursed, all related outstanding fees and fines are received, and any application, notice, or permit required is received and approved by the Director. When a permit has been revoked under this chapter, the contractor shall pay all related outstanding fees and fines immediately, but shall not be required to reimburse the permit surety until the time as the contractor applies for reinstatement. 
(E)  Reinstatement. A contractor whose permit is revoked may not re-apply for a permit under this chapter for 36 months after the effective date of the revocation. 
(Ord. 500, N.S., passed 1-18-2011) 
ENFORCEMENT 

§ 8-1-40 - AUTHORITY. 
(A)  Authority to inspect. Prior to collection, the city shall have the right to inspect containers and their contents. Any solid waste inspector shall have the authority to perform inspections, report violations to the Director for enforcement and issue civil citations pursuant to this chapter. 
(B)  Authority to proceed civilly or criminally. The city may proceed civilly or criminally against a person, firm or corporation acting in violation of this code. Any solid waste inspector may issue a civil citation pursuant to this chapter. 
(C)  Authority to remove container. In addition to issuing a civil citation or pursuing a complaint for criminal sanctions, the city shall have the authority to remove city owned refuse and/or recycling containers from the property of users who fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(D)  Authority to abate. The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation of this chapter in order to terminate an existing or imminent public health hazard. The city may assess the costs of the abatement against the property of the person, firm or corporation acting in violation of this code in the form of a lien on the property. The abatement of violations of this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in the city's property maintenance code. 
§ 8-1-41 - VIOLATIONS. 
    Violations of this chapter include, but are not limited to: 
(A)  Failing to remove construction waste. It shall be unlawful for a generator of construction waste to fail to remove the construction waste from the premises within 5 days from the date on which it was placed upon the premises, or not later than the final building inspection, the clearance of public utilities, or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever comes first. 
(B)  Burning refuse, yardwaste, green waste and litter. No person shall burn refuse, yardwaste, green waste or litter unless expressly permitted by the Maricopa County Air Quality Department and with a valid Maricopa County Air Quality Department permit, if applicable. Any burning of refuse, yardwaste, green waste or litter must comply with the rules and regulations established by the Arizona Department of Health Services, Maricopa County Air Quality Department and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(C)  Interfering with collection. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with authorized collection of refuse in any way. 
(D)  Mishandling hazardous waste. No person, business, contractor or licensee shall knowingly collect, place or cause to be placed or collected any hazardous waste or similar materials from or in any container or from or upon any public or private property, except as specifically permitted by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
(E)  Failing to contain refuse in transit. No person shall collect, transport or receive any refuse or other wastes within or upon any public or private streets in the city, or anywhere in the city, except in leak proof containers or vehicles so constructed that no refuse or other wastes leak or sift through, fall out or be blown from the container or vehicle. Any person collecting or transporting any refuse or other wastes shall immediately pick up all refuse or waste which drops, spills, leaks or is blown from the collecting or transporting container or vehicle, and shall otherwise clean the place onto which any refuse or wastes were dropped, spilled, blown or leaked. 
(F)  Contaminating recyclable materials. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, in any recycling container, anything other than acceptable recyclable materials. 
(Am. Ord. 529, N.S., passed 10-23-2012; Am. Ord. 573 , N.S., passed 5-30-2017) 
§ 8-1-42 - PENALTY. 
    Unless specified otherwise, any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both a fine and imprisonment. 
§ 8-1-43 - CIVIL ENFORCEMENT ACTION; PENALTY FOR CONTAINED REFUSE AND UNCONTAINED REFUSE. 
    The civil penalty for a violation of this code shall be $250 per violation, and all penalties are subject to all surcharges and fees imposed by state law. The Court shall not suspend any portion of the civil penalty provided by this division. 
(A)  Civil citation. The civil citation shall direct the defendant to appear in Court within ten days of the issuance of the citation or pay the fine imposed pursuant to § 8-1-42 of this code. The citation shall also include the date and location of the violation, a reference to the city code provision or ordinance violated and a notice that if the defendant fails to appear as directed, a default judgment will be entered in the amount of the fine designated on the citation for the violation charged, in addition to a fine for failure to appear as set forth in division (C) below of this code. 
(B)  Citation service. Service of the citation may be accomplished and will be deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods: 
(1)  Hand delivering a copy of the citation to the defendant; 
(2)  Mailing a copy of the citation to the defendant by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the defendant's last known address; 
(3)  In the event service cannot be accomplished as set forth above, the defendant may be served by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure for the Superior Court. 
(C)  Appearance; penalty for failure to appear. Within ten days of the issuance of the citation, the defendant shall appear in person or through his or her attorney in Court and shall either admit or deny the allegations contained in the complaint or the defendant may proceed as provided in division (D) of this code. If the defendant admits the allegations, the Court shall immediately enter judgment against the defendant in the amount of the fine for the violation charged. If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the court shall set a hearing date for trial of the matter. If the defendant fails to appear as directed on the citation, the court, upon request by the code official or authorized designee, shall enter a default judgment for the amount of the fine indicated for the violation charged. Additionally, the defendant may be fined up to $100 for failure to appear at the time and place set for any trial of a matter arising under this code. 
(D)  Payment by mail. The defendant may admit the allegations in the citation and pay the fine indicated by mailing the citation, together with a check for the amount of the fine to and made payable to the Tolleson City Court. 
(E)  Rules of procedure. The Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be followed by the Tolleson City Court for civil violations of this code, except as modified or where inconsistent with the provisions of this code, local rules of the municipal court or rules of the Arizona Supreme Court. 
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING PROGRAMS 

§ 8-1-55 - COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. 
(A)  The collection of recyclable materials from residential properties by a person or contractor other than the city is prohibited. 
(B)  Under the residential sanitation service recycling program, the city will provide residential customers a second clearly identified recycling container in which to place specified residential recyclable materials. The recycling container will remain the property of the city. 
(C)  The specified residential recyclable materials are approved by City Council and may change from time to time after notification to all residential customers. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, in any recycling container, anything other than the approved specified recyclable materials. 
(D)  Residential customers participating in the residential sanitation service recycling program shall receive from the city once-per-week collection of residential recyclable materials placed into recycling containers, and once-per-week collection of nonrecyclable materials placed into refuse containers. The Administrator will designate specific collection days each week, including holidays. 
(E)  Residential recyclable materials placed inside a recycling container shall not be bagged or contained and should conform to all residential recycling program guidelines consistent with this article. 
(F)  Residential customers participating in the residential recycling program shall bag and securely tie their refuse and place it inside a refuse container. 
§ 8-1-56 - RECYCLING PROGRAM NONPARTICIPANTS. 
(A)  A nonparticipant shall not receive nor retain a recycling container, shall receive twice-per-week refuse collection, and an extra fee will be charged. The city will assess this fee on a monthly basis in addition to the regular monthly service fee. The entire regular monthly service fee which includes recycling program costs shall be paid by all residential customers whether participating in the recycling program or not. 
(B)  Residential customers not complying with this article will be notified in writing by the city of their status as nonparticipants. After a minimum of two notifications have been given explaining their lack of compliance with this article, the recycling container will be retrieved by the city. 
(1)  The city may make the notification based upon a determination that a violation of this article has occurred, including any of the following actions: 
(a)  Placing anything other than the specified residential recyclable materials into a recycling container; 
(b)  Placing dangerous or hazardous waste in a recycling container; and 
(c)  Depositing specified residential recyclable materials into a refuse container. 
(2)  The Administrator or designee may deliver twice-per-week collection to any residential customer, subject to the appropriate additional monthly service fee, if in the Administrator's judgment a health hazard exists. 
§ 8-1-57 - RE-ENTRY AS A PARTICIPANT. 
(A)  Residential customers determined by the city to be nonparticipants may notify the city that they desire to re-enter the residential sanitation service recycling program. The notification may occur no earlier than three months after being designated by the city as a nonparticipant. The Administrator may waive this three month period upon a determination that special circumstances exist and that it would be in the best interest of the city to allow re-entry sooner. 
(B)  The city also may designate a fee to recover costs associated with distributing recycling containers and information by city personnel to residents re-entering the recycling program. 
§ 8-1-58 - APPEAL PROCESS. 
    Any person who has been designated by the city as a nonparticipant may file, within seven calendar days after receipt of notice from the city of the designation, in the Administrator's office a written request for a hearing before the Administrator. The request shall contain the name and address of the person, together with a brief statement as to why the designation should be reversed. The decision of the Administrator is final. 
ARTICLE 8-2: - LITTER 

§ 8-2-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    LITTER. Any rubbish, trash, weeds, filth and debris which shall constitute a hazard to public health and safety and shall include all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste; any deposit, accumulation, pile or heap of brush, grass, debris, weeds, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish or other unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind whatsoever; and any growth of weeds, brush, grass or other vegetable growth to a height of over six inches. 
    PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibules belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
§ 8-2-2 - LITTER ON PRIVATE PREMISES. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the city, whether owned by the person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place. 
§ 8-2-3 - OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES. 
(A)  Generally. All land including exterior premises and vacant land, whether improved or unimproved, shall be maintained free from any accumulation of garbage or blight, which includes, but is not limited to, graffiti on walls, fences, mail boxes, and the like, accumulation of litter; rubbish, refuse, waste material, bottles, papers, glass, cans, organic or inorganic material; inoperable vehicles, discarded appliances; discarded furniture, broken glass, piles of mixed material (dry vegetation, rags, empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cages, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing straw, packing hay or other packing material, lumber not neatly piled (and if neatly piled in no event for more than 5 days), lumber stored in front yards, scrap iron, tin and other metal not neatly piled (and if neatly piled in no event for more than 5 days) or anything whatsoever in which insects, rodents, snakes or other harmful pests may live, breed or multiply or which may otherwise create a fire hazard. It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this article based on the presence of an inoperable vehicle that the vehicle was registered to a resident of the property, that the vehicle was undergoing repair, and that the total period during which the vehicle was inoperable did not exceed 15 days. This affirmative defense may not be raised more than three times in any combination of civil or criminal proceedings in any one calendar year. 
(B)  Sidewalks, streets and alleys. The owner and any responsible party in control of any land abutting a sidewalk, alley or street shall maintain the sidewalk, alley or street in the same manner as provided in division (A). The areas required to be maintained pursuant to this section are as follows: 
(1)  Any portion of a street, which has been opened for public use, between the curb line and the abutting property line including sidewalks and landscaped areas; 
(2)  One half of the width of abutting alleys, from the property line to the center line of the alley; and 
(3)  Any portion of a street abutting the boundaries of a parcel of land, which street has not been dedicated to the City or Maricopa County or otherwise opened for public use, shall be maintained by those persons who created or are served by the street or their successors in interest, including lessees and other persons in control of the land abutting the street; provided, that if the abutting land on either side of the street is owned by different persons and each person has an obligation to maintain the street hereunder, then the owner, lessee or other person in control of the land shall only be required to maintain one-half of the width of the street abutting their land. 
(C)  Swimming and architectural pools and spas. All swimming and architectural pools and spas shall be properly maintained so as not to create a safety hazard or harbor insect infestation, or create a visible deteriorated or blighted appearance. Water shall not be allowed to stagnate. Fencing or other barriers required for swimming pool and spa enclosures shall be maintained as required by law. The premises shall be free from safety hazards inclusive of, but not limited to, lack of security, water stagnation, or abandoned pools, regardless of whether or not there is water in the pools. All pools will also be free from visible deterioration or blighted appearance. 
(D)  Dry vegetation, tumbleweeds, weeds, bushes and tall grass and trees. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from dry vegetation, tumbleweeds, weeds, bushes and tall grass and trees which present a visual blight upon the area, which may harbor insect or rodent infestations and, dry vegetation, or which may likely become a fire hazard or result in a condition which may threaten the health and safely or the economic welfare of adjacent property owners or occupants. The premises shall be free from visual blight, potential fire hazards, dead trees and branches, palm fronds, lawn grass, tumbleweeds or weeds higher than six inches tall. 
(E)  Dumping. 
(1)  Vacant lots or lands which have been subject to dumping on more than one occasion shall be secured to prevent future occurrences of dumping. 
(2)  Methods of securing vacant lots or lands may include the following: 
(a)  Permanent fencing; 
(b)  Ditch and berm; 
(c)  Placing four foot high posts at four foot intervals; and 
(d)  Other equally effective methods. 
(3)  Signs stating "no dumping" shall be erected in accordance with applicable laws on vacant lots or lands which have been subject to dumping on more than one occasion. 
(E)  Excavations. 
(1)  Excavations and other like or similar conditions must be filled with clean fill. On a temporary basis, excavations shall be maintained in a secure manner so as to prevent a hazard to public health and safety. 
(2)  An excavation is considered secure when: 
(a)  The excavation is protected by a free-standing, stable and complete six foot minimum height enclosure that surrounds the excavation or property; and 
(b)  A well, pit, abandoned swimming pool, or similar excavation is completely and permanently covered, fenced securely or protected in an equivalent manner. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998; Am. Ord. 573 , N.S., passed 5-30-2017) 
§ 8-2-4 - PROCEDURE TO COMPEL REMOVAL OF LITTER. 
    The Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, may enforce the provisions of this article through one or more of the following methods: 
(A)  Prosecuting violators of the article in the Tolleson Magistrate's Court pursuant to the criminal provisions of this code; 
(B)  Proceeding civilly against violators of the article pursuant to this code; or 
(C)  Compelling the removal of litter by the procedure outlined in §§ 8-2-5 through 8-2-6 hereof. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998; Am. Ord. 525, N.S., passed 9-11-2012) 
§ 8-2-5 - NOTICE TO REMOVE. 
    If a person owning, leasing, or occupying any property fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with this article, the Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, may compel the person to comply by giving written notice to comply not less than 5 days before the day set for compliance. The "day set for compliance" means 5 days from the date of the notice. The notice shall contain: 
(A)  The legal description of the property; 
(B)  An estimate of the cost to the city to bring the property into compliance; 
(C)  A statement that the city will perform the necessary work at the expense of the person owning, leasing, or occupying the property unless the person complies on or before the day set for compliance; and 
(D)  A statement that the person may appeal in writing to the Council before the day set for compliance. If the person appeals within the time limit, unless the removal or abatement is ordered by a court, the person is entitled to a hearing before the Council. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998; Am. Ord. 525, N.S., passed 9-11-2012; Am. Ord. 573 , N.S., passed 5-30-2017) 
§ 8-2-6 - SERVICE OF NOTICE. 
    Notice shall be personally served on the owner, the owner's authorized agent, or the owner's statutory agent and on the person occupying or leasing the property, by a police officer of the city or by a private process server registered with the clerk of the court in the manner provided in the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, or shall be mailed by certified mail to the last known address of the owner, the owner's authorized agent, or the owner's statutory agent and to the address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998; Am. Ord. 525, N.S., passed 9-11-2012) 
§ 8-2-7 - REMOVAL BY CITY. 
    When any person to whom notice, as aforesaid, has been given and on or before the day set for compliance, fails, neglects or refuses to comply with this article, the Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, is authorized and directed to cause the property to be brought into compliance with this article at the expense of the owner or person leasing or occupying the property. Upon completion of the work, the Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, shall prepare a verified statement of account of the actual cost of the removal or abatement, including the actual costs of any additional inspection and other incidental connected costs, the date the work was completed, and the street address and the legal description of the property on which the work was done, and shall serve a duplicate copy of the verified statement upon, or mail the same to, the person owning, leasing or occupying the property in the manner prescribed in § 8-2-6 hereof. The cost of removal, abatement, or injunction, and associated legal costs for abatement or injunctions, shall be assessed on the property on which the work was done. The owner, lessee, or occupant of the property shall have 30 days from the date of service, or, if mailed, the date of receipt, of the verified statement to appeal in writing from the amount of the assessment as contained in the verified statement. If the person appeals within the time limit, unless the removal or abatement is ordered by a court, the person is entitled to a hearing before the Council. If an appeal is not filed within the 30-day period, then the amount of the assessment shall become final and binding. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998; Am. Ord. 525, N.S., passed 9-11-2012) 
§ 8-2-8 - ASSESSMENT FOR REMOVAL. 
    If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an appeal is taken and the amount of the assessment has been affirmed or modified, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified, including the city's name, the date and amount of the assessment, and the legal description of the property, shall be recorded in the office of the Maricopa County Recorder and from the date of its recording shall be a lien on the lot or tract of land until paid. The lien is prior and superior to all other liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except for liens for general taxes. A sale of the property to satisfy an assessment obtained under the provisions of this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The city shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the assessment in Maricopa County Superior Court at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the assessment by such action shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein, and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof. A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for those purposes, and any number of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998; Am. Ord. 525, N.S., passed 9-11-2012) 
§ 8-2-9 - PLACEMENT OF DEBRIS. 
    Any person, firm or corporation that places any rubbish, trash, filth or debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of that person, firm or corporation shall be guilty of a class I misdemeanor or a civil violation and, in addition to any fine or penalty which may be imposed for violation of any provision of this article, shall be liable for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this article for the removing, abating, or enjoining the rubbish, trash, filth or debris. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998; Am. Ord. 525, N.S., passed 9-11-2012) 
ARTICLE 8-3: - LANDFILLS 

§ 8-3-1 - SUPERVISION BY CITY'S MANAGER. 
(A)  The use of the city landfill shall be subject to the supervision and control of the City Manager or the Manager's designee. 
(B)  The Council shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the use of the landfill, as it shall deem necessary, and to change and modify the same. The Council shall have the power to alter any existing regulation, create new regulations or permit the non-compliance with any regulation if the same is deemed by them to be necessary to protect health and safety or to carry out the purpose and intent of this article. 
§ 8-3-2 - NO CHARGE TO RESIDENTS. 
    There will be no charge for use of city landfill facilities by residents of the city so long as the trash or other items deposited in the landfill originate in the city. 
§ 8-3-3 - USE OF LANDFILL. 
(A)  (1) The city landfill facilities shall be used exclusively by residents of the city and no special permits shall be granted. 
(2)  The City Manager or the Manager's designee is authorized to issue appropriate identification to residents for use of the city landfill. The City Manager or the Manager's designee is further authorized to post appropriate "no trespassing" signs and erect fences and gates to enforce this section. 
(B)  It is unlawful for a non-resident to use the landfill facilities. It is unlawful for any person to allow a non-resident of the city to use his or her landfill identification card or to bring trash to the city landfill that originates outside the city limits. 
ARTICLE 8-4: - JUNK 

§ 8-4-1 - DEFINITION. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    JUNK. Includes all old appliances or parts thereof, all old iron or other metal, glass, paper, cardboard, old lumber, old wood, old mattresses and all other waste or discarded material. 
(Ord. 236, N.S., passed 10-23-1984) 
§ 8-4-2 - KEEPING OF JUNK UNLAWFUL. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep, store or allow to accumulate or to permit any other person to keep, store or allow to accumulate any junk on any privately-owned property within the city, or to keep, store or allow to accumulate any junk in a building that is not wholly enclosed, except for doors for ingress or egress, and any person violating this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 236, N.S., passed 10-23-1984) 
§ 8-4-3 - VIOLATORS TO BE NOTIFIED. 
    Before any person is charged with a violation of this article, the person shall be advised by certified or registered letter that a complaint is contemplated and by the letter shall be given not less than 5 days to cause removal of the junk. Copies of the letters shall be kept and filed by the city along with any complaint filed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. 236, N.S., passed 10-23-1984; Am. Ord. 573 , N.S., passed 5-30-2017) 
§ 8-4-4 - REMOVAL BY CITY. 
    Junk may be removed following the procedures set forth in §§ 8-2-5, 8-2-6, 8-2-7 and 8-2-8 of this code. 
(Ord. 236, N.S., passed 10-23-1984) 
§ 8-4-5 - EXCEPTIONS. 
    This article shall not apply to any appliance dealer who, in a proper zone, has screened his or her old appliances from general view and from access by children or trespassers, nor to material stores on the premises of any manufacturing enterprise for use in connection with the enterprise so long as the enterprise is conducted in accordance with zoning and other codes. 
(Ord. 236, N.S., passed 10-23-1984) 
ARTICLE 8-5: - NON-DUST FREE LOTS 

§ 8-5-1 - PARKING ON NON-DUST FREE LOTS. 
    No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any motor vehicle upon any lot or area within the city which is not dust free. Violation of this section shall constitute a civil traffic violation, and the violator shall be subject to a civil sanction of not less than $65 or more than $250. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998) 
§ 8-5-2 - DEFINITION OF DUST FREE. 
    DUST FREE shall mean that a lot or area is maintained by paving with one of the following methods: asphaltic concrete, cement concrete, penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate, or the equivalent as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998) 
§ 8-5-3 - RESIDENTIAL LOTS. 
    An area which encompasses all or part of a residential lot which contains one single family or duplex residential unit is also dust free if covered by a smooth layer of crushed rock or gravel maintained to a minimum depth of three inches and contained within a permanent border or an alternative surface treatment as approved by the Development Services Department that will equal or exceed the dust free characteristic of contained crushed rock or gravel. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998) 
§ 8-5-4 - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. 
    It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this article that the condition of the lot was in compliance with a stipulation made by the Zoning Commission permitting temporary parking for civic events and that the vehicle was parked by or on behalf of an attendee of an event. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998) 
§ 8-5-5 - IMPOUND. 
    The Police Department may remove and impound any vehicle parked or stored found to be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. 364, N.S., passed 2-10-1998) 
ARTICLE 8-6: - DUST AND AIRBORNE PARTICULATE CONTROL 

§ 8-6-1 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to improve air quality by regulating practices that contribute to the air pollution caused by particulate matter. 
(Ord. 516, N.S., passed 9-13-2011) 
§ 8-6-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    LEAF BLOWER. A device that generates a stream of air to move landscape debris. 
    MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled conveyance, including vehicles designed for use on roadways and those designed for off-road use. 
    PARTICULATE MATTER. Fine dust particles that contribute to air pollution and can harm human health. 
    PERSON. Any public or private corporation, company, partnership, firm, association or society of persons, the federal government and any of its departments or agencies, the state and any of its agencies, departments or political subdivisions, as well as a natural person. 
    PUBLIC ROADWAY. A street, alley, road, highway or thoroughfare that is used by the public or is open to public use for vehicular travel, including roadways in gated communities. 
(Ord. 516, N.S., passed 9-13-2011) 
§ 8-6-3 - LEAF BLOWER USE RESTRICTIONS. 
(A)  No person may use a leaf blower to blow leaves, grass cuttings, other landscape debris, trash, soil or dust into a public roadway. 
(B)  No person may operate a leaf or air blower for landscape maintenance that has a 50 cubic centimeter engine or larger. 
(C)  No person may operate a leaf blower except on stabilized surfaces, which are stabilized with asphaltic concrete, cement concrete, penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate, granite cover, aggregate cover, gravel cover, grass or other continuous vegetative cover, or any combination of those stabilizers. 
(D)  No person may operate a leaf blower during any high pollution advisory day forecast for particulate matter. 
(E)  The provisions of this section do not apply to any site that has a permit issued by a control officer as defined in A.R.S. § 49-471, as amended, for the control of fugitive dust from dust generating operations. 
(Ord. 516, N.S., passed 9-13-2011) 
§ 8-6-4 - UNPAVED AREAS. 
(A)  Parking, maneuvering, ingress, and egress areas at developments other than residential buildings with four or fewer units shall be maintained with one or more of the following dustproof paving methods: 
(1)  Asphaltic concrete; 
(2)  Cement concrete; 
(3)  Penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate; or 
(4)  A stabilization method approved by the city. 
(B)  Parking, maneuvering, ingress, and egress areas 3,000 square feet or more in size at residential buildings with four or fewer units shall be maintained with one or more of the following dustproof paving methods: 
(1)  Asphaltic concrete; 
(2)  Cement concrete; 
(3)  Penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate; or 
(4)  A stabilization method approved by the city. 
(C)  No person shall park or use a vehicle on an unpaved vacant lot unless the surface actually utilized is permanently maintained with a stabilization method approved by the city. 
(D)  Owners of vacant land shall control dust emissions by stabilizing any unpaved area or by installing and maintaining physical barriers approved by the city to prevent vehicle access. 
(Ord. 516, N.S., passed 9-13-2011) 
§ 8-6-5 - COMPLIANCE MONITORING; ENFORCEMENT. 
(A)  The city may enter and inspect property subject to regulation under this article as necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property owner or occupant has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the property owner or occupant shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property to be inspected shall be promptly removed by the property owner or occupant a the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of the access shall be borne by the property owner or occupant. 
(B)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises found to be in violation of this article, and the city, through its designee, can demonstrate that there is probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of any provision of this article, or that there is a need to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(C)  When the city's designee finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or an order issued hereunder, the designee may serve upon that person a written notice of violation. The designee's notice will require the person within ten working days of the receipt of the notice, to provide in writing to the city's designee an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific actions to be taken by the person to prevent subsequent violations. Submission of this plan does not relieve the person of liability for any violations in the notice or that occurred before or after receipt of the notice of violation, and does not limit the city's authority to take further enforcement actions. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city's designee to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement actions, without first issuing a notice of violation. In appropriate situations, the city's designee may notify the person orally either in person or by telephone prior to, and in some cases in lieu of, written notification. 
(D)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, and is deemed a nuisance that may be summarily abated at the owner's expense, and is subject to a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of the nuisance. 
(E)  The penalties and remedies listed herein are not exclusive of any other remedies available under applicable federal, state, and local laws, including, without limitation A.R.S. §§ 49-463 and 49-513. The city may, in its discretion, seek cumulative remedies and city may recover its attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article. 
(F)  If the city's designee issues a notice of violation for a provision of this article and makes a prima facie showing that the conduct or events giving rise to the violation are likely to have continued or recurred past the date of notice, the city's designee may request the county attorney to file an action in superior court to recover penalties provided for in A.R.S. § 49-513. 
(G)  This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. 516, N.S., passed 9-13-2011) 
CHAPTER 9: - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE 9-1: - GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 9-1-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    ANIMAL. Any and all types of animals, domestic and wild, male and female, singular and plural, and includes, but is not limited to, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds, fowl, snakes, spiders and insects. 
    AT LARGE. An animal not under restraint. 
    BITE. Any penetration of the skin by the teeth of any animal. 
    CAT. Any member of the feline species. 
    COLLAR. A band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the neck of an animal to which a license may be affixed. 
    DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has a propensity to bite or to otherwise cause physical injury to any person or other animal, or to destroy, damage or cause damage to the property of any person, or that has been so declared after a hearing before a justice of the peace or the Chief Magistrate. 
    DOG. Any member of the canine species. 
    ENFORCEMENT AGENT. Any city police officer or other person designated or contracted by the city for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
    FOWL. Chickens, ducks, geese and turkey. 
    IMPOUND. The act of taking or receiving an animal into custody for the purpose of confinement at an animal control facility. 
    KENNEL. An enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals, in which a person keeps, harbors or maintains five or more dogs under controlled conditions. 
    LEASH or LEAD. A chain, rope, leather strap, cord or similar restraint attached to a collar or harness or otherwise secured around an animal's neck. 
    LICENSED DOG. Any dog having a current license. 
    LIVESTOCK. Neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules and asses. 
    OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, maintaining or having custody or otherwise having control of an animal within or without the city limits. 
    POLICE DOG. Any dog belonging to any law enforcement agency service dog unit. 
    POUND. Any animal control facility authorized for the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs and other animals that come into the custody of the enforcement agent in the performance of his or her official duties. 
    PROVOCATION. Any behavior toward an animal or its owners or its owner's property that is likely to cause a defensive reaction by the animal. 
    RABIES QUARANTINE AREA. Any area in which a state of emergency has been declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent to this area. 
    RABIES VACCINATION CERTIFICATE. A method of recording and duplicating rabies information that is in compliance with the enforcement agent's licensing system and/or enforcement agent's prescribed forms. 
    STRAY DOG. Any dog three months of age or older running at large that is not wearing a valid license tag. 
    TIE-OUT. A chain, leash, wire cable or similar restraint attached to a swivel or pulley. 
    UNDER RESTRAINT. An animal secured by a leash or lead and under the immediate control of a responsible person; or confined within a vehicle; or located upon the real property limits of its owners. 
    VACCINATION. An anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine approved by the state's veterinarian and administered by a state-licensed veterinarian. 
    VETERINARIAN. Unless otherwise indicated, any veterinarian licensed to practice in this state or any veterinarian employed in this state by a governmental agency. 
    VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed to practice in this state that provides clinical facilities and houses animals for dental, medical or surgical treatment. A VETERINARY HOSPITAL may have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it, or as an integral part of it, pens, stalls, cages or kennels for quarantine, observation or boarding. 
    VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has a propensity to attack, to cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings without provocation, or that has been so declared after a hearing before a justice of the peace or the Chief Magistrate. 
    VICIOUS DOG. 
(1)  Any dog, except one assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which: 
(a)  When unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person or domestic animal in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private grounds or places; 
(b)  The owner thereof knows, or should reasonably know, possesses a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
(c)  Bites, inflicts injury, assaults, or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or private property; or 
(d)  Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting; or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the definition of a VICIOUS DOG above, no dog may be declared vicious if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, had entered upon the premises of another without license, invitation, or other right. 
(Am. Ord. 412, N.S., passed 11-10-2003; Am. Ord. 455, N.S., passed 5-8-2007) 
§ 9-1-2 - GENERAL PROHIBITIONS. 
(A)  Dangerous and vicious animals. It is unlawful for any person to hold, keep or maintain any dangerous or vicious animal within the corporate limits of the city. Any enforcement agent is authorized to kill any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of person or property. 
(B)  Permitted animals. Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in division (A) above, four or fewer domesticated cats or dogs, and livestock or fowl of a number permitted under applicable zoning, may be held, kept or maintained on any single lot. Any person who keeps or causes to be kept any livestock or fowl within the corporate limits of the city shall keep the livestock or fowl in a pen or similar enclosure to prevent their roaming at large. It is unlawful to cause or allow any pen, stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome. 
(C)  Swine, pigs and roosters. It is unlawful for any person to keep, hold or maintain any swine, pigs or roosters on any premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(D)  Noises. It is unlawful to harbor, keep, hold or maintain any animals that disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. 
(E)  Animals at large. It is unlawful to permit any animal of any kind to roam or run at large within the city and the animals shall be immediately impounded by the enforcement officer and delivered into the custody of a pound. Any animal may be sold by the city and the proceeds applied to the expense of impounding the animal, the costs of sale and the payment of any fine due by reason of the violation. If any surplus remains, it shall be paid to the owner of the animal. Exhibitions or parades of animals that are Ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the city. Animals may be at large as an exception to this division as follows: 
(1)  While participating in field trials, obedience classes or kennel club events where the trials, classes or events have been approved by the city; 
(2)  While being used or trained for legal hunting or for control of livestock; 
(3)  If a police dog or otherwise assisting a police officer in law enforcement duties; and 
(4)  Guide dogs while assisting disabled persons so long as the dogs are under direct and effective voice control of the person to assure that they do not violate other provisions of law. 
(F)  Waste removal required. Every owner of every animal shall immediately remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner any solid waste deposited by the animal on public property or upon any private property without the consent of the owner or the person in control of the property. This section shall not apply to persons with mobility disabilities or police officers or other law enforcement officers accompanied by police dogs while on duty. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to permit or otherwise allow any violation of any applicable state, county or city ordinances including health code and nuisance regulations. A violation of this division shall constitute a civil infraction subject to a fine of $25 per occurrence. 
§ 9-1-3 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT AGENTS. 
(A)  Enforcement agents shall: 
(1)  Enforce the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Issue citations, complaints and notices to appear for violations of the provisions of this chapter in accordance with lawful procedure; 
(3)  Be responsible for determining that any animal within the city limits is a dangerous or vicious animal and poses immediate danger to the safety of any person or other animal or person's property, and impound the animal immediately and deliver it into the custody of a pound; and 
(4)  Be responsible for declaring a rabies quarantine area within his or her area of jurisdiction. When a quarantine area has been declared, the enforcement agent shall meet with the state's veterinarian and representatives from the Department of Health Services and the Game and Fish Department to implement an emergency program for the control of rabies within the area. Any regulations restricting or involving movements of livestock within the area shall be subject to approval by the state's veterinarian. 
(B)  The enforcement agent may designate deputies. 
§ 9-1-4 - UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT AGENT. 
    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with an enforcement agent in the performance of the enforcement agent's duties. No person may remove, or attempt to remove, an animal that has been impounded or which is in the possession of the enforcement agent. 
§ 9-1-5 - HEARING FOR DECLARATION OF AN ANIMAL AS DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS. 
(A)  The Chief Magistrate, for good cause shown in a petition filed by the prosecutor's office, shall order that an order to show cause hearing be held within ten days of the date of impoundment of an animal determined by an enforcement agent to be dangerous or vicious, at which time, the owner shall appear and show cause why the animal should not be declared a dangerous or vicious animal and sanctions be ordered pursuant to division (C) below. 
(B)  The owner of the animal shall be notified of the hearing by the Court. Upon proof of the notification, the hearing may proceed in the owner's absence. 
(C)  Upon the declaration of an animal as a dangerous or vicious animal, the Chief Magistrate may order any of the following: 
(1)  That the animal shall be kept in an enclosure that is high enough so that the animal cannot bite, harm or injure anyone outside the enclosure; that the enclosure and property whereon it is located shall be posted with conspicuous warning signs; and that at no time shall the animal leave the enclosure unless it is muzzled, leashed and under the control of an adult person; 
(2)  That the animal be banished from the city limits; and/or 
(3)  That the animal be humanely destroyed. 
PROVISIONS REGARDING CATS 

§ 9-1-20 - CONTROL OF CATS. 
(A)  It is the intention of the city to regulate cats, as defined as a member of the feline family of animals. For the purposes of this section, a cat is considered to be running at large if it is off the premises of the owner, not under the control of the owner or other persons acting for the owner. The owner is considered any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining a cat. 
(B)  Those provisions of Article 9-3 of this chapter pertaining to dogs and rabies control that are applicable to rabies control in cats are specifically incorporated by reference into this section. 
(C)  It shall be the duty of the enforcement agent to impound all cats found at large in violation of this chapter, or not in charge or under the care or control of some person in the street, alleys or other public places or vacant or enclosed lots in the city. 
(D)  The city may, by resolution, require the payment of appropriate fees, vaccinations and licenses for cats within the city limits. 
(E)  The Council specifically finds, by this section, that if any person is the owner or has possession of more than four cats in any dwelling or property less than one acre in size within the city limits, that possession or ownership on the same property of any more than four cats shall be considered a public nuisance and that the nuisance shall be immediately abated. For purposes of this division, it is contemplated that newborn kittens shall not be counted until they reach the age of three months. The burden of establishing the birth date of any kitten shall be on the cat owner. 
ARTICLE 9-2: - CRUELTY AND NEGLECT OF ANIMALS 

§ 9-2-1 - CRUELTY PROHIBITED. 
    It is unlawful for any person to torture, cruelly beat or kick, mutilate, cruelly injure or cruelly or unlawfully kill an animal or to cause or allow an animal to be tortured, cruelly beaten or kicked, mutilated, cruelly injured or cruelly or unlawfully killed. 
§ 9-2-2 - ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED. 
    It is unlawful for any owner of an animal to abandon the animal in any location for more than 24 hours without providing for that animal's care and wellbeing. An animal shall be deemed abandoned when the owner has left the animal in an abode that is not presently occupied or released the animal out of a vehicle onto public or private property without making arrangements for its care. 
§ 9-2-3 - FAILURE TO RENDER AID. 
    It is unlawful for any person to accidentally, or otherwise, hit and injure an animal with an automobile or other vehicle and to leave without making a reasonable effort to obtain aid or to render aid and assistance in the care of the animal. 
§ 9-2-4 - NEGLECT PROHIBITED. 
    It is unlawful for any owner of any animal to fail to comply with the following: 
(A)  Daily provide the animal with food that is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the animal in good health; 
(B)  Provide potable water that is accessible to the animal at all times; 
(C)  Provide access to natural or artificial shelter to the animal throughout the year. The shelter must be maintained in good repair to protect the animal from injury and the elements and must be of sufficient size to permit the animal to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Livestock and fowl are not included in this section; 
(D)  Provide the animal with the care and medical treatment for injuries, parasites and diseases, sufficient to maintain the animal in good health and minimize suffering; 
(E)  Provide the animal with adequate exercise space; 
(F)  If the animal is on a tie-out, the tie-out must consist of a chain, leash, wire cable or similar restraint attached to a swivel or pulley. Tie-out collars shall not be of a choke type. The tie-out shall be located so that it cannot be entangled with other objects, or caught on objects such as fences or walls. No tie-out shall employ a restraint that is less than ten feet in length; and 
(G)  Provide the animal with adequate ventilation and protection from temperature extremes at all times. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal in a vehicle or other enclosed space in which the temperature is either so high or so low, or the ventilation is so inadequate as to endanger the animal's life or health. 
§ 9-2-5 - USE OF FORCE. 
(A)  An enforcement agent is authorized to use whatever force is necessary to remove any animal from a vehicle or other enclosed space whenever it appears that the animal's life or health is endangered by extreme temperatures or lack of ventilation. 
(B)  No enforcement agent shall be liable for damages to property caused by the use of force necessary to remove an animal from a vehicle or other enclosed space under the circumstances. 
§ 9-2-6 - DOGS NOT PERMITTED AT LARGE; WEARING LICENSES. 
(A)  In a rabies quarantine area, no dog shall be permitted at large. Each dog shall be confined within an enclosure on the owner's property or secured so that the dog is confined entirely to the owner's property or on a leash not to exceed six feet in length and directly under the owner's control when not on the owner's property. 
(B)  Any dog over the age of three months running at large shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a valid license tag. Dogs used for the control of livestock or while being used or trained for hunting dogs while being exhibited or trained at kennel club events, or dogs while engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing Commission, and those dogs while being transported to and from the events, need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached provided that they are properly vaccinated, licensed, and controlled. 
(C)  If any dog is at large on the public streets, public parks, or public property, then the dog's owner or custodian is in violation of this article. 
(D)  Any person whose dog is at large is in violation of this article and shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor subject to the general penalty clause of § 1-1-8. A dog is not at large: 
(1)  If the dog is restrained by a leash, chain, rope, or cord of not more than six feet in length of sufficient strength to control the actions of the dog or is confined entirely to the owner's property by adequate fence or other method; 
(2)  If the dog is used to control livestock or while being used or trained for hunting or being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event or while engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing Commission; 
(3)  While the dog is actively engaged in dog obedience training, accompanied by and under the control of his or her owner or trainer, provided that the person training the dog has in his or her possession a dog leash of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient strength to control the dog; and further, that the dog is actually enrolled in or has graduated from a dog obedience training school; or 
(4)  If the dog, whether on or off the premises of the owner or person acting for the owner, is controlled as provided in division (D)(1) of this section or within a suitable enclosure which actually confines the dog. 
(E)  Any dog(s) at large shall be apprehended and impounded by an enforcement agent. 
(1)  The agent shall have the right to enter upon private property when it becomes necessary to do so in order to apprehend any dog that had been running at large. The entrance upon private property shall be in reasonable pursuit of the dog(s) and not include entry into a domicile or enclosure which confines a dog unless it is at the invitation of the occupant. 
(2)  The agent may issue citation(s) to the dog owner or the person acting for the owner when the dog is at large. The procedure of the issuance of notice to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903, except the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before issuing the notice. The issuance of citation(s) pursuant to this article shall be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899. 
(3)  In the judgment of the enforcement agent, if any dog at large or any other animal that is dangerous or fierce and a threat to human safety that cannot be safely impounded, it may be slain. 
(Am. Ord. 455, N.S., passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 567, N.S., passed 11-22-2016) 
§ 9-2-7 - IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSING OF DOG AND CATS; RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS; POUND FEES. 
(A)  Any stray dog or cat shall be impounded. All dogs and cats impounded shall be given proper care and maintenance. 
(B)  Each stray dog or cat impounded shall be kept and maintained at the pound for a minimum of 72 hours unless claimed by owner. Any person may purchase the dog or cat upon expiration of the impoundment period, provided the person pays all pound fees and complies with the licensing and vaccinating provisions of the article. If the dog or cat is not claimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog or cat for sale or may dispose of the dog or cat in a humane society. If the dog or cat is used for medical research, no license or vaccination is required. The enforcement agent may destroy impounded sick or injured dogs or cats whenever the destruction is necessary to prevent the dog or cat from suffering or to prevent the spread of disease. 
(C)  Any impounded licensed dog or any cat may be reclaimed by its owner or the owner's agent, provided that the person reclaiming the dog or cat furnishes proof of right to do so and pays all pound fees. If the dog or cat is not reclaimed within the impound period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog or cat for sale or dispose of the dog or cat in a humane manner. Any person purchasing a dog or cat shall pay all pound fees. 
(Am. Ord. 455, N.S., passed 5-8-2007) 
§ 9-2-8 - DETERMINATION OF VICIOUS DOG. 
(A)  Hearing. In the event that the Police Chief or his or her designee has reasonable grounds to believe that a dog may be vicious, a hearing may be convened. Dog owners are guaranteed due process hearings in the initial determination and in the completion of any appeal process with regard to the determination that their animal is a vicious dog as defined by the this article. 
(B)  Written notice. Written notice informing the owner of the charged viciousness and of the hearing shall be served by the Police Chief or his or her designee pursuant to the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. A hearing shall be held not later than ten calendar days from the date notice was served to the owner. 
(C)  Hearing officer. The due process hearing will be conducted by a Chief Magistrate or hearing officer. The Chief Magistrate or hearing officer will make findings of fact and conclusions of law. The Chief Magistrate or hearing officer shall provide the owner with a written copy of the findings. 
(D)  Hearing procedure. The hearing shall be informal and shall be open to the public. At hearing, both oral and documentary evidence may be taken from any interested person and considered in determining whether the dog is vicious. Any owner who fails to appear after notice is given without obtaining a continuance from the appointed hearing officer or Chief Magistrate may be deemed to have waived any right to introduce evidence or object to any order made by the Chief Magistrate or hearing officer. The Chief Magistrate or hearing officer's decision shall be based on the preponderance of evidence. 
(E)  Notice. If the animal is deemed to be a vicious dog, the Chief Magistrate or hearing officer will advise the owner of the decision at the hearing or send a registered letter advising the owner of such within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
(F)  Probable cause. In the event that the enforcement agent or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the dog in question is vicious and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals, the enforcement agent or law enforcement officer may require the seizing and impoundment of the dog pending the hearing. 
(Ord. 455, N.S., passed 5-8-2007) 
§ 9-2-9 - CONTROL OF A VICIOUS DOG. 
    Once a dog is declared vicious, the following steps will be required to continue ownership of an animal. 
(A)  Upon determination of viciousness. Immediate steps that must be completed within one calendar day upon completion of notification of a determination of viciousness. 
(1)  Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless the dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than six feet in length. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash outside confinement unless a person is in physical control of the leash. The dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, and the like. In addition, all vicious dogs on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the dog from biting persons or other animals. Any kennel or pen must meet the requirements of § 9-2-9(C)(1). 
(2)  Confinement indoors. No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit the building on its own volition. 
(B)  Reporting requirements. The following types of information must be reported by the owner of the dog to the Police Chief or his or her designee within ten calendar days of occurrence: 
(1)  Death of dog. A written notice from a veterinarian confirming the death of the dog must be provided to the Police Chief or his or her designee. 
(2)  Yearly renewal of liability insurance. 
(3)  The new address of a registered vicious dog owner should the owner move within the city limits. 
(4)  The new address of a registered vicious dog that has been moved permanently outside the city limits. 
(C)  Schedule for completion. A time schedule for completion of the following steps is to be set by the hearing officer, but in no case will it be longer than 30 calendar days from the date of the Chief Magistrate or hearing officer's decision. 
(1)  Confinement. All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled. The pen, kennel, or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. 
(a)  All structures used to confine vicious dogs must be locked when the animals are within the structure. The structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. 
(b)  The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area of perimeter fence. 
(c)  All structures erected to house vicious dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated, and kept in a clean and sanitary condition and any other condition that provides for humane care. 
(2)  Registration. A declared vicious dog shall not only be licensed yearly but shall also be permanently registered as a vicious dog with the Tolleson Police Department. 
(3)  Signs. All owners of vicious dogs within the city shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign in three-inch letters, easily readable by the public, using the words "Vicious Dog." In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of the animal. 
(4)  Insurance. All owners of vicious dogs must obtain public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $100,000 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property or animals owned by any persons resulting from the ownership of a dog. All owners must provide proof of insurance and effective dates to the Police Chief or his or her designee. Cancellation of liability insurance by the dog's owner is allowed only in the event that the dog dies. The owner of a dog must notify the Police Chief or his or her designee within ten days if insurance coverage is cancelled by the insurance carrier and provide proof that substitute insurance coverage has been obtained. 
(5)  Failure to comply. The purpose of complying with these guidelines for a dog declared vicious is to prevent attacks, injuries, or deaths by mandating the use of control methods. Owners have the opportunity to keep their dogs if this article is complied with. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vicious dog registered in the City of Tolleson to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this article. Any dog determined to be a vicious dog pursuant to § 9-2-8 that is found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment and may be destroyed upon order of a Chief Magistrate. 
(b)  Any dog that has been determined to be a vicious dog pursuant to § 9-2-8 that injures or kills a human being or a domestic animal and is in violation of this article shall be destroyed. 
(Ord. 455, N.S., passed 5-8-2007) 
§ 9-2-10 - PENALTY; VICIOUS DOG. 
(A)  Any owner of a dog that has been declared vicious pursuant to § 9-2-8 who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the City of Tolleson Court, be fined a sum of not less than $250 and not more than $2,500 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(B)  In addition, the Court may order the vicious dog impounded and destroyed. 
(C)  The Court may order any person who violates the provisions concerning vicious dogs to pay all expenses related to the impounding of the vicious dog, including shelter, food, handling, and veterinary care, to the city. 
(D)  The Court may also order any person who violates this article to pay restitution to any victim or victims whose person or animal was injured or killed or property damaged. 
(E)  In the event that the owner of the vicious dog is a minor, the parent or guardian in physical control of the minor at the time of the acts giving rise to the determination of viciousness shall be liable: 
(1)  For all injuries and property damage sustained by a person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by the vicious dog; and 
(2)  All violations of this article. 
(Ord. 455, N.S., passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 567, N.S., passed 11-22-2016) 
ARTICLE 9-3: - RABIES; ANIMAL CONTROL 

§ 9-3-1 - LICENSE FEES FOR DOGS; ISSUANCE OF DOG TAGS. 
    Every dog shall be licensed in accordance with current applicable county and state laws and regulations. 
§ 9-3-2 - KENNEL PERMIT; FEE; VIOLATION. 
(A)  A person operating a kennel shall obtain a permit issued by the city, except if each individual dog is licensed. 
(B)  The annual fee for the kennel permit shall be set by the Council. 
(C)  A dog remaining within the kennel is not required to be licensed individually unless otherwise required by law. A dog leaving the controlled kennel conditions shall be licensed except if the dog is only being transported to another kennel that has a permit issued under this section. 
(D)  A person who knowingly fails within 30 days after written notification from the enforcement agent to obtain a kennel permit is guilty of a violation of this section. 
§ 9-3-3 - HANDLING OF BITING ANIMALS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPORTING ANIMAL BITES. 
(A)  An unlicensed or unvaccinated dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than seven days. A dog properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this article that bites any person may be confined at the home of the owner or wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent. 
(B)  Any animal other than a dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon the request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than 14 days, provided that livestock shall be confined and quarantined for the 14-day period in a manner regulated by the Arizona Livestock Board. If the animal is a caged rodent, it may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or where it is harbored or maintained, for the required period of time, with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent. 
(C)  Any wild animal that bites any person may be killed and submitted to the enforcement agent or the enforcement agent's deputies for transmission to an appropriate diagnostic laboratory. 
(D)  Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge. 
(E)  The enforcement agent may destroy any animal confined and quarantined pursuant to this article prior to the termination of the minimum confinement period for laboratory examination for rabies if: 
(1)  The animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies; and 
(2)  The owner of the animal consents to its destruction. 
(F)  Any animal subject to licensing under this article found without a tag identifying its owner shall be deemed unowned. 
§ 9-3-4 - UNLAWFUL KEEPING OF DOGS. 
    It is unlawful for a person to keep, harbor or maintain a dog within the city, except as provided by the terms of this article. 
§ 9-3-5 - DOGS; LIABILITY. 
    Injury to any person or damage to any property by a dog while at large shall be the full responsibility of the dog's owner or person or persons responsible for the dog when the damages were inflicted. 
CHAPTER 10: - WATER 
ARTICLE 10-1: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
WATER SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION 

§ 10-1-1 - MANAGEMENT OF WATER SYSTEM. 
    The Council shall have the immediate control and management of all things pertaining to the city water system and shall perform, or cause to be performed, all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and economical management and protection of the water system. The Council shall have the power to prescribe other and further rates, rules and regulations as it may deem necessary. 
§ 10-1-2 - RECEIPTS AND DEPOSITS. 
    The city shall keep a correct account of all receipts, make out all bills for water furnished to consumers, collect the same and deposit the proceeds so collected to the credit of the city and in accordance with the direction of the Council. 
APPLICATION FOR SERVICE 

§ 10-1-20 - APPLICATION FOR WATER AND SEWER SERVICE. 
(A)  Application. Application for the use of water service shall be made in person, at the City Hall to the Finance Department by the owner or agent of the property to be benefitted, designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which the water may be required. Applications for water service must be accompanied by a valid identification card and proof of ownership. If the customer is a renter, a copy of the lease agreement must accompany the application. 
(B)  Deposit for water services. 
(1)  A water security deposit shall be required of all consumers as follows: 
(a)  Residential customers; 
(b)  Commercial and government consumers; 
(c)  Industrial consumers; and 
(d)  Hydrant meters customers. 
(2)  The amount of the deposit shall be as set by Council from time to time. A separate deposit is required for each meter. Deposits are kept on account and applied to the customer's final bill. 
§ 10-1-21 - GROUNDS FOR REJECTION OF APPLICATION. 
    The city may reject any application for water service for any good and sufficient reason including the following: service not available under a standard rate; service which involves excessive service expense; service which may affect the service to other consumers and service when the applicant is delinquent in payment of bills incurred for service previously supplied at any location. The city may also reject an application for service at a location where a prior account is delinquent and arrangements for payment of the delinquent balance have not been established. 
§ 10-1-22 - VIOLATION OF APPLICATION PROVISIONS. 
(A)  For violation of any of the provisions relating to application for service, the city shall, at the expiration of seven days after mailing written notice to the last known address of the consumer, at its option, remove the meter and discontinue service. 
(B)  Where the meter is thereafter reinstalled, the consumer shall first pay to the city a reinstallation charge. 
DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE 

§ 10-1-35 - NOTICE REQUIRED. 
    Any person who desires to discontinue the use of water service shall file written notice with the city at least three days in advance of intended termination of service. Responsibility for water service consumed extends to the time of departure or to the time specified for departure, whichever occurs last. 
§ 10-1-36 - SERVICE MAY BE DISCONTINUED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS. 
    The city may discontinue water service upon any of the following conditions: 
(A)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(B)  Disregard of city rules pertaining to water service; 
(C)  Emergency repairs; 
(D)  Insufficient supply caused by factors outside the control of the city; 
(E)  Legal process; 
(F)  Direction of public authorities; 
(G)  Local emergency requiring emergency measures; 
(H)  Tampering with meter or other equipment by the consumer; and 
(I)  For delinquency or non-payment of water bills for a period of 20 days from the date of billing. 
State Law reference- Criminal damage; classification, see A.R.S. 13-1602 
Obtaining utility service fraudulently; classification; definitions, see A.R.S. § 13-3724 
Theft; classification, see A.R.S. 13-1802 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

§ 10-1-50 - REGULATIONS PART OF CONTRACT. 
    All regulations contained in this article shall be considered a part of the contract of every resident of the city taking water service from the city and the resident taking water service shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. Consumers outside the city limits, shall, upon application for water service, be required to sign a statement agreeing to the regulations set forth in this article. 
ARTICLE 10-2: - RATES AND BILLS 

§ 10-2-1 - WATER RATES. 
    The Tolleson City Council may by ordinance or resolution periodically establish rates to be charged to all persons receiving water service for the city. The rates may include a water cost adjustment to compensate for increases or decreases in the amount charged by third-parties for water delivered to the city. 
(Ord. 262, N.S., passed 6-10-1986; Am. Res. 546, passed 8-9-1988; Am. Ord. 471, N.S., passed 3-25-2008) 
§ 10-2-2 - MINIMUM RATE. 
    Service for a time period less than a month shall be charged at the minimum monthly rate. 
(Am. Res. 546, passed 8-9-1988) 
§ 10-2-3 - UTILITY BILLS. 
(A)  Utility bills shall be mailed out during the first week of every month. 
(B)  Payments are due two weeks from the current charge date on the bill. If the due date should fall on a weekend or holiday, the due date will be the following City Hall working day. 
(C)  If payment is not received by the due date, a delinquent bill will be mailed to the customer within one week after the due date of the bill. The delinquent bill will inform the customer that if the bill is not paid by the date specified on the bill, water service will be discontinued until the unpaid balance, plus a turn off/turn on fee, as determined by Council from time to time, is paid. 
(D)  The city will turn off the customer's water if the unpaid balance of the water bill is not paid by the date specified on the bill. In addition, a turn on/turn off fee, as determined by Council from time to time, will be charged to turn the water back on. 
(E)  If the customer breaks the lock or turns the water back on, it will be considered a misdemeanor and subject to a penalty, as determined by Council from time to time, for each offense. 
(F)  In addition to all other taxes which may be levied or assessed against customers of the city water distribution system, effective with the water bill mailed on the last business day of October 1990, a tax shall be assessed and levied of $.065 per 1,000 gallons of water delivered to a customer of the city municipal water system. The tax collected hereunder shall be used to pay the tax levied and assessed by the State of Arizona on the business of operating a municipal water system under the provisions of A.R.S. § 42-5302 and amendments thereto. 
(G)  Delinquent balances will be subject to a one and one-half percent finance charge effective on the eighth day following the due date of the bill. 
Water Deposits and Water Service On and Off Fees 
Water Deposit Residential $120.00 Government, commercial and industrial $150.00 Water Service Turn On and Off Fee Turn off $20.00 Turn on $20.00  
(Ord. 262, N.S., passed 6-10-1986; Res. 2043 , passed 6-28-2011) 
State Law reference- For felony penalties under state law, please see A.R.S. §§ 13-1602, 13-1813-3724 
§ 10-2-4 - INCORRECT BILL. 
    Any consumer may present a claim to the city if he or she believes that he or she may have received an incorrect bill. The claim shall be presented at the City Hall before the bill becomes delinquent; provided that, the consumer may make a claim following payment of his or her bill and his or her payment shall not prejudice his or her claim. The claim shall not exempt the consumer from delinquency penalties if he or she fails to pay his or her bill on time. 
§ 10-2-5 - TURN OFFS AND TURN ONS. 
    A service charge shall be made for each turn off and each turn on of water service for reasons other than change of occupancy. The service charge provided herein shall not be assessed when the city itself turns off the water for repairs. The service charge shall be as determined by Council from time to time. 
§ 10-2-6 - UNOCCUPIED UNITS LIABLE. 
    The above minimum charges for additional units or trailer spaces shall apply regardless of whether the unit or trailer space is occupied or unoccupied. 
§ 10-2-7 - COMMENCEMENT OF CHARGES. 
    The city shall commence service charges for a consumer when the water meter is installed and the water connection is made, regardless of whether the water service is used or not. 
§ 10-2-8 - FINANCE CHARGES FOR DELINQUENT BALANCES. 
(A)  A delinquent balance shall be subject to a penalty equal to one and one-half percent per month on outstanding balances. 
(B)  A late charge, as determined by Council from time to time, will be charged if a bill is unpaid three weeks after the due date. 
(C)  Any charges imposed by this article constitute, if not paid by the due date, a lien on the property, lot or tract of land to which service was rendered. 
(D)  Upon delinquency, the city shall give notice to the customer and the owner, if known, of the property. 
§ 10-2-9 - PERSONS LIABLE FOR BILL. 
(A)  When a water application is submitted, the person in whose name the application is made shall be responsible for payment of all bills incurred in connection with the service furnished. 
(B)  In those cases where non-payment by a renter has occurred, the person owning the premises shall be responsible for payment of all bills incurred in connection with the services furnished. 
ARTICLE 10-3: - METERS 

§ 10-3-1 - METERS TO BE USED. 
    All water sold by the city shall be metered by meters, which shall be owned and kept in repair by the city. 
§ 10-3-2 - SUITABLE PLACEMENT. 
    The city may install a water meter on the property line or on the consumer's property in the location as deemed necessary and which is conveniently accessible by a meter reader. The city is further authorized to install the water meter in the alley or any adjacent public property at the convenience of the city. 
§ 10-3-3 - SINGLE METER. 
    Pipes and equipment for water service belonging to the consumer shall be so arranged to permit the placing of a single water meter connection for that property convenient to the city. If the pipes and equipment belonging to the consumer are not arranged to permit the placement of a meter connection, and additional meters or connections are required, each additional meter or connection shall be considered as an additional account and shall be so billed. 
§ 10-3-4 - GROUPING OF METERS. 
    When two or more meters are installed on the same premises for different consumers, they shall be closely grouped and each meter shall be clearly marked as to the consumer to whom it belongs. 
§ 10-3-5 - WATER METER INSTALLATION FEE SCHEDULE. 
    Fees for water meter installations shall be determined based on meter cost and applicable employee time used for installation. In the event the Council fails to adopt a new water meter installation fee schedule, the same fee schedule that was in existence for the prior fiscal year shall remain in effect until the time as the Council, by resolution, adopts a new water meter installation fee schedule. 
(Ord. 262, N.S., passed 6-10-1986) 
§ 10-3-6 - WATER METER FAILURE. 
    If a water meter fails to operate and a reading cannot be taken, a bill shall be made by the city in an amount based on the average monthly billing calculated by current policy and procedures. 
§ 10-3-7 - INTERFERENCE BY DOGS. 
    In the event any dog kept on the premises interferes with meter reading by an employee of the city and the meter is not read, a billing shall be made by the city in an amount based on the average monthly billing calculated by current policy and procedures. Continued interference may result in discontinuation of water service. 
§ 10-3-8 - SPECIAL METER READING. 
(A)  Any consumer may request and have the city perform a special reading of the consumer's water meter upon the payment of a deposit, as determined by Council from time to time. 
(B)  If the special reading indicates that the regular meter reading was incorrect, then the deposit shall be returned to the consumer, otherwise, the deposit shall be retained by the city as a charge for the special meter reading. 
§ 10-3-9 - METER TESTS. 
    Any consumer may, upon written application accompanied by a deposit, as determined by Council from time to time, have his or her meter tested for accuracy by the city. If the meter registers a divergence from accuracy greater than 5%, the deposit shall be applied to the consumer's balance and the indicated adjustment made in the water service charges for a total period not longer than the then current period and the monthly period immediately preceding. If a meter so tested registers within 5% of accuracy, the deposit shall be retained by the city as a fee to pay the cost of the test. All inaccurate and defective meters shall be replaced by the city immediately when detected. 
§ 10-3-10 - CONSTRUCTION HYDRANT METERS. 
    All water used for construction will follow the hydrant meter issuance policy. See Appendix A: Hydrant Meter Issuance Policy and Appendix B: Request for Construction Water (Hydrant Tap). 
APPENDIX A: HYDRANT METER ISSUANCE POLICY 
CONSTRUCTION WATER/HYDRANT TAP USERS HYDRANT METER ISSUANCE POLICY 
    The City of Tolleson requires all prospective hydrant meter users to meet the following requirements before an approval or issuance is granted: 
1.  Acceptable location to be approved by the City Fire Department and Water Department. Hydrant number must be submitted prior to approval. 
2.  Hydrant meter will be locked and secured at all time. Keys will be kept at the Water Department. 
3.  The use of a standpipe as an air gap method is not permitted. 
4.  Mandatory installation of a storage tank must be located at job site with an air gap. A backflow assembly must also be located and supported directly after the hydrant meter. Backflow must be certified on-site with a member of the City of Tolleson Water Department present. The certification document must be given to the Tolleson Water Department. Storage tank will remain in use throughout hydrant meter duration at job-site. 
5.  Gate valve is to be located downstream of hydrant meter and backflow preventer. Gate valve must be fully opened during meter service. Gate valve is to be supplied by user. 
6.  Floats inside tank must be set to reduce drawdowns that may cause pressure drop or turbulence in water transmission line(s). 
7.  Meter registration will be kept in only ONE name. 
8.  Representatives from both the Building Inspection and Water Department are required to be on-site for inspection of the unit during start-up. 
Failure to comply with the above listed requirements at any time will void the agreement between the city and the user. 
The city has the discretion to review and change this policy at any time. 
I have reviewed and agree to this policy. 
Authorized Rep.'s signature ___________ Date: ___________ 
APPENDIX B: REQUEST FOR CONSTRUCTION WATER (HYDRANT TAP) 
REQUEST FOR CONSTRUCTION WATER (HYDRANT TAP) 
_____
Company Name: _____ 
Mailing Address: _____ 
City: ___________ State: ___________ Zip Code: ___________ 
Telephone #: ___________ Fax #:___________ 
Representative Name: ___________ Title: ___________ 
Water to be used for: (project) _____ 
Location and Hydrant # Requested: _____ 
Start date requested: ___________ Estimated End Date: ___________ 
Upon receipt of the required a deposit of ________, the City of Tolleson will begin billing on a monthly basis, via the Utility Billing System, at the current construction water service rate as prescribed by resolution. It is the responsibility of the applicant to notify the Billing Department at (623) 936-7111 at the time water will no longer be needed. 
Upon inspection of the hydrant and return of the meter in an operable condition, the remainder of the deposit will be refunded. 
    Authorized Rep.'s Signature ___________ Date: ___________ 

ARTICLE 10-4: - CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES 

§ 10-4-1 - CONSUMER WATER FACILITIES. 
    The consumer shall have complete responsibility for the installation and maintenance of adequate water facilities on the premises, and the city shall not in any way be responsible for the installation, maintenance, inspection or damage of the facilities or damage caused by any defect in the facilities on the consumer's premises. The facilities shall be maintained by the consumer in full compliance with any and all rules and regulations of the city in addition to applicable state statutes. 
§ 10-4-2 - CONSUMER NEGLIGENCE. 
    When any damage to the city water system or injury to city employees is caused by the negligence of any consumer and requires any repairs, replacements or damages, the cost of that shall be added to that consumer's bill and, if the charges are not paid, water service may be discontinued. 
§ 10-4-3 - RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
    Each consumer shall provide to the city the easement and right-of-way as is necessary to provide water service to that consumer. 
§ 10-4-4 - PROTECTION OF CITY PROPERTY. 
    The consumer shall guarantee proper protection for city property placed on the consumer's premises and shall permit access to it only to authorized representatives of the city. 
§ 10-4-5 - SUPPLYING WATER TO OTHERS PROHIBITED. 
    No occupant or owner of any building into which water is introduced will be allowed to supply water to other persons or families or for use on any other property. The city reserves the right to shut off the supply for abuses of water privileges. 
§ 10-4-6 - COMMERCIAL USE. 
    Any water service for commercial use shall not be included in a residential service account and shall have a separate meter and connection. 
§ 10-4-7 - SPRINKLING RESTRICTIONS. 
    In case of water shortage or scarcity, the Council may, by resolution, place any restrictions which it deems necessary upon the use of water for irrigation or sprinkling purposes. 
§ 10-4-8 - WASTE OF WATER PROHIBITED. 
(A)  Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. 
(B)  All water outlets, including those used in conjunction with hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs and other fixtures, must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended. 
(C)  In addition to the penalty provided herein for code violations, the water supply may be turned off where any waste occurs. 
§ 10-4-9 - INSPECTIONS. 
    Whenever, in the judgment of the city, it is deemed necessary, it may provide for the inspection of the premises or buildings of any water consumer for the purpose of examining the condition of all pipes, motors, meters and fixtures, or the manner in which the facilities are used. 
ARTICLE 10-5: - LIABILITY 

§ 10-5-1 - INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE. 
    The city shall notify the consumer in advance of any anticipated interruption of service when the advance notice is possible. The city shall not be responsible for any interruption of water service caused by forces beyond its control. 
§ 10-5-2 - LIABILITY LIMITED. 
    No liability shall attach to the city for any injury or damages that may result from turning on or shutting off the water in any main, service connection or pipe, or the restriction of use or discontinuance of any water service, or any failure of the water supply, regardless of any notice or lack of notice thereof. The city shall not be held liable, in any respect, for the condition, defects, failure or use of any pipe, connection, fixture or appurtenance, not belonging to the city, on any premises, or for loss or damage resulting therefrom. If repairs are necessary due to unauthorized turn on or turn offs, the city has the right to charge the home owner for all time and materials related to repair. 
ARTICLE 10-6: - WATER CONSERVATION 

§ 10-6-1 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish for the city a water conservation policy and guidelines to be used hereafter in the city. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-2 - AUTHORITY DELEGATED TO CITY'S MANAGER. 
    The following programs will be directly implemented by policy directives of the City Manager after review and approval by the Council: 
(A)  Water meter testing; 
(B)  Leak detection and repairs; 
(C)  Feasibility study to use reclaimed wastewater for irrigation; and 
(D)  Other programs as the Council or the Arizona Department of Water Resources may from time to time recommend. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-3 - ELIMINATION OF WATER THEFT. 
(A)  The receipt of any water from the city's water system by any means other than through an authorized, functioning, metered service connection shall be considered theft and shall be prosecuted as a class one misdemeanor subject to the general penalty clause of § 1-1-8. 
(B)  This article will permit certain exceptions: 
(1)  For emergency use, such as fire fighting; 
(2)  For Water and Sewer Department maintenance, e.g. flushing and testing of water lines; 
(3)  For accidental releases, e.g. line breaks; and 
(4)  For temporary operations for the receipt of water such as for construction use, administered through a permit process and the installation of temporary meters by the city staff. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988; Ord. 567, N.S., passed 11-22-2016) 
§ 10-6-4 - ELIMINATION OF WATER WASTE DUE TO EXCESS RUN-OFF. 
    The city staff shall have the authority to enforce regulations which will prevent groundwater run-off and waste from landscape areas due to poor grading or over irrigation; operation of automatic irrigation systems during periods of rain and from car washing and similar operations on impervious surfaces. A violator shall be given one warning, in writing, by the city staff or Police Department. A second violation within 30 days of the warning and all subsequent violations shall constitute a class one misdemeanor subject to the general penalty clause of § 1-1-8. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988; Ord. 567, N.S., passed 11-22-2016) 
§ 10-6-5 - FLOW RESTRICTION DEVICES. 
(A)  This section shall apply to water-cooled refrigerating systems using water, entirely or in part, as a means of condensing a refrigerant installed after May 1, 1988. 
(B)  Water-cooled refrigerating systems, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be equipped with one of the following devices: 
(1)  Cooling tower; 
(2)  An evaporative condenser; or 
(3)  An acceptable water-circulating device. 
(C)  The provisions of division (B) above shall not apply to systems with an aggregate total of two tons or less or a rating of two horsepower or less and located or installed at one street address. Multiple dwelling unit structures are considered as one street address. However, the systems should be equipped with water regulation valves adjusted to use a minimum amount of water. 
(D)  All new installations of evaporative coolers shall be fitted with recirculation pumps. 
(E)  Penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine of up to $300 per day until the proper device has been installed. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-6 - NEW CONSTRUCTION. 
(A)  New developments and major renovations are to be fitted with low flow plumbing fixtures and devices. 
(B)  The plumbing fixtures and devices required to be installed pursuant to this article shall be certified by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and comply with all applicable American-National Standards Institute standards. 
(C)  The plumbing fixtures and devices specified in this section shall be installed, unless otherwise indicated herein, in every new building or addition to an existing building for which a building permit has been issued after May 1, 1988, and when a replacement fixture or device is required in any building. 
(1)  Faucets (general). All lavatory, kitchen and bar sink faucets shall be designed, manufactured, installed or equipped with a flow control device or aerator which will not allow a water flow rate in excess of two and seventy-five-hundredths gallons per minute. 
(2)  Faucets (public restrooms). In addition to the general requirements set forth in division (C)(1) above, lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type. 
(3)  Showerheads. Showerheads, except where provided for safety reasons, shall be designed, manufactured and installed with a flow limitation device which will not allow a water flow rate in excess of two and seventy-five-hundredths gallons per minute. The flow limitation device must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rate in excess of two and seventy-five-hundredths gallons per minute. 
(4)  Urinals. Urinals shall be designed, manufactured and installed so the maximum flush will not exceed one and one-half gallons of water. Adjustable type flushometer valve may be used provided they are adjusted so the maximum flush will not exceed one and one-half gallons of water. 
(5)  Water closets. Water closets shall be designed, manufactured and installed so the maximum flush will not exceed one and one-half gallons of water. 
(D)  New or major renovations to non-residential, commercial and industrial facilities shall, where possible, comply with the provisions of this section or demonstrate to the City Building Inspector that the most efficient water control devices are being utilized. 
(E)  Developers of new non-residential facilities shall employ the best available technology for water conservation. The conservation requirements apply to all uses within the facility including processes, potable use, maintenance and operations. The developer will be responsible for demonstrating that the best available technology is to be used as part of the project approval and building permit process. The developer will submit a report with the project documents. The report shall be prepared by an engineer licensed in the State of Arizona. The report shall detail all potential water use points within the facility, the type of system fixtures, devices and controls to be employed to reduce the water consumption at these points to a minimum; estimates of what the annual water consumption would be, with and without the water conservation technology, and a certification that the technology proposed is the best available at the time of facility design. 
(F)  City staff will have the right to conduct actual usage audits after the facility is occupied to ensure ongoing compliance. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-7 - USE OF LOW WATER CONSUMPTION LANDSCAPING FOR NEW DEVELOPMENTS. 
(A)  All new developments submitted for approval within the city shall employ a system of low water consumption landscaping and watering. 
(B)  The list of plants dated December, 1984, is to be used for minimum water consumption for new developments and major renovations (requiring a building permit) for landscaping purposes. The plant list prepared by the Arizona Department of Water Resources dated December, 1984, and any updates thereto appear in Article 10-8. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-8 - WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND METERS. 
(A)  The Council shall adopt a resolution which will require all water service connections both existing and future, to be fitted with meters. 
(B)  Service connections for the exclusive use of fire sprinkler systems in non-residential facilities may be exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-9 - CONVERTING LANDSCAPING OF PUBLIC AREAS TO LOW WATER CONSUMPTION TYPES. 
    The city shall adopt a resolution to convert the landscaping of public areas to low water consumption types. This conversion shall be in accordance with the technical standards of this article. Public areas shall include but not be limited to city, county, state as well as elementary and high school property. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-10 - RETROFIT OF EXISTING PLUMBING FIXTURES. 
(A)  The city shall adopt a resolution to institute a voluntary program to install low-flow devices on existing fixtures. 
(B)  The city shall adopt a resolution to institute a voluntary program to fit existing flow through evaporative coolers with re-circulating pumps. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-11 - PUBLIC AWARENESS AND EDUCATION PROGRAM. 
    The Council shall adopt a resolution to implement an ongoing public awareness and education program to help achieve the city's water conservation objectives. The program will be developed by the city staff and will take advantage of a wide range of techniques and resources available from other programs in the Phoenix Active Management area and the Arizona Department of Water Resources. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-12 - WATER USE AUDIT OF EXISTING NON-RESIDENTIAL USERS. 
(A)  The Council shall adopt a resolution to conduct a voluntary water use audit of existing non-residential water users to encourage conversion to the best available technology. 
(B)  This program will consist of the following steps: 
(1)  Send letter signed by Mayor to each user. Publish the letter and program highlights; 
(2)  Conduct the actual audit by city staff or independent contractors; and 
(3)  Submit report with recommendations. Recommendations may include providing a one time economic incentive to encourage conversions. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-13 - RESTRICTION ON USE OF WATER FOR LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION. 
    The city staff is authorized to prepare and implement regulations which will restrict the use of groundwater for landscape irrigation to periods of low evaporative loss. The permitted periods will include seasonal conditions as well as daily conditions. These regulations shall be adopted by the Council by appropriate resolution. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-14 - WATER USE RATE SCALE TO DISCOURAGE WASTE. 
(A)  In order to reduce discretionary consumption of water, it is proposed to change the water use rates to provide an economic incentive to do so without restricting development. 
(B)  A new water rate structure will be developed by the City Manager and approved by Council resolution after conducting a study of the other local water use rates to arrive at a rate structure which has the following characteristics: 
(1)  Does not cause hardship to present users; 
(2)  Has an incentive to reduce the discretionary consumption; and 
(3)  Does not restrict desirable new development with the city. 
(C)  This article provides annual authorization for the city staff to analyze the city's water rates and prepare changes for adoption by Council resolution. The city staff is also authorized to conduct an initial study and prepare a new rate structure which increases progressively with the amount of water use and which also has a seasonal adjustment factor to be used during the high consumption season. This annual review shall follow the guidelines set forth in this section and article and the guidelines and goals given to the city by the Arizona Department of Water Resources. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-15 - ANNUAL WATER USE QUOTAS. 
(A)  The Council shall adopt an annual resolution which would permit the establishment of quotas for water consumption by non-residential users and provides authority to implement them. The quotas would be based on individual user's record of consumption, their progress towards implementing conservation programs, their estimated discretionary consumption (to be defined) and the city's overall progress towards meeting its annual conservation objectives. These quotas would be enforced by the city as a last resort. 
(B)  The city shall use this annual quota review to attain quotas passed on to the city by the Arizona Department of Water Resources. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-16 - VIOLATION; PENALTIES. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein a violation of this article shall be a civil infraction. A single citation shall be issued for each building regardless of the actual number of non-compliances within the building. The owner of the building or the person who acquired the building permit shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per citation. The City Court shall also order the persons to correct all non-compliances within the building for which the citation was issued. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
§ 10-6-17 - WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS. 
    In the event any low flow fixture or other water conservation device, required by this article, will be unavailable from any reasonable source for a period in excess of 90 days, the developer or contractor of a new building or addition to an existing building may request a temporary waiver of the requirements of this article. The request for a temporary waiver shall be in writing, shall contain sufficient documentation to support the claim that the device or fixture will not be available for a period in excess of 90 days, and shall be delivered to the City Manager either personally or by certified mail. The City Manager may request or solicit additional information in order to determine if the request is valid. If the City Manager finds that the device or fixture will be unavailable from any reasonable source for a period in excess of 90 days, the City Manager may grant to the developer or contractor a permit waiving compliance with the requirements of this article for a period of 180 days from the date of issuance of the permit. If the fixtures or devices become available before the 180-day period expires, the waiver shall terminate automatically. The decision of the City Manager will be final. 
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
ARTICLE 10-7: - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

§ 10-7-1 - PURPOSE; RESPONSIBILITY. 
(A)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the public water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the user's system the contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water supply; and to provide for the monitoring and enforcement of a continuing program of backflow prevention, which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the city's potable water supply. 
(B)  Responsibility. 
(1)  The Department. The Building Department (hereinafter called the "Department") of the city is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article and to prevent water from unapproved sources to enter the potable water system. No water service connection to premises of a type specified in this article shall be installed or maintained unless the public water supply is protected as required by this article. 
(2)  The user. The user shall not allow any pollutants and contaminants to enter the public potable water system, from the point of delivery from the public potable water system. The user shall, at his or her own expense, install, operate, test and maintain approved backflow preventive assemblies as directed by the Department. 
§ 10-7-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    APPROVED. Accepted by the Department as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this article, and as suitable for the proposed use. 
    AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the public potable water supply, including, but not limited to, water from another purveyor's public or private potable water supply, treated effluent, wastewater or industrial fluids. 
    BACKFLOW. The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or backsiphonage. 
    BACKPRESSURE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than the intended source. 
    BACKSIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An assembly or means designed to prevent the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or backsiphonage. 
(1)  AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel, and in no case less than one inch. 
(2)  DOUBLE CHECK BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY. An assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a recognized laboratory and approved by the Department for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. 
(3)  PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER ASSEMBLY. An assembly containing an independently operating loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with properly located test cocks and resilient seated shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly. 
(4)  REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY. An assembly of two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent differential pressure relief valve located between the check valves and, at the same time, below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and resilient seated shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. The entire device shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a recognized laboratory and approved by the Department for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. 
    CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree, which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial fluids through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy section of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tube. 
    POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) in the water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the waters for domestic use. 
    TESTER, RECOGNIZED. A person who has proven his or her competency to the satisfaction of the Department. Each person certified to make competent tests or to repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention assemblies shall be conversant with the applicable laws, rules and regulations and have had experience in plumbing or pipe fitting or have other qualifications which are equivalent in the opinion of the Department. 
    WATER, POTABLE. Any water, which, according to the city, meets nationally recognized standards for human consumption. 
    WATER, NON-POTABLE. Water, which is not safe for human consumption. 
    WATER, SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of the service line from the public potable water system at its point of delivery to the user's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. Unprotected takeoffs from the service line will not be permitted upstream of any meter or any backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the user's water system. SERVICE CONNECTION shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
§ 10-7-3 - APPROVAL. 
(A)  Each backflow preventive assembly required hereunder shall be approved by the Department prior to installation and shall be installed by and at the expense of the user. 
(B)  The Department may approve backflow assemblies when the devices have received approval from the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.), and the manufacturer has a parts and service center located within Arizona, Nevada or California 
§ 10-7-4 - INSTALLATION OF DEVICES. 
(A)  Assemblies shall be installed at the service connection or near the property line, but in all cases before the first branch line leading off of the service line and in an accessible location approved by the Department. All assemblies shall be shown and specified on all required building and engineering plans, and approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of building or engineering permits. All assemblies shall be installed according to standard detail. 
(B)  Backflow preventive assemblies shall have at least the same cross-sectional area as the water service or meter. In those instances where a continuous water supply is necessary, or if the water supply cannot be temporarily interrupted for testing of assemblies, then two sets of backflow preventive assemblies shall be installed in parallel. 
(C)  No bypass shall be installed around backflow preventive assemblies. 
(D)  Double check valve assemblies may be installed below ground in a vault if approved, in writing, on a case-by-case basis, by the Department. Double check valve assemblies installed in vaults shall have sufficient clearance provided to permit testing in place or removal for maintenance, as prescribed in the standard details. Copies are available upon request from the Department. 
(E)  A reduced pressure principle backflow preventive assembly shall be installed above ground. Assemblies installed shall be accessible for testing as not to endanger the tester. Under no conditions except as provided for herein will backflow prevention assemblies be installed less than 12 inches or more than 24 inches above grade level. 
(F)  All pressure type backflow preventive assemblies which are designed for periodic field testing shall be equipped with gate valves on both the upstream and the downstream side of the assembly. In addition, test cocks shall be provided and located so that test equipment may be connected to the assembly at points that the pressure in each pressure zone may be detected, and, in addition, a test cock shall be located upstream of the upstream gate valve, as close as possible to the upstream gate valve. 
(G)  Backflow assemblies shall be protected from freezing by a method acceptable to the Department. 
§ 10-7-5 - PREMISES OR SYSTEMS REQUIRING APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTIVE DEVICES. 
(A)  An approved backflow preventive assembly of the type specified in this section shall be the minimum installation of each service connection, (whether from a fire hydrant, temporary, regular or other water service connection) to the following type of premises or systems: 
Premises Requiring Approved Backflow Preventive Assemblies Type of Assembly Required Double Check Reduced
Pressure Air Gap Pressure
Vacuum
Breaker Animal clinics, animal grooming shops x Automotive repair with steam or acid cleaning equipment or solvent facilities x Auxiliary water systems (interconnected) x Auxiliary water systems (non-interconnected) x Beverage bottling plants x Buildings greater than three stories or 34 feet in height x Buildings with house pumps or potable water storage x x Buildings with sewer ejectors (inadequate on-site protection) x Buildings with sewer ejectors (adequate on-site protection) x Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants x Car wash facilities x Centralized heating and air conditioning plants x Chemical plants x Chemically treated potable or non-potable water systems x Civil works (government owned or operated facilities not open for inspection by the Department x Commercial laundries x Dairies and cold storage plants x Film processing labs x Food processing x High school and elementary x Holding tank disposal stations x Hospitals and mortuaries x Medical and dental buildings x Sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes x Irrigation systems (premises having non-potable piping one inch and larger) x Irrigation systems (premises having separate systems) x Labs using contaminating materials x Manufacturing, processing and fabricating plants using contaminating materials x Mobile home parks x Oil and gas production facilities x Radioactive materials processing x Restricted, classified or other closed facilities x Rubber plants x Sand and gravel plants x Sewage and storm drainage facilities x Shopping centers x Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained x Water trucks, hydraulic sewer cleaning equipment x x Any premises where water supplied by the city is subject to deterioration in sanitary quality and its entry into the public water system x  
(B)  Fire protection systems will be required to have the following type of protection; 
Premises Requiring Approved Backflow Preventive Assemblies Type of Assembly Required Double Check Reduced
Pressure Air Gap Pressure
Vacuum
Breaker Direct connection from public water system (non-contaminating) x x Direct connection from public water system (contaminating) x With pump and/or storage tank x With auxiliary supply x  
§ 10-7-6 - APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTIVE DEVICES. 
(A)  As designated in § 10-7-3, the standard installation at each service connection to premises or each system requiring an approved backflow preventive assembly shall be a model and size approved by the Department. 
(B)  The term APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTIVE ASSEMBLY means an assembly approved by the Department and may mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association - A.W.W.A. C506-78 most recent revised publication Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assemblies , and has met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCCHR) of the University of Southern California established by specifications of backflow prevention assemblies - Section 10 of the most current issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control , which will be available for inspection. 
(C)  Backflow preventive assemblies which may be subject to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by FCCCHR may be listed on the current list of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies , which will be made available upon written request to the Department. 
§ 10-7-7 - MAINTENANCE, TESTING AND RECORDS. 
(A)  The user shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies and provide the Department with copies of the records. The records shall be on forms approved by the Department and shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used. 
(B)  The user shall notify the Department 15 days in advance when the annual tests are to be done, so that an official representative may witness the tests if so desired by the Department. 
(C)  Following the installation or any repair, repiping, overhaul or relocation of an assembly, the user shall have it inspected by the Department, tested and provide the Department with results of the test, before the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(D)  Testing, maintenance and repairs to the assemblies shall be made at the customers expense by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester who is approved by the Department and assisted by public works to prescribe test methods or to certify or approve persons to conduct tests. It shall be the duty of the user to see that these tests are made at least once a year, on the anniversary date of the initial inspection. 
§ 10-7-8 - INSPECTIONS. 
    The user's system must be open for inspection, at all reasonable times and in all emergencies, to authorized representatives of the Department to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When a condition becomes known, the Department may deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the user has corrected the condition in conformance with this article. 
§ 10-7-9 - DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE. 
    Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the Department if a backflow preventive assembly required by this article is not installed, tested and maintained; if it has been found that a backflow preventive assembly has been removed or bypassed or if a cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until the conditions or defects are corrected. The city may also terminate a user's service upon 20 days notice, in writing, in a non-emergency. 
§ 10-7-10 - EXISTING DEVICES AND USERS. 
(A)  If the Department determines that a user's backflow preventive assembly does not meet current standards, the user shall retrofit his or her assembly so that it will meet current standards. 
(B)  Users with water service prior to the effective date of this article may be subject to all requirements imposed by this article as determined by the Department. 
§ 10-7-11 - DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. 
    This article shall not create any liability or duty on the part of the city or any of its officers or employees. 
ARTICLE 10-8: - LOW WATER USING PLANT LIST, PHOENIX ACTIVE MANAGEMENT AREA 

§ 10-8-1 - LIST. 
    This list was compiled by the Department of Water Resources in cooperation with experts from the Desert Botanical Garden, Arizona Department of Transportation and various nurserymen and landscape specialists from the Phoenix AMA. Individuals wishing to add low water using plants to this list or delete plants from this list may submit information to the Director of Water Resources for consideration. The Director will amend the list as appropriate. 
(A)  Trees. 
Botanical Name Common Name Acacia spp Acacia Wattle Agonis flexuosa West Australia Peppermint Brachychiton populneus Bottle Tree Brahea spp. Bursera spp. Caesalpinia spp. Callistemon viminalis Weeping Bottle Brush Casuarina spp. Celtis reticulate Western Hackberry Cercidium spp. Ceratonia siliqua St. John's Bread Tree/Carob Tree Chamaerops humilis Mediterranean Fan Palm Chilopsis linearis Desert Willow Cupressus arizonica Arizona Cypress Cupressus sempervirens Italian Cypress Dalea spp. Dahlbergia sissco Sissoo Tree Eucalyptus spp. Forchammeria watscuii Geijera parviflora Australian Willow Gleditsia triacantinos Honey Locust Leucaena retusa Golden Ball Lead Tree Lysiloma spp. Olea spp. Olive Olneya tesota Ironwood Parkinsonia aculeate Mexican Palo Verde Phoenix canariensis Canary Island Date Palm Phoenix dactylifera Date Palm Pinus canariensis Canary Island Pine Pinus eldarica Afghan Pine Pinus halepensis Aleppo Pine Pinus pinea Italian Stone Pine Pinus roxburghii Chir Pine Schinus terebinthifolious Brazilian Pepper  
(B)  Shrubs. 
Botanical Name Common Name Acacia spp. Acacia/Wattle Aloysia spp. Ambrosia deltoidea Triangleleaf Bur-sage Ambrosia dumosa White Bur-sage Atriplex spp. Saltbush Baccharis spp. Berberis haematocarpa Red Barberry Bougainvillea spp. Bougainvilliea Buddleia marrubifolia Summer Lilac Caesalpinia spp. Calliandra californica Fairy Duster Calliandra eriophylla Fairy Duster Calliandra peninsularis Fairy Duster Callistemon citrinus Lemon Bottle Brush Callistemon phoeniceus Salt Resistant Bottle Brush Callistemon viminalis "Captain Cook" Dwarf Bottle Brush Calothamnus spp. Cassia spp. Cassia Celtis pallida Desert Hackberry Chrysothamnus nauseosus Rabbit Brush Cistus spp. Convolvulus cneorum Bush Morning Glory Cordia boissieri Cordia parvifolia Little Leaf Cordia Dalea spp. Dodonaea spp. Hopbush Encelia spp. Brittlebush Ephedra spp. Mormon Tea Eremaea beaufortioides Eremea Eremaea pauciflora Snow Gum Eremaea violacea Violet Eremea Eriogonum spp. Buckwheat Eucalyptus spp. Forestiera neomexicana Desert Olive Genista hispanica Spanish Broom Grevillea rosmarinifolia varieties Hakea spp. Haplopappus laricifolia Turpentine Bush Hyptis emoryi Desert Lavender Jatropha spp. Juniperus chinensis varieties Juniper Justicia spp. Kunzea spp. Lantana camara Bush Lantana Larrea tridentate Creosote Bush Leucophyllum spp. Lycium spp. Melaleuca spp. Mimosa biuncifera Waite a Minute Bush Mimosa dysocarpa Velvet Pod Mimosa Nerium oleander varieties Oleander Pyracantha spp. Pyracantha  
(C)  Groundcovers/herbaceous plants. 
Botanical Name Common Name Acacia spp. Anigozanthos spp. Kangaroo Paw Artemisia spp. Asclepias subulata Desert Milkweed Asparagus densiflorus cv. sprengeri Sprenger Asparagus Atriplex spp. Baccharis spp. Carpobrotus edulis Ice Plant Centaurea cineraria Dusty Miller Cephalophyllum spp. Red Spike Ice Plant Clianthus formosus Sturt's Desert Pea Convolvulus mauritanicus Ground Morning Glory Dalea spp. Gazania spp. Gazania Grevillea crithmifolia Spider Flower Kennedia coccinea Coral Vine Kennedia prostrata Scarlet Runner Lantana montevidensis Trailing Lantana Malephora crocea Ice Plant Myoporum parvifolium Sandalwood Oenothera berlandieri Mexican Evening Primrose Oenothera drummondii Baja Primrose Pentzia incana Karoo Groundcover Romneya coulteri Matilija Poppy Rosmarinus officinalis prostratus Prostrate Rosemary Salvia chamaedryoides Blue Sage Salvia farinacea Mealy Cup Sage Santolina chamaecyparissus Lavender Cotton Santolina virens Green Santolina Sesuvium verrucosum Sea Purslane Sphaeralcea spp. Globe-Mallow Verbena bipinnatifida Verbena Verbena peruviana Peruvian Verbena Verbena pulchella False Sand Verbena Verbena rigida Verbena  
(D)  Annuals/perennials. 
Botanical Name Common Name Abronia villosa Sand Verbena Arctotis spp. African Daisy Argemone pleicantha Prickly Poppy Baeria chrysostoma Goldfield Bahia absinthifolia Bahia Baileya multiradiata Desert Marigold Cassia covesii Catharanthus roseus cultivars Madagascar Periwinkle Celosia spp. Cockscomb Cosmos spp. Cosmos Dimorphotheca spp. African Daisy Dyssodia pentachaeta Dyssodia Eschscholzia californica California Poppy Eschscholzia mexicana Mexican Gold Poppy Gilia leptantha Showy Blue Gilia Gomphrena globosa Globe Amaranth Helichrysum bracteatum Everlasting Daisy Helipterum spp. Kallstroemia grandiflora Arizona Poppy Layia platyglossa Tidy Tips Lesquerella gordoni Gold Crucifer Linaria spp. Toadflax Lupinus densiflorus Lupine Lupinus sparsiflorus Matricaria grandiflora Pineapple Weed Melampodium leucanthum Blackfoot Daisy Mentzelia spp. Blazing Star Orthocarpus purpurascens Owl's Clover Pectis papposa Chinch Weed Penstemon spp. Phacelia spp. Tagetes spp. Marigold Ursinia spp. Ursinia  
(E)  Vines. 
Botanical Name Common Name Antigonon leptopus Mountain Rose/Queens Wreath Billardiera ringens Riverbell Flower Bougainvillea spp. Bougainvillea Campsis radicans Common Trumpet Creeper Cissus trifoliata Arizona Grape Ivy Clematis drummondii Virgin's Bower Hardenbergia comptoniana Wild Wisteria Kennedia nigricans Black Yellow Vine Macfadyena unquis - cati Cat Claw Mascagnia lilacaena Lilac Orchid Vine Mascagnia macroptera Yellow Orchid Vine Merremia aurea Yucca Solanum jasminoides Potato Vine  
(F)  Grasses. 
Botanical Name Common Name Aristida purpurea Red Three Awn Bromus rubens Red Brome Eragrostis atherstone Cochise Lovegrass Eragrostis lehmanniana Lehmann Lovegrass Muhlenbergia dumosa Giant Muhley Pennisetum setaceum Fountain Grass Schismus barbatus Schismus  
(G)  Succulents. 
Botanical Name Common Name Agave spp. Century Plant/Agave Aloe spp. Aloe Cacti (all) Dasylirion spp. Desert Spoon Fouguieria spp. Hesperaloe spp. Nolina spp. Bear Grass Yucca spp. Yucca Plumbago scandens Cape Plumbago Punica granatum varieties Pomegranate Quercus spp. Oak Rhus ovata Mountain Laurel Rhus virens Evergreen Sumac Rhus trilobata Skunkbush Ruellia californica Ruellia Ruellia peninsularis Salvia spp. (shrub only) Sage Senecio cineraria Dusty Miller Simmondsia chinensis Jojoba Sophora arizonica Sophora formosa Tecoma stans Yellow Bells Teucrium fruticans Bush Germander Vauguelinia spp. Rosewood Viguiera tomentosa Golden Eye Ziziphus obtusifolia Greythorn Pistacia spp. Pistachio Pithecellobium spp. Pittosporum phillyraeoides Willow Pittosporum Prosopis spp. Mesquite Quercus spp. Oak Rhus lancea African Sumac Sophora secundiflora Texas Mountain Laurel Tamarix aphylla Athel Tree Ulmus parvifolia 'sempervirens' Evergreen Elm Vitex agnus-castus Chaste Tree Washingtonia spp. Fan Palm Ziziphus jujuba Chinese Jujube  
(Ord. 285, N.S., passed 3-22-1988) 
CHAPTER 11: - WASTEWATER 
ARTICLE 11-1: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 11-1-1 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a safe, clean and healthy environment, at the same time providing for the maximum possible beneficial use of the city's facilities through: 
(A)  The adequate regulation of sewer construction; 
(B)  Sewer use and industrial wastewater discharges; 
(C)  Procedures to prevent the introduction of pollutants that would interfere with the treatment plant operations and be incompatible with the environment; 
(D)  Improving the feasibility of recycling and reclamation of municipal wastewater and publicly-owned treatment works residue; and 
(E)  Enforcing all applicable laws relating to discharges, as required by the state, county and federal regulatory agencies. 
§ 11-1-2 - SCOPE. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter apply to the direct or indirect discharges of all water-borne wastes to facilities of the city. 
(B)  This chapter provides for, but is not limited to: 
(1)  The regulation of sewer construction in areas within the city; 
(2)  The quantity and quality of discharged wastes; 
(3)  The degree of waste pre-treatment required; 
(4)  The setting of waste discharge fees to provide for equitable distribution of costs; 
(5)  The approval of plans for sewer construction; 
(6)  The issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharge and other miscellaneous permits; and 
(7)  The establishment of penalties for violation of this chapter. 
(C)  The city reserves the right to establish and require implementation of Best Management Practices. 
§ 11-1-3 - WASTE TREATMENT POLICY. 
    The policy of the wastewater treatment plant is to obtain the highest and best use of the city's sewage system in the conveyance, treatment and disposal of domestic and industrial sewage. The use of the city's sewage system for industrial wastewater discharges is subject to further regulation by the city. The city is committed to a policy of wastewater reclamation and re-use in order to provide an alternate source of water supply; to reduce overall costs of wastewater treatment; and to protect public health and environment. These concerns may require more stringent quality requirements on industrial wastewater dischargers than required by other government regulatory agencies. To comply with the regulations and requirements of the federal government, state and county and to permit the city to meet increasingly higher standards of treatment plant effluent and POTW residual quality, provisions are made in the chapter for the regulation of industrial waste discharges. This chapter establishes quantity and quality limitations on industrial wastewater discharges which may adversely affect the city's sewage system, treatment process or effluent quality of the POTW. Methods of cost recovery from industrial wastewater discharges are also established where the discharges may impose disproportional collection, treatment or disposal costs to the city. 
§ 11-1-4 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    ACT. The term ACT means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
    APPROVED TESTING METHODS. The measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical procedures as established in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as revised October 26, 1984. 
    AZPDES PERMIT. The Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, issued to the city by ADEQ which imposes federal standards. 
    BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs . Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site run off, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. (40 CFR § 403.3 (e)). The city reserves the right to establish and require implementations of Best Management Practices. 
    B.O.D. Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND . The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20°C expressed in milligrams per liter, mg/l by weight. 
    BRANCH SEWER. A sewer that collects sewage from one or more lateral sewers. 
    BUILDING DRAIN. The drain pipes and their hardware within a building and extending five feet beyond the foundation. 
    BUILDING SEWER. Sometimes referred to as the building or house service, is the private service line that extends from the building drain to the point of connection to the city's main line, including the apparatus used to make the connection to the city's main line. 
    CATEGORICAL PRE-TREATMENT STANDARD. The Federal Categorical Pre-Treatment Standards issued in accordance with § 307 of the Clean Water Act, as amended in 1977. 
    C.F.R. The Code of Federal Regulations. 
    CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
    COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    CONTROL MANHOLE. A special manhole positioned as an integral part of the building sewer on an industrial site to facilitate the sampling of wastes from the facility. 
    DEPARTMENT. The Utilities Department. 
    DEVELOPER. Any person engaged in organizing and financing of a sewage collecting system within an area tributary to a trunk sewer of the city sewer system. Such may be either a subdivider or a legally constituted improvement district. 
    DIRECTOR. The Utilities Director or the Utilities Director's authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    DISCHARGE. Water-borne pollutants released to a receiving stream directly or indirectly or to a sewerage system. 
(40 C.F.R. § 240.101(e)) 
    EFFLUENT. Wastewater, treated or untreated, that flows out of a treatment plant, sewer or industrial outfall. Generally refers to wastes discharged into surface waters. 
(EPA 3/88 Glossary of Environmental Terms EPA 87-017) 
    ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY. Also designated as EPA. The federal governmental agency charged with the protection of the environment. 
    GARBAGE. Solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    INFLOW MEASUREMENT. The volume of water that passes through a given cross-section of a channel during a unit of time. This flow, measured in cubic feet per second, is the amount of water fed to the stream from surface and groundwater run-off. Discharge varies according to velocity of flow, which in turn depends upon gradient (down stream slope, usually expressed in feet per mile), volume of water, load of rock particles being carried, shape of channel and cross-section area of the channel (DOI 4/70). 
    INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment plant from any non-domestic source regulated under the Clean Water Act, § 307(b), (c) or (d). 
    INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. The charges collected from industrial users of a publicly-owned treatment works to repay the proportionate federal and local share of the construction costs of the treatment works allocated to their use. 
    INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE. Any introduction into the POTW of a non-domestic pollutant which is produced by a source which would be subject to any categorical standards or pretreatment requirements if the source were to be discharged to the POTW, or contains any substance or pollutant for which a discharge limitation or prohibition has been established by any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement. 
    INDUSTRIAL USER. Any non-domestic user of the sewer system which either discharges or produces a waste which is or potentially could be discharged into the wastewater treatment plant which would be subject to any categorical standard, pre-treatment standard or local limit. 
    INDUSTRIAL USER DISCHARGE PERMIT. The permit granted by the city which each industrial user must first obtain prior to causing or allowing any industrial discharge to the sewer system. 
    INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any liquid, free flowing waste, including cooling water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources with or without suspended solids excluding uncontaminated water. 
    INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer that receives flow from a number of other large sewers or outlets and conveys the sewage to a point for treatment or disposal. 
    INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal and therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's AZPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): § 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal ACT (SWDA) (including Title 11, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(i). 
    INSPECTOR. A person authorized by the wastewater treatment plant Director to inspect wastewater generation, conveyance, processing and disposal facilities. 
    LATERAL SEWER. A sewer which discharges into a branch or other sewer and has no other common sewer tributary to it. Sometimes referred to as a STREET SEWER because it collects sewage from individual homes and business. 
    LOCAL LIMITS. Enforceable local requirements developed by POTW's to address federal standards as well as state and local regulations. These limits apply to any and all entities that contribute flow to a POTW. 
(EPA Manual Pre-treatment Program Local Limits Guidance, March 22,1988) 
    MAIN SEWER. For the purposes of these regulations, MAIN SEWER (sometime called the MAIN LINE ) refers to the public sewer line whereby private sewer connections are made and may include laterals (street laterals), branch sewers, main lines and interceptors. MAIN SEWER does not refer to any portion of the consumers' private sewer (building drain, building sewer and the connection to the public sewer or any portion thereof). 
    NATIONAL PRE-TREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5. 
    NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch or other body of surface or ground water. 
    NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pre-treatment standards under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which another source is located; or the building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or the production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors, the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(40 C.F.R. § 403.3(k)(1)) 
    PASS THROUGH. Any discharge that introduces pollutants in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's AZPDES permit. 
    PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, state, municipality, Indian tribe, political subdivision of the state or federal governmental agency or any other legal entity, including their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
    pH. A measure of the acidity (0, most acid) or alkalinity (14, most alkaline) of a liquid or solid on a scale of 0-14; pH of a neutral solution is 7.0. 
    POINT OF TIE-IN. The location of the consumer's (property owners') privately owned service connection on the city main sewer. 
    POINT OF TRANSITION. The point at which sanitary sewer ownership and responsibility changes from private to public or vise versa. 
    POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. It does not mean sewage from vessels or water, gas or other material which is injected into a well to facilitate production of oil or gas, or water derived in association with oil or gas production and disposed of in a well, if the well, used either to facilitate production or for disposal purposes, is approved by authority of the state in which the well is located and, if the state determines that the injection or disposal will not result in degradation of ground or surface water resources. 
(40 C.F.R. § 401.11(f)) 
    POTW RESIDUALS. All effluent or solids including sludge, scum, screenings and grit which are the by-product of wastewater treatment operations and which must be discharged into the environment for ultimate disposal or re-use. 
    PRE-TREATMENT. A process used to reduce, eliminate or alter the nature of wastewater pollutants from non-domestic sources before they are discharged into publicly-owned treatment works. 
(EPA, 3/88, "Glossary of Environmental Terms," Office of Public Affairs (A-107), Washington, DC 20460, EPA 87-017, March 1988. 
    PRE-TREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. All of the duties imposed upon POTW users by the Director. 
    PRIVATE SEWER. Are sanitary sewer lines and apparatus (building drain, building sewer and sewer tap) which is owned by the consumer (property owner) and which originates on the consumers property and which may extend out into the public right-of-way or public utility easement, whichever the case may be, and terminates at the sewer connection, and includes the connection. 
    PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    PUBLIC SEWER. Are sanitary sewer lines that are owned and or operated by the City of Tolleson or other entities and which are not otherwise considered by the Department as being private. 
    PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). Any device or system used in the treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by § 502(4) of the Clean Water Act of 1977). This definition includes sewers, pipes or other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW providing treatment. 
(40 C.F.R. § 260.10) 
    SANITARY SEWAGE. Any and all waste substances, liquids or solids, but excluding storm, surface, ground waters and industrial wastes. 
    SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries liquid and water borne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally to a municipal treatment plant. 
(EPA 11/82) 
    SEWAGE. The waste and wastewater produced by residential, commercial and industrial establishments and discharged into the sewers. 
    SEWAGE SYSTEM. A network of wastewater collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal facilities interconnected by sewers and owned by the city. 
    SEWER CONNECTION. The apparatus (e.g. including but not limited to saddle and associate hardware) used by the consumer to make a tie-in to the city's public sewer system on the city operated main sewer. Commonly referred to as the TAP. 
    SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. All industrial users subject to categorical pre-treatment standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N; and any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant or is designated as such by the control authority as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pre-treatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6). 
    SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE. Any violation of pre-treatment requirements (limits, sampling, analysis, reporting and meeting compliance schedules and regulatory deadlines). 
    SLUG LOAD. Any pollutant discharged to the sewer system in the volume or strength as to cause interference. In particular, any pollutant concentration, quantity or flow rate which during any period of 15 minutes or more is greater than five times the average 24 hour concentration, quantity or flow rate of the pollutant during normal operation. 
    STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE (S.I.C.). A coded classification of industries based upon economic activity developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce, as published in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual , 1982, Office of Management and Budget. 
    STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters drainage and groundwater, but excludes sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    SURFACTANT. Surface active chemicals which tend to lower the surface tension between liquids, such as between acid and water (EPA 3/83a); surface active agents used in detergents to cause lathering (EPA 3/88). 
    SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids measured in milligrams per liter that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device or other conventional means. 
    TERMINAL MANHOLE. A manhole that is placed for the purpose of extending the public sanitary sewer (city owned main line) beyond the right-of-way to more effectively serve the community. 
    TRUNK SEWER. A sewer that transports wastewater from collecting sewers to the treatment plant. A TRUNK SEWER does not ordinarily service individual properties but rather receives tributary branches and serves a larger territory. 
    USER CHARGE. Fees collected for the treatment of wastewater resulting in proportionate distribution or operation, maintenance and replacement cost. 
    WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT. Those officers and agents of the city supervising sewer operations for the city. 
    WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs continuously or intermittently. 
§ 11-1-5 - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS; WASTE DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS. 
    Except as provided herein, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewer: 
(A)  Any storm, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer; 
(B)  Any discharge containing temperatures in amounts which will inhibit biological activity resulting in interference, or allowing the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to exceed 104°F; 
(C)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(D)  Any garbage that has not been property shredded; 
(E)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, grits, such as brick, cement, carbides or any other solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works; 
(F)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic, poisonous or corrosive substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant; 
(G)  Any waters or wastes containing any pollutant released at a flow rate or pollutant concentration that will cause interference with the wastewater treatment plant; 
(H)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance; 
(I)  Any waste which may contain fats, oils or grease in quantities so as to require special handling; 
(J)  Any surface active chemical which would tend to lower the surface tension between liquids, such as between acid and water; any surface active agents used in detergents to cause lathering; 
(K)  Any waters or wastes that cause a pass through resulting in the wastewater treatment plant violating any requirements, including petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil products or mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b)(6)) 
(L)  Any waste having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any corrosive or detrimental characteristics that may cause injury to wastewater treatment or maintenance personnel or may cause damage to the structure, equipment or other physical facilities of the sewage system; 
(M)  Any water added for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pre-treatment standard or local limit established by the city; 
(N)  Any waste containing over 0.1 milligrams/liter of dissolved sulfides; 
(O)  Any waste requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes which would result in an excess of five-one hundredths residual; 
(P)  Any waste producing excessive discoloration of wastewater or treatment plant effluent; 
(Q)  Any wastewater containing the EPA limits included in this chapter, except as superseded by local limits; 
(R)  Any quantities of radioactive material wastes; 
(S)  It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human excrement, garbage or other waste; 
(T)  It is unlawful to discharge to any stream or watercourse in the city any sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter; 
(U)  No run-off from roofs and no surface drains for rainwater shall be connected to any sanitary sewer. No surface or storm water, seepage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters shall be permitted to enter any sanitary sewer by any devices or method whatsoever; 
(V)  Discharge of a substance which creates a fire or explosive hazard in the treatment works is prohibited. The recent revisions to the general pre-treatment regulations further clarify this prohibition by specifying that discharges with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C, using the Pensky-Martens Standard D-93-79 or D-93-80 are prohibited; and/or 
(W)  It is unlawful for any hauled wastes, including industrial wastes, to be discharged into the city's sewer system from any area being served either directly or indirectly by the city. 
(X)  Any waste containing over 250 mg/l by weight of BOD (five day) and 250 mg/l by weight suspended solids content. 
§ 11-1-6 - LIABILITY OF USER. 
    Any residential, commercial or industrial user who unlawfully discharges, or causes the discharge of industrial wastewater which causes damage to the wastewater treatment plant, interference, pass through, upset or any other damages resulting in costs to the wastewater treatment, shall be liable to the city for all damages occasioned thereby. This chapter is not intended to create, nor does it create, any private right of action in any person. When requested, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within the time period specified in the request. A commercial or industrial user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within five days. 
(40 CFR § 403.16(3)) 
ARTICLE 11-2: - APPLICATIONS, PERMITS, PLANS AND INSPECTIONS 

§ 11-2-1 - APPLICATION FOR SERVICE. 
    No sewer connection to the city sanitary sewer system shall be made or used by any person, except upon written application furnished to the city by the owner, or his or her authorized agent, of the premises to which sanitary sewer service is to be furnished. A permit from the city is required prior to any connection. 
§ 11-2-2 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. 
(A)  Except as provided in § 11-4-5, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial wastewater directly or indirectly to sewage facilities owned by the city without first obtaining a city permit for industrial wastewater discharge. The duration of an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall not exceed 12 months. 
(B)  The permit for industrial wastewater discharge may require: 
(1)  Pre-treatment of industrial wastewater before discharge; 
(2)  Restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day; 
(3)  Payment of additional charges to defray increased costs to the city created by the wastewater discharge which shall be collected through the use of industrial cost recovery and user charges, as defined herein; and 
(4)  Other conditions as may be required to effectuate the purpose of this chapter. 
(C)  No person shall discharge industrial wastewater in excess of the quantity or quality limitations set by the permit for the industrial user discharge permit. Any person desiring to discharge wastewater or use facilities which are not in conformance with the industrial user discharge permit shall apply to the city for an amended permit. The city reserves the right to develop and implement certain local limits through the permitting process. No user shall in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a substitute to achieve an applicable pretreatment standard unless expressly authorized. 
(D)  An industrial user may claim information submitted as confidential by stamping the words "Confidential Business Information" on each page containing the information and demonstrating to the Director's satisfaction that trade secrets and confidential business information would be endangered by making the information public. Data on industrial effluent quality may not be given confidential treatment. 
(E)  The city may, in addition, require that the discharge of certain wastewater be limited to specific sewers within the city, and peak flows or discharges may require restriction or regulation. The industrial user discharge permit may also prohibit certain wastewater components. Due to the differences of various business and industrial users, a list of examples of prohibited components is not feasible. 
§ 11-2-3 - CONSTRUCTION PLANS. 
(A)  No person other than employees of the city or persons contracting to do work for the city shall construct or cause to be constructed, or alter or cause to be altered, any public sewer, lateral sewer, house connection or industrial connection sewer, sewage pumping plant, pollution control plant or other sewage works within the city where existing or proposed wastewater flows will discharge directly or indirectly to facilities of the city without first obtaining approval of sewage construction plans from the Director. 
(B)  The contractor shall submit for approval by the city and the Engineering Divisions of the county environmental services division and the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality detailed construction plans and the specifications and other details as required to describe fully the proposed sewage facility. The plans shall have been prepared under the supervision of and shall be signed by an engineer of suitable training who is registered in the State of Arizona. 
(C)  Construction plans and specifications for sewage facilities shall conform to the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction , as adopted by the Council as well as those of other regulatory agencies, i.e. county, state and federal and the Department. 
(D)  An approval of plans for sewage construction shall expire one year after date of approval unless construction has been initiated. 
§ 11-2-4 - NON-TRANSFER OF PERMITS AND APPROVAL. 
    Approval of plans for sewage construction, trunk sewer connection permits and industrial user discharge permits are not transferable from one person to another person or from one location to another location. 
§ 11-2-5 - INSPECTIONS. 
(A)  Inspections. Inspections of each facility that is involved either directly or indirectly with the discharge of wastewater to the city's sewage system shall be made by the Director or his or her designee as deemed necessary. 
(1)  These facilities shall include, but not be limited to, sewers, sewage pumping plants, pollution control plants, all industrial processes, industrial wastewater generation, conveyance and pre-treatment facilities, devices and connecting sewers and all similar sewage facilities. Inspections shall be made to determine that the facilities are maintained and operated properly and are adequate to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Access to all of the above facilities or to other facilities directly or indirectly connected to the city's sewage system shall be given to authorized personnel of the city at all reasonable times, including those occasioned by emergency conditions. Any permanent or temporary obstruction to easy access to the sewage facility to be inspected shall be promptly removed by the facility user or owner at the written or verbal request of the Director or his or her designee and shall not be replaced. 
(3)  No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to an authorized city inspector attempting to inspect any wastewater generation, conveyance or treatment facility connected directly or indirectly to the city's sewage system. 
(B)  Plans and specifications. It shall be the joint responsibility of the contractor and the industrial user to file with the Director or his or her designee one set of each phase of construction plans, i.e. preliminary design plans, amended plans, final as-built plans. 
(C)  Construction inspections. All sewers to be attached directly or indirectly to a city sewer shall be inspected by personnel of the city during construction. The city shall be notified at least 48 hours prior to cutting into the city's sewer. In making a connection to the city sewer, no physical alteration of the city's facilities shall commence until an inspector is present. No wastewater shall be discharged into any sewage facility tributary to the city facility prior to obtaining inspections and approval of sewage construction by the city. Following satisfactory completion of construction, the city will issue a construction inspection certificate upon request. 
§ 11-2-6 - AVAILABILITY OF RECORDS. 
    All records pertaining to an industrial user's monitoring activities shall be made available to the Director or the Director's designee for the purpose of examination and copying as set forth in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(0) or as amended. These records shall be retained by the industrial user for a minimum of three years, as required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(2) or as amended. 
ARTICLE 11-3: - PRELIMINARY TREATMENT REQUIREMENTS 

§ 11-3-1 - INDUSTRIAL PRE-TREATMENT. 
(A)  Industrial users are required to meet all applicable local, state and federal discharge limits on any pollutant. This requirement applies to those standards promulgated by EPA after this chapter is actually adopted. The city will review the federal standards and amend this chapter as needed to ensure the enforceability of standards on local users. 
(B)  The federal or state standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter, shall replace the limitations as set forth in this chapter. 
(C)  An industrial wastewater pre-treatment system or device shall be required by the Director to treat industrial flows prior to discharge to the sewer when: 
(1)  It is necessary to restrict or prevent the discharge to the sewer of certain waste constituents; 
(2)  To distribute more equally over a longer time period any peak discharges of industrial wastewater; or 
(3)  To accomplish any pre-treatment result required by the Director. 
(D)  All pre-treatment systems or devices shall be approved by the Director. All pre-treatment systems shall require an engineering design and have plans prepared and signed by an engineer of suitable discipline licensed in the State of Arizona. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptor shall not be required for a building used for residential purposes. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at the owner's expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(E)  A device shall be provided for the purpose of neutralizing or reducing the amounts of phenols, metals or pesticides prior to their discharge into the city's sewer system so that the discharge meets set standards. 
(F)  In addition, the Director may also require the installation of a pH probe with recorder at a point prior to any industrial discharge entering the city's collection system. This device shall be properly installed and maintained by the industrial discharger at his or her expense. The admission into the public sanitary sewers of any waters or wastes having characteristics exceeding the following limits shall be subject to the review and approval of the city, and, where necessary, in the opinion of the city, the owner shall provide, at his or her own expense, the preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the objectionable characteristics to within the following allowable limits: 
(1)  Five day B.O.D. of 250 milligrams per liter by weight; 
(2)  Suspended solids content of 250 milligrams per liter by weight; 
(3)  Any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in this section; 
(4)  A pH range of 6.5 to 9.0 s.u.; 
(5)  An average daily flow of 2% of the average daily flow of the city. In addition to all other requirements, each industrial user who discharges an industrial discharge into the sewer system shall also: 
(a)  Obtain an industrial discharge permit from the Director. Any application for a permit or an amended permit shall contain the information stipulated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1) through (b)(7) and C.F.R. § 403.12(c)(1) through (c)(3) as amended. Any person intending to begin any new industrial discharge, modifications or any additional industrial discharge not already allowed pursuant to an existing permit, shall first obtain a new or amended industrial discharge permit, as applicable, from the Director prior to initiating the discharge; 
(b)  Comply fully with all requirements and conditions of this chapter and of any industrial user permit. Once a permit is issued no industrial user shall make any discharge in violation of this chapter or of the industrial user permit; 
(c)  Provide all the pre-treatment necessary to comply with the categorical standards and pre-treatment requirements required by this article; 
(d)  Maintain a continuous discharge record which clearly identifies the: 
1.  The dates and times of all industrial discharges; and 
2.  Chemical nature, concentration and volume of all discharges. 
(e)  Provide the Director with all the same self monitoring reports and notices which the industrial user is required to submit to the POTW or any other authority in accordance with provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12. In particular, the industrial user shall meet the requirements of: 
1.  Baseline monitoring reports 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b); 
2.  Compliance schedule progress reports 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(c); 
3.  Reports on compliance with categorical pre-treatment standard deadline 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d); 
4.  Periodic reports on continued compliance 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e); 
5.  Notice of potential problems, including slug loading 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(f); and 
6.  Notification of changed discharge 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(j). 
(G)  All reports and any other documents relating to indirect discharges shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user as dictated by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(1). 
(H)  All industrial users are required to develop a slug control plan which outlines discharge practices (including non-routine batch discharges), describes stored chemicals and contains procedures both to notify the POTW immediately of slug discharges and to prevent adverse impacts from any accidental spill. 
(I)  Industrial users are required to develop a compliance pre-treatment standard. This should be done in the shortest time feasible and within any deadline established by state or federal standards. All pre-treatment systems or devices shall be approved by the Director and by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. 
§ 11-3-2 - APPROVAL. 
    Plans and specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval by the city and to all appropriate regulatory agencies with jurisdiction. No construction of facilities shall begin until the approvals are obtained in writing. 
§ 11-3-3 - MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the property owner at his or her own expense and subject to inspection by the Wastewater Department. 
§ 11-3-4 - MANHOLES. 
    When required by the Wastewater Department, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling of wastes, and it shall be installed in a manner as to prevent the discharge of any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run off, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water. A manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Wastewater Department. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
§ 11-3-5 - TESTS AND ANALYSIS. 
(A)  All tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with the latest Approved Testing Methods , 40 C.F.R. part 136, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in § 11-3-4 or upon suitable samples taken at a control manhole. Periodic measurements of flow rates, flow columns, B.O.D. and suspended solids for use in determining the annual industrial wastewater treatment surcharge and the measurements of other constituents believed necessary by the Director shall be made by all industrial wastewater dischargers unless specifically relieved of the obligation by the Director. All sampling analysis and flow measurements of industrial wastewater shall be performed by an independent laboratory or by the laboratory of the industrial discharger approved by the Director and licensed by the Arizona Department of Health Services. Prior to submittal to the city of data developed in the contracted laboratory of an industrial discharger, the results shall be certified by a responsible administrative official of the industrial discharger under the penalty of perjury. 
(40 C.F.R. § 403.12(n)) 
(B)  Those industrial wastewater dischargers required to make periodic measurements of flow volumes and constituents shall make these determinations at a frequency and in a manner as determined by the Director. Measurements to certify the quantities of waste flows and waste constituents reported by industrial dischargers will be conducted on a random basis by personnel of the Wastewater Department. 
(C)  Industrial waste dischargers, prior to receiving a connection permit, shall provide the city with a chemical, mineral and bacteriological breakdown of the proposed waste discharge. 
§ 11-3-6 - PRE-TREATMENT PROGRAM ENFORCEMENT AND RESPONSE GUIDELINES. 
(A)  The goal of the pre-treatment program for the city is to obtain compliance with all applicable laws and regulations by those regulated dischargers into the publicly-owned treatment works or POTW. These enforcement response guidelines and penalties shall be interpreted in the interest of obtaining compliance with all applicable laws and regulations by dischargers into the POTW. 
(B)  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Contact by inspector; 
(2)  Notice of violation; 
(3)  Increased monitoring and testing; 
(4)  Administrative orders: modification of permits, fines, other appropriate orders; 
(5)  Order to show cause - formal meeting requiring the discharger to appear and answer either specific allegations or indicate why further enforcement should not occur; 
(6)  Publication of significant violators and imposition of fines; 
(7)  Civil action including injunctive relief; 
(8)  Termination of service; and 
(9)  Criminal investigation and action. 
(C)  In determining any enforcement response, the wastewater treatment plant Director shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Previous compliance history, length of violation; 
(2)  Number of violations; 
(3)  Seriousness of effects to facilities; 
(4)  Potential effects of the violation to the public health; 
(5)  History of the violation; and 
(6)  Any other relevant factors as part of determining what enforcement action is to be taken including the above-stated goal to obtain compliance. 
ARTICLE 11-4: - LIABILITY AND DAMAGES 

§ 11-4-1 - RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIABILITIES. 
(A)  The city shall not be responsible for the installation, maintenance or inspection of the consumer's service line piping or apparatus or for any defects therein. 
(B)  The city shall have the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in a manner as to prevent cross connection or backflow. 
(C)  Under normal conditions, the consumer shall be notified of any anticipated interruption of service. 
(D)  The city shall not be responsible for the negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the Wastewater Department resulting in any interruption of service or damage to the property of the consumer. 
(E)  The city may refuse service to any prospective consumer when the capacity of the sewer system will not permit additional loads being placed thereon. 
§ 11-4-2 - CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY. 
(A)  Building or house sewer connections on the consumer's premises shall be so arranged as to provide service to one lot. If additional service is required, it will be considered as a separate and individual account. 
(B)  The consumer's house or building service line, sewer connection and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer, at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the city rules and regulations and in full compliance with the regulations of the county's and state's Departments of Health. 
(C)  The consumer shall safeguard the city's property placed on the consumer's premises and shall permit access to it only by the authorized representatives of the Sewer Department. 
(D)  In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the city or any accident or injury to persons or property is caused by or results from the negligence or wrongful act of the consumer, his or her agents or employees, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the consumer to the city and any liability otherwise resulting shall be assumed by the consumer. The amount of the loss or damage or the cost of repairs may be added to the consumer's bill and, if not paid, service may be discontinued by the Sewer Department. 
(E)  The city may discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; and 
(2)  The consumer's willful disregard of or refusal to comply with this chapter or other rules as may be adopted by the Council. 
(F)  The city may discontinue service when, in the opinion of the city, an actual or threatened discharge presents an imminent or substantial danger to the health and welfare of the people, to the environment or the process of its wastewater treatment plant or to its violating of any condition of its AZPDES permit. If, after notification to discontinue discharge, any person fails to do so voluntarily, the city will physically sever the sewer connection to prevent or minimize the damage to the treatment plant. 
(G)  When service to a consumer shall require the laying of any city sewer lines or the installation of any other city property on, under, across or over the consumer's property, the consumer will grant to the city an easement, right-of-way or license for the installation. 
(H)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the consumer shall be responsible for all sewer lines and repairs thereto up to the point of tie-in with the city owned main line. 
§ 11-4-3 - PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS. 
(A)  Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain within the city any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(B)  It is unlawful for any waste hauler, recreational vehicle or waste from septic tanks or cesspools to be discharged into the city's sewer system from any area being served either directly or indirectly by the city. 
(C)  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system which complies with regulations of the County Health Department and Department of Environmental Quality, EPA or other regulatory agencies as required. The private sewage disposal system shall be constructed, maintained and operated at all times in a sanitary manner. 
(D)  Within 180 days after a public sewer becomes available within 200 feet of any property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this code, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
§ 11-4-4 - TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the city sewage works. 
§ 11-4-5 - SPECIAL AGREEMENTS. 
    No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement between the city and an industrial concern or outside public or private jurisdiction which would allow the acceptance of wastewater flows of unusual strength or character or those flows generated from outside the city limits, subject to payment therefore, or superseding, affecting or interfering with the rights and obligations pursuant to the agreements in effect as of November 26, 1991. The agreements are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Any agreements entered into after November 26, 1991, must be at least as stringent as applicable state and federal requirements. At no time will national categorical pre-treatment standards be waived or modified. 
§ 11-4-6 - PUBLICATION OF NON-COMPLIANCE LIST. 
    The Director shall publish, annually, a list of industrial users significantly violating pre-treatment requirements for a period of 12 months. Significant violation is considered a violation which remains uncorrected 45 days after being notified of non-compliance, which is part of a pattern of non-compliance over a 12-month period which involves a failure to accurately report non-compliance or which resulted in the Director exercising emergency authority. 
ARTICLE 11-5: - CHARGES 

§ 11-5-1 - SEWER CONNECTIONS. 
(A)  In addition to all other requirements of these regulations and the city, the consumer (property owner) shall bare all expenses for the installation and repair their sewer connection and building service. The consumer is responsible to obtain a licensed contractor and building permit prior to installing or performing any repairs to the building sewer or service connection within the right-of-way or public utility easement or private property. New construction and any repairs must be inspected by the city and approved prior to backfilling. 
(B)  Any sewer connection made outside the corporate limits of the city shall be at the discretion of the Council. In addition to all other requirements, the consumer (property owner) shall bare all expenses for the installation and repair their sewer connection and building service. The consumer is responsible to obtain a licensed contractor and building permit prior to installing or performing any repairs to the building sewer or service connection within the right-of-way or public utility easement. 
(C)  The owner of the property for which sewer service is requested shall sign an application and furnish a legal description of the property to be served. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to construct the building sewer up the main sewer designated by the city and including the connection to the main sewer at the point of tie-in. Service will be granted only where adequate collection lines have been installed. 
§ 11-5-2 - SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. 
    Sewer service charges are hereby imposed on all users of the sewage system of the city as per Res. 595, as may be amended from time to time. 
(A)  A monthly service charge is made for each single family residential living unit. In those cases where more than one dwelling unit is situated on a single residential lot, a charge is calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
User Charge ($/yr)= Flow Volume (MG/yr) × Unit Cost of Flow ($/MG) + Administrative Cost ($/yr) Number of Customers 
(B)  Multiple dwelling units including, but not limited to, apartments, duplexes, town houses, mobile home parks and the like shall pay a monthly user charge each month for each unit whether occupied or not. The charge shall be calculated according to Res. 595. 
(C)  Commercial establishments including, but not limited to, the following: hotels, service stations, equipment repair and shop facilities, barber and beauty shops, coin operated laundries, garages, wholesale and retail stores, banks, schools, restaurants, bars, hospital and doctor offices shall pay a monthly user charge. In the event the establishment does not receive its water supply from the city, the customer serviced will provide water metering at the customer's expense. Billing calculations are to be made on the basis of water consumption. The user charge shall be calculated according to Res. 595. 
(D)  A user charge applicable to a specific industrial customer shall be established by permit to be a specific percentage of the total operating and maintenance budget determined at the time a permit is issued to a specific industrial customer. 
(Res. 595, passed 7-24-1990; Am. Res. 546, passed 8-9-1988) 
§ 11-5-3 - INDUSTRIAL WASTE TREATMENT CHARGES. 
(A)  Non-process wastewater charges are to be based on a per fixture unit charge with a minimum monthly charge. 
(B)  Industrial wastewater discharges, in compliance with §§ 11-1-5 and 11-3-1 of this chapter, shall be charged pursuant to annual fees and rates as referenced in § 11-5-6. 
(Am. Res. 546, passed 8-9-1988) 
§ 11-5-4 - INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGES. 
    Industrial dischargers to the sewer system shall be required to participate in the payment of capital costs equal to that required to provide treatment works capacity for the treatment of industrial wastes. The industrial waste discharger shall, at the discharger's expense, provide the preliminary treatment so as to discharge into the public sewer system only those wastes that are within the limits of strength as defined in §§ 11-1-5 and 11-3-1. A review of all state, county and U.S. government rules and regulations shall be conducted annually to determine compliance with the rules and to determine industrial cost recovery charges. Industrial cost recovery charges shall be calculated pursuant to annual fees and rates as referenced in § 11-5-6. 
(Am. Res. 546, passed 8-9-1988) 
§ 11-5-5 - USER FEES. 
(A)  Each sewer service account shall be billed on a monthly basis for earlier with water system, § 10-2-3. Industrial accounts will be billed monthly in accordance with the provisions of §§ 11-5-3 and 11-5-4 of this chapter. 
(B)  All money gathered and received as a result of charges made by this chapter shall be deposited into accounts under the following headings: 
(1)  Residential sewer service charge receipts; 
(2)  Industrial waste treatment charge receipts; and 
(3)  Industrial cost recovery charge receipts. 
(Am. Res. 546, passed 8-9-1988) 
§ 11-5-6 - RATES BY ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION. 
    The Tolleson City Council may by ordinance or resolution periodically establish the rates to be charged to all persons receiving wastewater service from the city. 
(Am. Res. 546, passed 8-9-1988; Am. Ord. 471, N.S., passed 3-25-2008) 
§ 11-5-7 - BIENNIAL REVIEW. 
(A)  Sewer user charge rates shall be reviewed at least biennially. 
(B)  The reviews shall result in revision of user charges to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance of the sewage system; 
(3)  Apply excess revenues from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rate accordingly; and 
(4)  Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the sewer use charge rate and that portion of the total bill attributable to operation and maintenance and replacement costs for sewer service. 
ARTICLE 11-6: - JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS 
Section 

§ 11-6-1 - JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS. 
(A)  Whenever the city finds that a user has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the Director may ask the Attorney to take appropriate legal action. 
(B)  This action may include the following: 
(1)  Prohibitive injunctions; 
(2)  Mandatory injunctions for corrective action and cleanup; 
(3)  Civil penalties in accordance with this chapter; 
(4)  Criminal penalties pursuant to § 1-1-8 of this code; 
(5)  Recovery of civil damages, penalties and costs to the wastewater treatment plant; and/or 
(6)  Any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by city, state or federal law. 
§ 11-6-2 - CIVIL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. 
(A)  The civil penalties for violation of any article of this chapter, any part of a permit written and issued in compliance with this chapter or any requirement of a notification of violation written and issued in compliance with this chapter shall be levied pursuant to the laws and regulations of the United States and the State of Arizona as well as the ordinances of the city and shall be no less than a minimum of $1,000 per violation per day. 
(B)  The civil penalties for non-submittal of reports, non-compliance with the reporting or application requirements required in this chapter or a permit, or failure to complete an increment of progress of a compliance schedule, shall not exceed a maximum of $25,000 per violation per day in which the requirements are not fulfilled. 
(C)  A person who knowingly records, or offers for recordation or filing to a governmental agency, false information is subject to a class 6 felony, punishable by fines up to $150,000 and imprisonment of one year. 
(A.R.S. §§ 13-2407, 13-701, 13-801) 
§ 11-6-3 - INSPECTION AND MONITORING. 
    Any user shall comply with the inspection and monitoring provisions authorized by Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, specifically § 403.8(F)(1)(V) including, but not limited to, the city having the right to: 
(A)  Enter at reasonable times the user's premises; 
(B)  Inspect generally for compliance; 
(C)  Take independent samples; 
(D)  Require installation of monitoring equipment; and 
(E)  Inspect and copy records. 
ARTICLE 11-7: - NOTIFICATION OF PERMIT REVOCATION 

§ 11-7-1 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
(A)  The city may only revoke a permit upon compliance with the enforcement response guidelines, after 72 hours of written notice of hearing, unless a hearing is expressly waived, in writing, by the permit holder and a finding is made by the Director that the permit holder has violated any provision of this chapter. 
(B)  Any permit holder whose permit has been revoked shall immediately cease all discharge of any industrial wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant. 
§ 11-7-2 - FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PERMIT REVOCATION. 
    In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the notification of permit revocation, the Director shall take steps as necessary to insure compliance as authorized by the statutory and regulatory laws of the city, Maricopa County, the State of Arizona and the U.S. Government. 
§ 11-7-3 - RESOLUTION OF PERMIT REVOCATION. 
    Before any further discharge of industrial wastewater may be made by the user, the user must apply for and obtain a new permit for industrial wastewater discharge, pay all charges that would be required upon initial application, and pay all delinquent fees, charges and other sums as the permit holder may owe to the city. Costs incurred by the city in revoking the permit and disconnecting the industrial sewer shall be paid for by the user before issuance of a new permit. 
CHAPTER 15: - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE 15-1: - DEFINITIONS 

§ 15-1-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this Code, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory - not merely directory. All references to days shall mean calendar days, unless otherwise specified. References to "this Code" are to this Cable Communications Code. 
(1)  "Access channel" shall mean one or more channels dedicated in whole or in part for local non-commercial programming which is not originated by a cable company; provided that such access programming shall not include (i) the retransmission of local television broadcast signals or (ii) programming produced by persons unaffiliated with the cable company under the provisions of Section 612 of the Cable Act. 
(2)  "Affiliate" shall mean any person who owns or controls, is owned by or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with a licensee. 
(3)  "Applicant" shall mean a person who applies for a license to provide cable service in the city. 
(4)  "Application" shall refer to the offer by a qualified applicant to furnish and provide a cable system and cable services to residents, businesses, industries, and institutions within the city in accordance with the city's specifications. 
(5)  "Basic service" shall mean any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. Each such tier shall include all access channels, as defined in Section 611 of the Cable Act. 
(6)  "Cable Act" shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, including the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the "1996 Act"). 
(7)  "Cable services" or "cable service" shall be defined as (A) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming and other programming services and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such programming and programming services. 
(8)  "Cable system" shall mean a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable services that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city (as hereinafter defined), but such term does not include (a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (b) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (d) an open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 653; or (e) any facility of an electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. Any reference to licensee's cable system refers to the cable system as a whole or any part thereof. "Interactive on-demand services" means a service providing video programming to subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis, but does not include services providing video programming prescheduled by the programming provider. 
(9)  "Change of service" shall mean all requests by existing subscribers for modifications to their cable service, including without limitation additions or deletions of premium services, additional outlets, remote controls, and FM service. Such term shall not include initial installation of basic service, total disconnection of basic service, or service calls. 
(10)  "City" shall mean the City of Tolleson, a municipal corporation of the State of Arizona, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form. 
(11)  "City Council" shall mean the present governing body of the city or any future Council constituting the legislative body of the city. 
(12)  "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
(13)  "Completion of construction" or "complete system construction" shall mean "satisfactorily complete" and "fully activated." In each instance, these terms shall mean that, for aerial construction, strand has been put up and all necessary cable has been lashed, for underground construction, that all cable has been laid and trenches refilled, all road surfaces restored to the city's satisfaction, and, except as prevented by weather conditions or delayed because of seasons, landscaping restored; that all amplifier housings and modules have been installed, that power supplies have been installed, that construction of the headends or hubs has been completed, and all necessary processing equipment has been installed; and that any and all other construction necessary for the cable system to be ready to deliver cable service to subscribers has been completed with no unresolved violations of this Code or the license. Final balancing shall have been conducted on each otherwise completed segment of the cable system before direct marketing of that segment begins. It is expected that segments of less than the entire cable system will be activated and final balanced when completed. Construction of any segment or of the entire cable system will not be considered complete until final balance has been conducted on such segment (or in the case of the entire cable system, until final balancing and proof of performance tests have been conducted on all segments of the cable system). The term "completion of construction" does not include marketing and installation of subscriber service. 
(14)  "Connection" shall mean, with regard to connections to public buildings, including schools, the installation of fiber optic or coaxial cable or other system-related facility through the outer wall of the building leaving adequate excess facility to permit further connection to other facilities, plant, or cable within the building, as set forth in the license. 
(15)  "Educational access channel" shall mean any channel or bandwidth on a cable system set aside by a licensee or educational use. 
(16)  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, or a designated representative. 
(17)  "Governmental access channel" shall mean any channel or bandwidth on a cable system set aside by a licensee for governmental use. 
(18)  "Cross revenues" shall be the basis for computing the license fee under this chapter and shall mean any and all cash, credits, property, or other consideration of any kind or nature in any way derived and received from the operation of a licensee's cable system to provide cable services (as defined from time to time by applicable federal law) within the license area received directly or indirectly by a licensee, its affiliates, or any person in which a licensee has a financial interest, including the studios and other facilities associated therewith. Cross revenues include, by way of illustration and not limitation, monthly fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel, or per-program cable service; installation, disconnection, reconnection, and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees and any other fees from lease or license of the cable system for cable services; late fees and administrative fees; fees, payments, or other consideration received from programmers for carriage of programming on the cable system; revenues from converter rentals or sales; studio rental, production equipment rental, and associated personnel fees; advertising revenues; barter; revenues from program guides; and revenues from home shopping services and bank-at-home channels; and, (to the extent permitted by applicable law) revenues from Internet services provided using the cable system to the extent they are cable services. Gross revenues shall include an allocated portion of any revenue derived by the licensee or its affiliates pursuant to any regional, national or international compensation arrangement for any service or activity derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the license area, such as advertising. Such an allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the license area divided by the total number of subscribers relevant to such regional or national arrangements. When a licensee (or an affiliate) holds other cable television licenses in Maricopa County and receives and allocates gross revenues from advertising revenues not covered by the preceding sentence, leased channel fees, and studio and production equipment rental (and associated personnel fees), gross revenues derived from these sources shall be allocated based on the number of subscribers of licensee (or an affiliate) in the town divided by the total number of subscribers of licensee (or an affiliate) in Maricopa County, less those in any jurisdiction in which a licensee (or its affiliate) does not allocate its gross revenues derived from these sources. Gross revenues shall not include any bad debt, provided however that all or part of any such actual bad debt that is written off but subsequently collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period collected. Gross revenues shall not include actual converter deposits that are returned to subscribers, actual amounts refunded to subscribers by a licensee, money received by a licensee (or any of its affiliates) as payment for cooperative advertising, or receipts of any sales or use taxes, or any other taxes which are imposed upon subscriber by any taxing authority and which the licensee is required to collect from a subscriber on behalf of said taxing authority. The license fee is not such a tax. Gross revenues shall not include cash, credit, property or other consideration of any kind or nature received by a licensee's affiliates when such affiliate has all the following characteristics: the affiliate is a separate legal entity, with separate employees, with separate financial records (which may be part of consolidated financial reporting records), and a separate mission; makes payment to licensee which meet market standards for the services and industries involved, even if it does not offer and provide its services to persons other than licensee in the same industry as licensee; and was established for valid business purposes and not with the intent and purpose of circumventing payment of license fees on gross revenues. This definition shall be interpreted to include all revenues that may be subject to a license fee consistent with federal law. 
(19)  "Initial activation of cable service" shall mean with respect to a particular segment (as defined in any license issued hereunder), or with respect to a group of segments or the entire cable system, as the case may be, that, all proposed cable services and cable system capabilities as stated in the license are available and/or in place, construction has been completed, and the completed segment or segments in question or the entire cable system, as the case may be, have been activated. 
(20)  "Initial license" shall mean a license sought by, or granted to, a person who does not hold a license. 
(21)  " Institutional network" shall mean video, audio, digital, videotext, data, and/or any other one-way or two-way transmission or reception facilities or services provided to institutional users on an individual, private-channel basis, not normally accessible to regular subscribers. This may include signals among institutional users. 
(22)  "Interconnect" of "interconnection of facilities" shall mean connection of one or more channels of a licensee's system with other cable systems by direct cable, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate methods. 
(23)  "License" shall mean any authorization granted under this Code in terms of a privilege, permit, license, or otherwise to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system in the city, and to provide non-cable communication services including initial licenses and renewal licenses (as defined herein). Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city in accordance with the City of Tolleson Sales Tax Code or Chapter 8 of the Tolleson City Code. 
(24)  "License area" shall mean the current incorporated boundaries of the city and any future annexed area, unless the terms of a license provide otherwise. 
(25)  "Licensee" means the person or entity to which a license hereafter is granted for continuation, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of a cable system. 
(26)  "Licensor" means the City of Tolleson as represented by the City Council or City Manager, or their designee. 
(27)  "Multiple dwelling units" or "MDU" means any adjacent building(s) such as apartments under common ownership containing more than four dwelling units used as living quarters. 
(28)  "Normal business hours" means those hours during which most similar businesses in the city are open to serve subscribers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
(29)  "Normal operating conditions" means those service conditions that are within the control of the licensee. Those conditions that are not within the control of the licensee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, utility company power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the licensee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
(30)  "Outage" shall exist whenever licensee's cable system experiences three subscriber complaints within any 60 minute period of "no picture" within the same quarter section. 
(31)  "Proposal" shall refer to a response by a qualified cable company in accordance with city specifications to provide cable services to residents, businesses, industries, and institutions within the city. 
(32)  "Renewal license" shall mean a license sought by, or granted to, a person currently holding a valid license to provide cable services in the city. 
(33)  "School" means public educational institutions, including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, and charter schools that have 150 or more students between the ages of five and 18. 
(34)  "Service call" shall result when service problems occur relating to: (i) any "no picture" complaint, (ii) a degraded signal or picture on one or more channels, (iii) property damage by licensee's employees or authorized contractors, or (iv) in-house cable equipment problems. 
(35)  "Service interruption" shall exist when a subscriber loses the signal on all channels. 
(36)  "Standard drop" shall mean a cable connection that requires no more than a 225-foot drop measured from the nearest point of a subscriber's home or place of business to the nearest existing technically feasible point from which an individual subscriber can be connected to the cable system; involves only one outlet and standard materials; and does not involve a wall fish. In addition, a standard drop shall exclude custom installation work, including specific subscriber requested work that requires non-standard inventory or cable routing requiring construction methods exceeding reasonable underground or aerial work. The license may contain a different definition of standard drop as may be necessary because of a different technology or architecture. 
(37)  "Street" or "public street" shall mean only a street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, right-of-way, or drive which is owned by a public entity in fee or as to which a public easement has been dedicated for street purposes, and with respect to which, and to the extent that, city has a right to grant the use of the surface of, and space above and below in connection with a license for a cable system, or other compatible uses. 
(38)  "Subscriber" shall mean any person, firm, corporation, or entity receiving for any purpose the cable service of a licensee's cable system. 
(39)  "Two-way communication" shall mean the transmission of telecommunication signals from subscriber locations or other points throughout the cable system back to the cable system's control center as well as transmission of signals from the control center to subscriber locations. A license document may authorize switching at a level other than the control center. 
(40)  "User" shall mean a party utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt in a subscriber capacity. 
(41)  The terms "will be available," "will be equipped," "will use," "will be designed," "will perform," "will be utilized," "will permit," "will allow," "will be activated," "will be initially connected," "will be capable," "will provide," "will include," "will employ," "will be established," "will be able," "will be implemented," "will be delivered," "will utilize," and other similar uses of terms in a licensee's proposal denoting the activation of cable service, shall be interpreted to mean delivery or accomplishment at a date no later than the initial activation of cable service (as defined in this article) unless otherwise expressly and clearly stated or qualified in the licensee's proposal to mean a more specific or different time. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
ARTICLE 15-2: - PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING, RENEWING, TRANSFERRING, AND ACQUIRING BY CITY OF CABLE TELEVISION LICENSES 

§ 15-2-1 - LICENSE TO OPERATE; REQUIRED. 
    A non-exclusive license to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within all or any portion of the city is required of anyone desiring to provide cable television service in the city. A license may be granted by the City Council to any person, whether operating under an existing license or not, who offers to furnish and provide such cable system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this Code. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-2 - FAILURE TO HAVE LICENSE, VIOLATION. 
(A)  From and after the effective date of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons, in this city any television signals or radio signals by means of a cable system unless a license therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Code, and unless such license is in full force and effect. 
(B)  From and after the effective date of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or maintain within any public street in the city, or within any other public property of the city, or within any privately-owned area within the city that has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any preliminary subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a cable system, unless a license authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Code, and unless such license is in full force and effect. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connections, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a licensed cable system within this city for the purpose of enabling himself or herself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program, sound, or any other signals transmitted on the cable system, without the permission of the licensee. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the licensee, to willfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cables, wires, or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds, or any other signals transmitted on the cable system. 
(E)  Any person violating any part of § 15-2-2 shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor. 
(F)  Any person violating any part of this article shall also be subject to any fees required in this Code as though it were a licensee. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-3 - AUTHORIZATION TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS. 
    Any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall authorize and permit the licensee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, solicit, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along any street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms, or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other licensee licensed or permitted to do business in the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, and similar facilities in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along any street shall be placed underground unless such facilities are attached to existing utility or telephone poles and the poles are used primarily for utility or telephone purposes. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-4 - LIMITATIONS OF LICENSE. 
(A)  Any license granted under this Code shall be nonexclusive. 
(B)  Any privilege claimed under any license by the licensee in any public street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior or subsequent lawful occupancy or use thereof by the city or any other governmental entity, and shall be subordinate to any prior easements therein; provided, however, that nothing shall extinguish or otherwise interfere with property rights established independently of any license issued pursuant to this Code. 
(C)  Any right or power in, or duty imposed upon, any officer, employee, department, or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the city. 
(D)  A licensee shall be subject to all requirements of city's rules, regulations, and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, and shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations heretofore enacted or established. There is hereby reserved to the city the power to amend any article of this Code so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance, or otherwise pursuant to the city's lawful police powers or as provided in the license. 
(E)  Any license granted shall not relieve the licensee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the city, utility company, or from others lawfully maintaining poles in streets. 
(F)  Any license granted does not relieve licensee of compliance with city code provisions governing construction, work, or use of the streets and rights-of-way. There is hereby preserved to the city the power to amend any section of the Tolleson City Code related to construction in streets and public rights-of-way pursuant to its police powers. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-5 - ACQUISITION BY CITY. 
(A)  In accordance with Section 627 of the Cable Act, if a renewal of a license held by a licensee is denied and the city acquires ownership of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of a cable system to another person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the license itself. 
    If a license held by a licensee is revoked for cause and the city acquires ownership of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at an equitable price. Under the term "equitable price," such matters as the harm to the community resulting from the licensee's breach of the license may be considered in determining the appropriate price. No payment shall be made by the city to the licensee that would include a value attributed to the license itself. 
(B)  The fair market value of the cable system shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The fair market value of the cable system shall be determined by an appraisal committee consisting of three appraisers nationally recognized by training and experience as qualified to appraise the fair market value of a large, urban cable system. No appraiser shall have previously acted in any capacity for either the city or licensee. The appraisal committee shall function as an arbitration panel and shall conduct its appraisal process in Maricopa County, in accordance with the Center For Public Resources ("CPR") rules for non-administered arbitration of business disputes (the "rules"), supplemented by the following procedures which shall control to the extent they conflict with the rules: 
(2)  Each party shall appoint an appraiser within 30 days after the city sends notice initiating appraisal proceedings. The two appraisers shall select a third appraiser within 30 days after selection of the second appraiser. If the two appraisers are unable to agree on the appointment of a third appraiser within such 30-day period, either the city or the licensee may petition the presiding civil judge of the Maricopa County Superior Court, acting in his or her individual capacity, for the selection of a third appraiser. 
(3)  Each party shall bear the cost of its own appraiser and one-half of the cost of appointing the third appraiser and of paying the third appraiser's fee, and of any reasonable expenses incurred by the appraisers in order to carry out the appraisal process. 
(4)  Within 30 days after selection of the third appraiser, the appraisers shall meet for the purpose of determining the manner in which the parties may present by evidence that may bear upon the appraisal. Within 90 days after such meeting, the appraiser shall receive and consider such evidence and enter an award determining the fair market value of the cable system consistent with the requirements of this § 15-2-5. Such award shall be final and binding upon the parties, and judgment upon the award rendered may be entered by any court having jurisdiction thereof. 
(C)  Upon the termination of a license and the rights granted thereunder, whether by expiration or forfeiture, the City Council may direct and require the licensee as provided in § 15-5-3 to remove its wires, cables, fixtures and accessories and appurtenances from the streets. If directed, the city shall make a claim on the letter of credit as prescribed in § 15-7-4. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-6 - RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY. 
(A)  Nothing herein shall he deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire the property of the licensee, by purchase, at fair market value, which shall not include any amount for the license itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted. And nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city's right of eminent domain at fair market value. 
(B)  There is hereby reserved to the city every right and power that is required to be herein reserved or provided by any provision of the charter or code, and a licensee shall comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(C)  Neither the granting of any license hereunder nor any of the provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar, license to any other person, firm, or corporation, within the city. 
(D)  Neither the granting of any license nor the enactment of any provision in this Code shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city, now existing or hereafter granted. 
(E)  The City Council may do all things that are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Code and may, through the City Manager or through its own action, adjust, settle, compromise, or otherwise resolve, pursuant to § 15-7-7 and § 15-7-8, any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any licensee under this Code. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-7 - INITIAL LICENSE; APPLICATIONS. 
(A)  Each application for an initial license to construct, operate, or maintain any cable system in the city shall be filed with the Office of the City Clerk and in the form of a proposal for initial license prescribed by the city. Said forms shall require, but shall not be limited to the following information: 
(l)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to, the following and to whatever extent required by the city; 
(3)  The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, directors, and associates of the applicant; 
(4)  The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, persons, and entities having a one percent or larger share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity; 
(5)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent [or] subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems owned [or] controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary and the areas served thereby; 
(6)  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year next preceding the date of the application hereunder, and a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the City Council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant, certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system in this city; 
(7)  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the initial license, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement. All information is to be presented in the format approved by the city; and 
(8)  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system license(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said license(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such licensed cable system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed thereto. 
(9)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant that shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
b.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges and cable service charges; 
c.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
d.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber; 
e.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation that materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the initial license; 
f.  A copy of any agreement covering the license area, if existing between the applicant and the local telephone and/or electric utilities providing for the use of any facilities of the utility including but not limited to poles, lines, or conduits; and 
g.  Any other details, statements, information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application that shall be required or requested by the City Council or by any other provision of law. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-8 - FEES; APPLICATION OF INITIAL LICENSE. 
(A)  Amount. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this Code, each applicant for an initial license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of $15,000.00, by cash, certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other manner acceptable to the City Manager made payable to the City of Tolleson. No proposal for an initial license shall be considered without receipt of said fee. 
(B)  Deposit and use. All fees received will be deposited to an account of the city and will serve to recover expenses incurred by the city in the preparation and granting of initial licenses and regulation of licenses pursuant to this Code. 
(C)  Additional fee. Any licensee under an initial license, upon acceptance of such initial license, shall reimburse all additional expenses, including, but not limited to, any and all administrative, engineering, publication, or legal costs and consultants' expenses incurred in connection with the processing, evaluation, and preparation of documents relating to the initial license. The city shall document all such expenses by invoice. If expenses exceed the total amount of filing fees collected from the applicant(s), the licensee shall pay to the city the excess amount within 30 days of demand of the city. All unpaid amounts at the end of 30 days shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-9 - SELECTION OF LICENSEE; INITIAL LICENSE. 
(A)  Solicitation of proposals. The city may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for proposals for initial license, and may determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by the city, or the date before which the same must be received, or the date after which the same shall not be received and may make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions, or limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making, and receiving of such proposals. The terms and conditions for proposals shall be described in a document called "request for proposals." 
(B)  Unsolicited proposals. The city upon receipt of an unsolicited proposal for initial license may by advertising or other means solicit and call for competing proposals pursuant to paragraph (A), or may, in its sole discretion, reject such proposal as untimely. 
(C)  Compliance with city requirements. A person, firm, or corporation submitting a proposal for initial license to operate a cable system in response to the city's request for proposals shall provide all information required by this Code and all other information requested by city's request for proposals or otherwise required by the city. Each proposal shall be responsive to the questions soliciting the information, and shall completely, accurately and materially supply all of the information so solicited. Any misrepresentation, failure, neglect, or refusal to provide any of such information may, at the option of the city, render a proposal invalid. This requested information must be complete and verified as true by the applicant. 
(D)  Property of city. All proposals received by the city from an applicant shall become the sole property of the city. 
(E)  Applicant responsibility. Before submitting a proposal, each applicant shall be solely responsible for and must (1) examine all regulatory chapters and the request for proposals documents thoroughly; (2) be familiar with local conditions that may in any manner affect performance under the license, including but in no event limited to, community and institutional telecommunication needs, relevant demographics, topographies, pole attachment policies of appropriate utility authorities, undergrounding, and subscriber desires; (3) be familiar with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, chapters, rules, and regulations affecting performance under the license; and (4) carefully correlate all observations with the requirements of this Code and the request for proposals documents. 
(F)  Reference to City Manager. Upon receipt of any proposal for initial license, the City Manager shall prepare or cause to be prepared a report, including recommendations respecting such proposal, and cause the same to be completed and filed with the city. The city will evaluate all proposals that are submitted. At the discretion of the City Council, an applicant that has met the city's qualifications in the request for proposals and has submitted proposals on the required form will be offered the opportunity to make a formal presentation to the City Council in support of their proposals. 
(G)  Investigations. The city may make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine the ability of the applicant to perform under the initial license, and the applicant shall furnish to the city all such information and data for this purpose as the city may request. 
(H)  Rejection. The city may reject any and all proposals from whatever source and whenever received and the city also reserves the right to waive all formalities where the best interest of the city may be served, and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(I)  Public comment. If, upon receiving the City Manager's report, the City Council shall determine to further consider the proposals, the City Clerk shall set a public hearing for the consideration of proposals; fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or who wish to file objections may file written comments and appear before the City Council and be heard, and directing the City Clerk to publish notice of such hearing at least once within ten days of the passage thereof in the newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(J)  Consideration. In making any determination hereunder as to any proposal for initial license, the city may consider any and all factors relevant to significant interests of the community in cable television including, but not limited to the quality of the cable services proposed, areas to be served, rates to subscriber, income to the city, experience, character, background, and financial responsibility of any applicant, and its management and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment, willingness and ability to meet construction and physical requirements, to meet all requirements set forth in this Code, and to abide by all policy conditions, license limitations and requirements, and all other matters deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(K)  Determination. At the time set for the hearing on proposals for an initial license, or at any adjournment thereof, the City Council shall proceed to hear all comments. Thereafter, the City Council shall make one of the following determinations: 
(1)  That such proposal be denied, which determination shall be final and conclusive; or 
(2)  That such initial license be granted and the terms and conditions thereof. 
No provision of this Code shall be deemed or construed so as to require the granting of an initial license. 
(L)  Additional information. The city may at any time demand and applicant(s) shall provide such supplementary, additional, or other information as the city may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested initial license should be granted. 
(M)  Awards based on public record. It is the intention of the city to award an initial license solely on the basis of the public record. To this end, communication with the City Council by those wishing to submit proposals for an initial license shall be limited to public sessions. Requests for information should be directed to the Office of the City Manager. 
(N)  City Council decisions shall be final. Any decision of the City Council concerning award of an initial license pursuant to this Code shall be final. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-10 - DURATION OF LICENSE. 
    The duration of the rights, privileges, and authorizations granted in an initial or a renewal license shall not exceed 15 years. A license may be renewed by the city pursuant to the procedure established in § 15-2-11 and in accordance with the then applicable law. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-11 - RENEWAL. 
(A)  Proceedings. During the six-month period that begins with the thirty-sixth month before the expiration of an existing license, the city may on its own initiative, and shall at the request of the licensee, commence proceedings that afford the public appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of: 
(1)  Identifying the future cable-related community needs and interests; and 
(2)  Reviewing the performance of the licensee under the license during the then current license term. 
(B)  Proposal. 
(1)  Upon completion of a proceeding under subsection (A) of this section, the licensee seeking a renewal license may, on its own initiative or at the request of the city, submit a proposal for renewal license. 
(2)  Subject to Section 624 of the Cable Act, such proposal shall contain such material as the city may require, including proposals for an upgrade of the cable system. 
(3)  The city may establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted. 
(C)  Fees. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this Code, each applicant for a license renewal must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of $15,000.00, by cash, certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other manner acceptable to the City Manager made payable to the City of Tolleson. No proposal for a license renewal shall be considered without receipt of said fee. The fee will be used for the purpose of covering the city's cost in consideration of a license renewal proposal. The fee shall be handled in the same manner as provided for an initial license fee in § 15-2-8 of this Code and shall, upon granting of a renewal license, be a credit against licensee fees under this Code. 
(D)  Renewal assessment. 
(1)  Upon submittal by the licensee of a proposal to the city for renewal license, the city shall provide prompt notice of such proposal for renewal license and, during the four-month period that begins on the completion of any proceedings under subsection (A), issue a renewal license or, issue a preliminary assessment that the license should not be renewed and, at the request of the licensee or on its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt public notice of such proceeding, in accordance with subsection (D)(2) to consider whether: 
a.  The licensee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing license and with applicable law; 
b.  The quality of the licensee's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the cable system, has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
c.  The licensee has the financial, legal, and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set forth in the licensee's proposal; and 
d.  The licensee's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. 
(2)  In any proceeding under subsection (D)(l) the licensee shall be afforded adequate notice and the licensee and the licensor shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues raised in the proceeding under subsection (A), require the production of evidence, and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding. 
(3)  At the completion of a proceeding under this subsection, the city shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal license based upon the record of such proceeding, and transmit a copy of such decision to the licensee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor. 
(E)  Denial. Any denial of a proposal for renewal license shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in subsections a. through d. of subsection (D)(l), pursuant to the record of the proceeding under subsection (D). The city may not base a denial of a renewal license on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the license under subsection (D)(l)a. or on events considered under subsection (D)(l)b. unless the city has provided the licensee with notice and the opportunity to cure, or in any case in which it is documented that the city has waived its right to object, or has effectively acquiesced. 
(F)  Appeal. Any licensee whose proposal for renewal license has been denied by a final decision of the city made pursuant to this article, or has been adversely affected by a failure of the city to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this article, may appeal such final decision or failure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 626 and 635 of the Cable Act. 
(G)  Informal process. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (F) of this section, the licensee may submit a proposal for renewal license, together with the required fee, pursuant to this subsection (G) at any time, and the city may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including after proceedings pursuant to this article have commenced). The provisions of subsections (A) through (F) of this section shall not apply to a decision to grant or deny a proposal under this subsection (G). The denial of a renewal license pursuant to this subsection (G) shall not affect action on a proposal for renewal license that is submitted in accordance with subsections (A) through (F) of this section. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-2-12 - TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS. 
(A)  A license shall not be sold, assigned, or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, except an affiliate of licensee, without prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
Such consent shall not be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation in whole or in part to secure an indebtedness. 
The proposed assignee must show the transfer will not cause any increased risks of nonperformance of the license or any loss to the city of its bargained for consideration in the license. The assignee's showings must at a minimum detail facts sufficient to show the assignee's technical ability, financial capability, legal qualifications and general character qualifications, and such other qualifications as determined by the city and the assignee must agree to comply with all provisions of the license. 
(B)  No change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the licensee shall occur without prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The licensee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer to, or acquisition by any other party, of control of the licensee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. The sale or transfer of the license to an affiliate of a licensee does not require prior approval of the city as long as: (1) the sale or transfer of the existing or newly created equity interest in the licensee does not result, directly or indirectly, in a transfer of control of the licensee; and (2) the transferee already holds an ownership interest in the licensee of 25 percent or more. 
(C)  A rebuttable presumption that transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person, or group of persons (other than an affiliate of licensee), of more than 25 percent of the voting interest of the licensee or of the person exercising management authority over the licensee. 
(D)  Except in the case of an assignment of the license to an affiliate of licensee, upon written notification by the licensee to the city of a proposed assignment of the license, or transfer of control or ownership of the licensee company, the City Manager shall issue his written notice fixing and setting forth the day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein may appear and be heard. The City Clerk shall cause such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The City Clerk also shall cause a copy of such notice to be mailed to the licensee at least ten days prior to the date specified for the hearing. At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the City Manager shall proceed to hear the matter. Following the close of such hearing, the City Manager shall prepare and file with the Council his report of the hearing, his findings, and an opinion containing his recommendations and the reasons therefor. If after the expiration of ten days following receipt of the City Manager's report and opinion, the Council shall find that the assignment of the license or transfer of control or ownership of the licensee company will not be detrimental or injurious to the best interests and welfare of the subscribers and users, and of the city, then the Council by resolution shall consent to the assignment of the license or transfer of control or ownership of the licensee company. Such resolution shall thereupon become and shall be a part of any license granted under this Code and affected thereby. 
(E)  The consent or approval of the City Council to any transfer of a license shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the license. 
(F)  In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the City Council will not approve any transfer or assignment of a license within three years of and in no event prior to substantial completion of construction of a proposed cable system. 
(G)  Notwithstanding any other requirement of this Code, each applicant for a transfer or assignment must furnish with its request a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount established by the Council, by cash, certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other manner acceptable to the City Manager made payable to the City of Tolleson. No proposal for a transfer or assignment of license shall be considered without receipt of said fee. The fee will be used for the purpose of covering the city's cost in consideration of a transfer or assignment of license. The fee shall be handled in the same manner as provided for an initial license fee in § 15-2-8 of this Code and shall, upon granting the assignment or transfer, be a credit against license fees under this Code. 
(H)  The city may reserve in the license a right of first refusal to purchase a licensee's cable system. 
(I)  In no event shall a transfer of ownership be approved without the successor-in-interest becoming a signatory to the license. 
(J)  As long as a grant, rent, or lease does not amount to a transfer as defined in this article is made in the ordinary course of business with prior notice to the city, a licensee in the normal course of providing cable services or other telecommunication services may grant, rent, or lease use of its cable system to other persons. Any such use shall be restricted to and consistent with such uses as the licensee is authorized in this Code and the license or under other applicable law. Any such use shall be in compliance with applicable federal and state law. Any such grants, lease or rent by the licensee shall not, however, thereby relieve licensee of any requirement or obligation under its license as to its use of the streets and public ways, and any such grant, rent, or lease shall require that such other person comply with the appropriate provisions of this Code and the license as such use warrants. The grant, lease, or rent shall expressly provide for the authority of the city under applicable law to regulate the use provided by the grant, lease, or rent (including but not limited to the authority to protect the public welfare, safety, and health) and to enforce compliance with any applicable standards established by this Code or the license. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
ARTICLE 15-3: - INITIAL AND RENEWAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 

§ 15-3-1 - EFFECT OF AWARD OF LICENSE. 
(A)  Ordinance binding. Upon award of an initial or a renewal license pursuant to this Code, a licensee shall agree to be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein. 
(B)  Incorporation by reference of proposal for initial or renewal license. A licensee under an initial or renewal license also agrees to provide all of the cable services specifically set forth in its proposal, if provided, to provide cable services within the license area and by its acceptance of the initial or renewal license, the licensee specifically agrees that its proposal is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the initial or renewal license. If such proposal and the provisions of this Code conflict with the applicable initial or renewal license, that provision which provides the greatest benefit to the city, in the opinion of the City Council, shall prevail provided that, the city, having chosen or accepted one of the conflicting provisions, may not thereafter elect to require compliance with a different alternative of the conflicting provisions. Failure to provide services as promised in licensee's proposal or agreed to in its license may be deemed a breach of this Code to which the provisions of §§ 15-7-5 and 15-7-6 of this Code shall apply. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-2 - PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE. 
(A)  For the reasons that the streets and other public rights-of-way that are used by the licensee in the operation of its cable system within the boundaries of the city are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to the licensee [for] the use of said streets is a valuable property right without which the licensee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, and because the city will incur costs in regulating and administering the license, the licensee shall pay to the city an amount no less than five percent of licensee's gross revenues (the "license fee"). 
(B)  Should federal regulations be amended in the future to allow the city to receive a greater fee than the fee set forth in subsection (A) then, in that event, the city shall have the right to increase the fee as specified in the license. 
(C)  The payment of the license fee by the licensee to the city shall be made quarterly by delivery of the same to the City Manager on or before the twentieth day of the following month, with a ten-day grace period. If such payment is not made by the next to the last business day of the following month, the city may impose interest at a rate of one and one-half percent per month commencing from the date payment should have been made and continuing until the payment is made. Fractions of a month shall be considered to constitute a full month for the purpose of computing interest. 
    In addition to interest that may be assessed under this subsection, if licensee fails to pay any license fee, before the end of such grace period, licensee shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  A licensee who fails to pay the license fee or any portion thereof within the time prescribed shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the unpaid fee each month, unless the licensee shows that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. 
(2)  A licensee who fails or refuses to pay a license fee or any portion thereof after notice and demand by the city shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the unpaid fee, unless licensee shows that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. 
(3)  If the cause of failure to pay the licensee fee or any portion thereof is determined by the city to be due to civil fraud or evasion of the license fee, the licensee shall pay a penalty of 50 percent of the amount of deficiency. 
(D)  Under terms specified in the license, there shall be allowed as an offset against the license fee due under this article any amounts licensee paid to the city during the prior quarter in privilege license (sales) taxes; provided, however, that there shall be no offset to the extent that licensee made payments of privilege license (sales) taxes on any gross income (within the meaning of the privilege license (sales) tax ordinance) that is not included in gross revenues under this Code. 
(E)  The city shall have the right to inspect the licensee's income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this Code provided, however, that such audit shall take place within 36 months following the close of each of the licensee's fiscal years. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the licensee by the city, said notice shall include a copy of the audit report; provided, however, that licensee shall not be required to pay such deficiency until 30 days after completion of the administrative review process if licensee commences such process pursuant to § 15-7-7(a)(3). lf there is a deficiency in the payment of license fees to the city of ten percent or more, the city may assess the cost of the audit to the licensee. 
(F)  The cost to licensee of any city right-of-way construction permit, inspection, zoning review, and other fees that city imposes under city code requirements on licensee's construction activities shall be included in the license fee. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-3 - USE OF TELEPHONE FACILITIES. 
    When and if the licensee of any license granted hereunder uses a telephone company's cable system distribution channels furnished to the licensee pursuant to tariff or contract on file with a regulatory body having jurisdiction and said licensee makes no use of the streets independent of such telephone company furnished facilities, said licensee remains fully bound by the terms of its license and this Code. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-4 - REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES. 
(A)  A license shall include a description of proposed cable system design and a description of the initial programming and cable services to be offered, a description of facilities proposed for local programming, and facilities to be offered to various community institutions. 
(B)  A licensee shall maintain the mix, level, and quality of programming within the broad categories of video programming or other services set forth in its license. Where there has been a substantial failure to maintain the mix, level, or quality of services within the broad categories of video programming or other services as set forth in the licensee's license, the city may, following due notice and public hearing as provided in §§ 15-7-7 and 15-7-8, direct the licensee to comply with its obligations in this regard. Written notice of such hearing shall be provided to the licensee and to the public at least 30 days prior to such hearing. 
(C)  A license shall include a provision for the licensee to provide channel capacity for community programming on terms and conditions specified in the license. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-5 - SUBSCRIBER SERVICES; RATES. 
(A)  Initial rates. A licensee under an initial or renewal license may establish initial rates for its cable services in accordance with the rates contained in such licensee's proposal for an initial or renewal license. 
(B)  Authority to regulate rates. To the extent permitted, the city may regulate the rates for cable service in accordance with federal and state law. 
(C)  Notice of rates. Notice of rates shall be given in accordance with § 15-6-4 of this Code. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-6 - ACCESS AND PUBLIC SAFETY CHANNELS. 
(A)  Channel capacity. As provided in the license the licensee shall provide channel capacity for a minimum of one public safety channel dedicated to the city fire and police departments, one governmental access channel dedicated to the city, and one educational access channel dedicated to all schools within the city. 
(B)  Channel management. The operation of the public safety channel, the governmental access channel, and the educational access channel shall be the responsibility of the city. 
(C)  Excess capacity. The licensee may be permitted to utilize unused access channel capacity under rules and procedures established by the city. 
(D)  Change in technology. In the event a licensee makes any change in the cable system and related equipment and facilities or in licensee's signal delivery technology, licensee shall ensure that city analog signals are converted by licensee and the signal quality or transmission of access services or programming remains substantially the same. 
(E)  Technical quality. Licensee shall maintain all access channels and interconnections at the same level of technical quality and reliability required by this chapter and any license agreement and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations, for residential subscriber channels subject to the technical quality or reliability of the signal received from the source. Licensee shall provide routine maintenance and shall repair and replace all transmission equipment including channel modulators, associated cable and equipment, required to carry signal quality to and from licensee's facilities for the access channels; provided, however, licensee shall have no duty to provide, maintain, repair, or replace equipment for which the city is responsible under this chapter or the license. 
(F)  Institutional network. As may be specified in the license or by subsequent agreement, upon written request of the city, licensee shall provide an institutional network for educational and government use or shall provide appropriate contribution for construction of an institutional network or services with respect thereto. The license or subsequent agreement may set forth requirements for an institutional network or institutional network services. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-7 - AREA WIDE INTERCONNECTION OF CABLE SYSTEMS. 
(A)  Interconnection required . Subject to the limitations of applicable federal and state law, licensee shall interconnect governmental or educational access channels of the cable system with any or all other cable systems owned by a licensee or an affiliate as may be provided in the license or as may be otherwise agreed upon between the licensee, the city, and other cities. 
(B)  Cost . Subject to the limitation of applicable federal and state law, when such interconnection is required within the city limits, the cost shall be borne by all licensees to be interconnected. If licensees cannot establish a cost sharing formula for interconnection or cannot resolve technical issues, the City Manager may establish a cost sharing formula and resolve technical issues and his decision shall be final and conclusive. 
(C)  Relief . A licensee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or the city may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by the licensee to the city. The city shall grant said request, if it finds that a licensee negotiated in good faith and failed to obtain an approval from another cable system(s), governmental entity, or educational institution of the proposed interconnection. 
(D)  Control . The city or its designated access provider shall have the right to control and schedule the operation of all interconnected access channels. In addition, the city shall have the right to use, at its sole discretion and at no cost to the city, any access channels to be provided under a license agreement for access interconnection. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-8 - CHANGES IN CABLE TECHNOLOGY. 
(A)  The licensor and licensee shall meet at periods not exceeding three years or upon request of either to discuss changes in cable television laws, regulations, technology, competing services, the needs of the community, and other factors impacting cable television. As a result of these discussions, this license may be modified by the city and the licensee to respond to the change in laws, regulations, technology, competing services, the needs of the community, or other factors impacting cable television. 
(B)  If any of the following conditions occur, and upon written request of either licensee or licensor, the City Manager and licensee agree to meet and discuss in good faith the terms of a mutually agreeable license amendment: 
(1)  Cable service similar to cable television service offered by licensee is provided by any entity using the streets and public ways, which is not subject to similar licensing requirements of the licensor. 
(2)  Any other significant event occurs, including but not limited to changes of federal or state law or a final non-appealable order or judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction, which either licensee or licensor believes may impact the current terms and conditions of the license. 
(C)  The purpose of the meeting and discussion is to use best efforts to reach mutually acceptable agreement for recommendation to the City Council for proposed City Council action within 90 days of such written request, on how to amend the license to relieve licensor or the licensee from any commercial impracticability, which arises from the condition in question. This provision shall not require that the license be amended, however it is intended to facilitate a process whereby the parties may reach a mutually acceptable agreement. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-9 - TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE. 
    For any license or contract entered into pursuant to this Code, time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the licensee to perform within the time allotted, or within a reasonable time if a period is not specified, shall be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke liquidated damages or revocation of a license in accordance with §§ 15-7-6 and 15-7-9. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-3-10 - ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF LICENSE. 
(A)  No license granted pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall become effective unless and until all provisions required in this article and subsections 15-7-3(A) and 15-7-3(B) and §§ 15-7-4 and 15-7-5 hereof are done and completed, all of such provisions being hereby declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such license granted hereunder. If any of such provisions are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the license shall be null and void. 
(B)  Within 20 days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding any license, or within such extended period of time as the City Council in its discretion may authorize, the licensee shall file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of the license, in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, together with the letter of credit, construction bond, and insurance policies required by subsection 15-7-3(B) and §§ 15-7-4 and 15-7-5 hereof, respectively, and its license to be bound by and to comply with and to do everything that is required of the licensee by the provisions of this Code and the applicable license. Such acceptance shall be acknowledged by the licensee before a notary public, and shall, in form and content, be satisfactory to and approved by the City Attorney. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
ARTICLE 15-4: - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 

§ 15-4-1 - PERMITS, INSTALLATIONS, AND SERVICE. 
    Within 60 days after acceptance of any initial or renewal license, the licensee shall proceed with due diligence to apply for necessary permits and authorizations that are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-4-2 - CABLE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION MAP AND SCHEDULE. 
(A)  Within 120 days after acceptance of any license, licensee shall submit a specific construction plan or reconstruction plan, which shall be incorporated as an exhibit in the license. The plan shall include an overall time schedule of any construction or reconstruction effort and system design criteria. 
(B)  Within 90 days after obtaining necessary permits, licenses, and authorizations, licensee shall commence construction and installation of the cable system. 
(1)  Licensee shall comply with the time schedule for construction required in § 15-4-2(A). 
(2)  Installation and operation of the new or rebuilt cable system by licensee shall proceed on a nondiscriminatory basis, without regard for subscriber affluence or other discriminatory factors. 
(3)  Immediately following commencement of construction and installation of the cable system under an initial or renewal license, licensee shall diligently proceed to deliver cable services, as described in the license. 
(C)  Failure on the part of the licensee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be grounds for liquidated damages and/or termination of such license pursuant to §§ 15-7-6 and 15-7-8 provided, however, that the Council in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods if the licensee acting in good faith experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-4-3 - LINE EXTENSION. 
(A)  Residential service . Licensee shall make cable services available to dwelling units within the city and shall extend its cable system as contemplated under this article as follows. Each unit in an MDU shall be counted as a dwelling unit in determining the residential density, provided a mutually acceptable agreement granting licensee reasonable access to the MDU has been executed and delivered. Licensee shall not be required to make service available to residents of multiple dwelling units where the owner of the property has not granted licensee such reasonable access to the property. 
(1)  When requested by a resident or developer in the city, licensee shall, at licensee's sole expense, extend the cable system to any single family residence or dwelling within the city, provided that such extension involves density of 25 existing homes per mile as measured in linear trench or aerial strand footage from the nearest technically feasible point of connection on the cable system. Such extension(s) shall include cutting in one or more taps and extending cable as necessary. 
(2)  When a resident or developer in the city requests an extension of service to an area that does not meet the minimum density of 25 existing homes per mile as measured in linear trench or aerial strand footage from the nearest technically feasible point of connection on the cable system, licensee shall be required to comply with such request only if the resident or developer agrees to pay to the licensee an amount equal to all incremental costs incurred beyond those for an extension otherwise involving a density of 25 existing homes per mile. The incremental costs to be paid shall be licensee's costs (reasonable labor and materials) of extending the cable system consistently with licensee's overall system design to the residence, or to and throughout the development, from the nearest technically feasible point of connection on the cable system. The costs shall include splicing in one or more taps and extending cable. 
(3)  Where there is a request by a developer for an extension to a development that does not meet the minimum density test in subsection (2) and where, instead of proceeding under subsection (2), the developer agrees to pay licensee's full costs (reasonable labor and materials) of extending the cable system from the nearest technically feasible point of connection on the cable system to the nearest street access to the development, licensee shall then extend the cable system within the development, at licensee's sole cost, if it has a density of 20 existing homes per mile, as measured in linear trench or aerial strand footage from the nearest street access to the development to which the developer paid to have the cable system extended. 
(4)  To prevent unnecessary disruption and damage to streets, rights-of-way, and other property, the installation of cable system shall be accomplished in new subdivisions at the same time and in the same trench as other communications, electric, and other permanent services to structures. Except as federal law may grant them other rights, developers of new residential buildings or mobile homes within a new or undeveloped subdivision, new residential units within new multiple occupancy residential developments, and new commercial and industrial buildings and structures shall treat cable television facilities as they treat other communication facilities, utilities, and other underground facilities, in regards to availability and cost of trenching for undergroundings. 
(5)  Absent a showing by licensee to the City Manager of circumstances beyond licensee's reasonable control, an extension of service pursuant to subsections (1), (2), or (3) of this subsection (A) shall be accomplished within 120 days of the developer or resident's request. 
(B)  Commercial service . Licensee shall make cable services available to commercial establishments as follows except that licensee shall not be required to make service available to commercial establishments where the owner of the property has not granted licensee reasonable access to the property: 
(1)  When requested by the owner of a commercial establishment, provided that no plant extension and nothing more than a standard drop is required to make such cable services available. 
(2)  When the owner of a commercial or industrial establishment within the city requests an extension of service that does not meet a minimum 100 hook-ups per cable plant mile, licensee shall be required to comply with such request only if such owner pays to licensee an amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by licensee over and above the cost of a standard drop in making cable services available to such owner's commercial establishment. 
    Absent a showing by licensee to the City Manager of unusual circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, an extension of service pursuant to subsection (2) shall be accomplished within 120 days of owner's execution of any necessary easement documents and capital contribution agreements. 
(C)  Service drops . 
(1)  Licensee shall make service available to any single-family residence or any commercial establishment within the city at the standard connection charge if the connection requires a standard drop. 
(2)  If making service available requires more than a standard drop, licensee shall not be required to make such service available unless the person or entity requesting such service pays to licensee (i) the standard connection charge and (ii) an amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by licensee for the additional facilities and work. 
(3)  Licensee may offer bulk billing service, but shall not require a bulk billing agreement as a condition of providing service, if the person or entity requesting service pays to licensee the applicable amount(s) set forth in subsections (1) or (2) of this § 15-4-3(C). 
(4)  Absent a showing by licensee to the City Manager of unusual circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, (i) any standard drop to a single family residence or dwelling shall be accomplished within ten days of the request for service, and (ii) any drop that is not a standard drop shall be accomplished within 20 days of such request. Line extensions shall be done as provided in § 15-4-3(A)(4). 
(5)  Absent a showing by licensee to the City Manager of unusual circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, (i) any standard drop to a commercial establishment shall be accomplished within ten days after the owner of such commercial establishment executes any necessary easement documents and capital contribution agreements, and (ii) any commercial drop that is not a standard drop shall be accomplished within 20 days of the owner's execution of such documents and agreements. 
(D)  If a licensee elects to extend cable service to a customer in a licensed area that does not meet the density requirements of this section, the licensee shall not refuse to extend service to any other customer in the same area solely on the grounds that service to the first customer was not in the area required under the density requirements set forth in this section. 
(E)  The line extension requirements set forth in this section shall not apply to any area covered by a construction phase described in the construction schedule until the construction phase for that area has been completed. 
(F)  Discrimination prohibited . No person, firm, or corporation in the existing cable service area of the licensee shall be arbitrarily refused cable services; provided, however, that the licensee shall not be required to provide cable services to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable line extension connection fee and/or cable service charge(s). 
(G)  Annexed territory . Newly annexed territory shall be subject to the terms of this Code and specifically this article. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-4-4 - PLACEMENT OF TRANSMISSION FACILITIES. 
    Except as provided in the license, facilities shall be placed in accordance with Chapter 7 of the Tolleson City Code and the Tolleson Zoning Code (Chapter 14). 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-4-5 - CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS. 
(A)  Compliance with construction and technical standards . 
(1)  As provided in the license, licensee shall construct, install, operate, and maintain its system in a manner such that it operates at all times consistent with (i) all laws, this Code, construction standards of the city, the FCC Rules and Regulations, Part 76 SubPart K (Technical Standards), as amended from time to time, and (ii) detailed standards submitted by an initial or renewal licensee as part of its proposal, which standards are to be incorporated by reference in an initial or renewal license. In addition, the city may at any time conduct independent measurements of the system. If inaccurate proof of performance reports are shown to have been the result of licensee's willful neglect, licensee shall pay the costs reasonably incurred by the city in obtaining independent verification of technical compliance with all standards. 
(2)  When there have been multiple, similar complaints by subscribers, or when there exists other evidence that suggests that licensee is not in substantial compliance with the technical standards, the City Manager shall have the right and authority to compel licensee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the cable system under the supervision of the City Manager. Such report shall be delivered to the City Manager no later than 30 days after the City Manager requests such test(s) in writing and shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints that precipitated the test(s), which cable system component(s) was/were tested, the equipment used and procedure(s) employed in such testing, the result(s) of such test(s), and the manner in which such complaints were resolved. If such report indicates licensee is in substantial compliance with the technical standards, but there exists evidence suggesting that licensee is nonetheless not in substantial compliance, the City Manager may require that the test(s) be repeated within 30 days of the delivery of such report, under the supervision of a professional engineer, not on the permanent staff of licensee. Such engineer shall sign all records of such repeated test(s) and shall forward to the City Manager (i) such records, (ii) a report interpreting the results, and (iii) recommended corrective actions, if any. The fees of such engineer shall be paid by (i) licensee, if the repeated test(s) show(s) licensee is not in substantial compliance with the technical standards of this Code or (ii) the city, if the repeated test(s) show(s) licensee is in substantial compliance with said standards. 
(B)  Additional specification . Construction, installation, and maintenance of a cable system shall be performed in an orderly and professional manner. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in a manner similar to the installation of electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Underground installations shall be in conformance with all applicable codes. 
    Each cable system shall include equipment capable of providing stand-by power as specified in the license. The equipment shall be so constructed as to automatically revert to the stand-by mode when the electrical utility power returns. The system shall incorporate safeguards necessary to prevent injury to technicians resulting from licensee's stand-by power sources. 
    Licensee shall at all time comply with applicable sections of: 
(1)  National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI) C2-1990; 
(2)  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
(3)  The Uniform Building Code as may be adopted and amended by the city, together with applicable portions of all other Uniform Codes, as may be adopted and amended by the city, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials; 
(4)  City Zoning Code and Subdivision Regulations, all as from time to time amended and revised, and all other applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the city; 
(5)  The Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction including the latest City of Tolleson supplement thereto. 
(C)  Emergency service . The licensee shall design and construct the system to provide for a restricted audio override of the audio portion of all channels during emergencies consistent with FCC regulations. Emergency or stand-by power sources will be installed at the main electronic control center and appropriate locations so as to minimize loss of signal. Key cable routings shall also be equipped with a stand-by power source. In case of any declared emergency or disaster, the cable system shall, upon request of the Mayor or City Manager, make available immediately its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. A declared emergency or disaster as used in this article means such event that has been proclaimed by the Mayor, the Governor, or other competent authority. 
    In any event, the cable system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the license area or other areas where the licensee may have equipment located. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-4-6 - UTILITY LOCATING SYSTEM. 
    A licensee shall be required to be a participant in the regional one call utility locating system (Blue Stake). 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-4-7 - RESIDENT NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY REQUIRED. 
    The licensee shall provide reasonable advance notice to all affected residents prior to system construction or upgrade crews entering the right-of-way in front of their property; provided that the licensee shall not be required to provide such notice in emergencies or [for] normal system repair and maintenance work. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
ARTICLE 15-5: - REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO USE OF CITY STREETS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

§ 15-5-1 - LOCATION OF PROPERTY OF LICENSEE. 
(A)  Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits, or other properties of a licensee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the City Manager acting in the exercise of his or her reasonable discretion consistent with the city's technical and permitting regulations. 
(B)  Except as provided by the city, a licensee shall not install or erect any facility or apparatus in or on any privately owned area within the city that has not yet become a public street, whether or not designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any preliminary subdivision approved by the city. 
(C)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code or any license granted pursuant thereto, all facilities of a licensee in any public street or in any public or private easement, and cable service lines to subscribers of the main lines, shall be located underground as per the city's subdivision regulations as may be amended from time to time and at such depths and locations as shall be approved by the City Manager. 
(D)  Except as provided in the license, upon the undergrounding of other utility lines or shared overhead facilities, licensee shall concurrently (or earlier) place its facilities underground, at its own expense (when the undergrounding is at the expense of the other utilities involved), at depths and locations approved by the City Manager. Licensee shall also cooperate in placing its facilities underground if a third party (such as a developer) agrees to pay for the undergrounding of utility lines, cable facilities, and shared overhead facilities. 
(E)  All new underground wires or cable of licensee placed after the effective date of this Code shall be placed in conduits except for service drop lines. 
(F)  As required by the City Manager or other appropriate departments, the licensee or its authorized contractors will obtain permits, prior to any physical work being performed in the city's rights-of-way or on city-owned property. All work will be done in accordance with the city's technical and permitting specifications. 
    A licensee shall make maps of the applicable portion of the cable system showing amplifier and power supply locations available for inspection and review at the office where licensee maintains such records. The licensee shall provide the city with up-to-date route maps of a suitable scale showing all transmitting and receiving pickup locations, cable route, and pedestal locations. 
(G)  To prevent unnecessary disruption and damage to streets, rights-of-way, and other property, the installation of cable system shall be accomplished in new subdivisions at the same time, and in the same trench as other communications, electric, and other permanent services to structures. Except as federal law may grant them other rights, developers of new residential buildings or mobile homes within a new or undeveloped subdivision, new residential units within new multiple occupancy residential developments, and new commercial and industrial buildings and structures shall treat cable facilities as they treat other communication facilities, utilities, and other underground facilities, in regards to availability and cost of trenching for undergroundings. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-5-2 - EMERGENCY WORK. 
    The city reserves the right to move any portion of the licensee's equipment and facilities as may be required in any emergency as determined by the city without liability for interruption of cable service. However, prior to taking any actions pursuant to this article, the city shall provide, if feasible, reasonable notice to licensee of the emergency to allow licensee the opportunity to protect or repair licensee's facilities involved in the emergency. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-5-3 - REMOVAL AND ABANDONMENT OF PROPERTY OF LICENSEE. 
    The following provisions shall not apply to facilities used in the provision of services other than cable services as to which no cable license is required. 
(A)  If the use of substantial part of the cable system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or if such cable system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the licensee's license or this Code, or the license has been terminated, canceled, or has expired without renewal, the licensee shall promptly, upon being given ten days notice from the City Manager, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such cable system other than any underground cable or any other underground property that the City Manager may permit to be abandoned in place. Upon such removal, the licensee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the City Manager. 
(B)  Any property of the licensee remaining in place 180 days after the termination or expiration of the license shall be at the option of the city considered permanently abandoned. The city may extend such time. 
(C)  Any property of the licensee permitted to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the City Manager shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the licensee in place, the property shall become that of the city, and the licensee shall submit to the city an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. 
(D)  At the city's discretion, any property of the licensee not permitted by the city to be abandoned in place may be removed by the city at the licensee's expense. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-5-4 - TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF WIRE FOR BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS. 
    The licensee, on the request of any person, firm, or corporation holding a building moving permit issued by the city, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering of wires shall be paid to the licensee by the person, firm, or corporation requesting the same, and the licensee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The licensee shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-5-5 - CHANGES REQUIRED BY PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. 
    The licensee shall from time to time protect, support, temporarily dislocate, temporarily or permanently as may be required, remove or relocate, without expense to the city any facilities installed, used, or maintained under the license, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any street, by the city or made necessary by any other public improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon, or about any street, when such public improvement or alteration is at the instance of the city, when such improvement or alteration is for a governmental or proprietary function, or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, or any other public project or purpose of city, and when the licensee has substantially the same obligations with respect to the cost thereof as all other users of the public rights-of-way. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-5-6 - METHODS AND MATERIALS OF STREET CONSTRUCTION. 
    The city shall have the right to specify the methods and materials of street construction or reconstruction, together with the horizontal and vertical location of any underground facility proposed by licensee within any public property or right-of-way. The city shall also have the right to limit the work of the licensee to assure a minimum of inconvenience to the traveling public and to impose traffic control requirements, as specified in the city's subdivision regulations (Chapter 7 of the Tolleson City Code) and Chapter 12 of the Tolleson City Code regulating traffic. Licensee will be required to obtain permits from the city, allowing licensee to work in the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-5-7 - FAILURE TO PERFORM STREET WORK. 
    If a licensee during construction, installation, or repair of its facilities causes damage to pavement, sidewalks, driveways, landscaping, or other property, the licensee or the authorized agent shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such places to a condition satisfactory to the City Manager that existed before said work was commenced. The licensee shall further maintain all such restoration related to licensee's activities, in the condition approved by the city for a minimum period of one year following such restoration. 
    Upon failure of the licensee to complete any work required by law, or by the provisions of this Code, or by its license, to be done in any street, within ten days following due notice and to the satisfaction of the City Manager, the city may, at its option, cause such work to be done through its own forces or through a hired contractor, and the licensee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the City Manager to the licensee within 15 days after receipt of such itemized report. Or, at city's option, city may demand of licensee the estimated cost of such work as estimated by the City Manager and such shall be paid by licensee to city within 15 days of such demand. Upon award of any contract or contracts therefor, licensee shall pay to city, within 15 days of demand, any additional amount necessary to provide for cost of such work. Upon completion of such work, licensee shall pay to city or city shall refund to licensee such sums so that the total received and retained by city shall equal the cost to the city of such work. "Cost" as used herein shall include 15 percent of all other costs for its own personnel and equipment and materials or for a contractor to compensate the city's for its overhead, including inspection and supervision, and any interest charges incurred by city arising out of licensee's late payment to city under this article. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
ARTICLE 15-6: - SUBSCRIBER SERVICE PROVISIONS 

§ 15-6-1 - LOCAL BUSINESS OFFICE REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  The licensee shall maintain a business office for the purpose of receiving inquiries regarding new service, handling converters, paying bills, and receiving complaints. 
(B)  Said office shall be conveniently located near or in the city and shall be open during all normal business hours. "Near" for purposes of this article shall mean within ten miles of the corporate limits of the City of Tolleson. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-6-2 - EFFICIENT TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. 
    A licensee shall render efficient telephone communication service to subscribers and, at a minimum, meet the standards set forth below: 
(A)  Licensee shall have a publicly listed, local, or toll-free telephone number, in accordance with this article, and receive complaints and requests for repairs, service calls, billing inquiries, and other subscriber information on a 24-hour-per-day, seven-day-a-week basis. 
(B)  Trained licensee representatives will be available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
(C)  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquires received after normal business hours must be responded to by a licensee representative on the next business day. 
(D)  Under normal operating conditions, the mean average telephone answer time by a subscriber representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds after the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, the mean average transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds under normal operating conditions. These standards shall be measured on a quarterly basis. No caller should be left on hold more than 60 seconds without being informed of the status of the call. 
(E)  Under normal operating conditions, the subscribers will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
(F)  Licensee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless a historical record of compliance indicates a clear failure to comply. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-6-3 - SUBSCRIBER SERVICE STANDARDS. 
(A)  Each licensee shall at all times satisfy federal customer service standards and the subscriber service standards for subscribers set forth in this Code and in its license. If there is a conflict among standards, the stricter standard shall prevail, unless such standard has been preempted by federal law. 
(B)  Upon termination of cable services to any subscriber, a licensee shall promptly remove its converter equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon the subscriber's request. 
(C)  Licensee shall render efficient cable services, make repairs promptly, and interrupt cable services only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall occur during periods of minimum cable system use. 
(D)  Licensee shall not knowingly allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not serviced by licensee, nor shall the cable system interfere with, obstruct, or hinder in any manner, the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the city. 
(E)  A licensee shall continue, through the term of the license, to maintain the technical, operational, and maintenance standards and quality of cable service set forth in this Code and as specified in the license. 
(F)  Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards for subscribers will be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard drops (including reconnects) will be installed within seven days after an order has been placed. 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the licensee, the licensee will begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later that 24 hours after the service interruption becomes known. The licensee must begin actions to correct its service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(3)  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at a maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The licensee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the subscriber.) 
(4)  If a licensee representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the licensee will attempt to contact the subscriber. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the subscriber. 
(G)  In addition to the service interruption requirements set forth above, whenever it has been determined that an outage exists, licensee shall respond immediately. It shall be deemed a violation if licensee exceeds a four-hour average response time to outages during any consecutive three-month period. 
(H)  Licensee shall respond and resolve all complaints within a reasonable time. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-6-4 - SUBSCRIBER AND CITY NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  The license shall provide written information in easy-to-understand language on each of the following areas prior to or at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers and the city, and at any time upon request: 
(1)  Products and services offered; 
(2)  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
(3)  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
(4)  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
(5)  Information on a parental control feature that will permit a subscriber to lock out any objectionable programming from the cable services entering his or her home; 
(6)  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
(7)  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city's designated office for handling cable television matters. 
(B)  Subscribers and the city will be notified of any changes in rates, programming, services, or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to the city and subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the licensee, unless the city concerns that notice is not necessary. In addition, the licensee shall notify the city and subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by the preceding paragraph. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-6-5 - BILLING PRACTICES; INFORMATION AND PROCEDURES. 
(A)  Bills to subscribers will be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills to subscribers must [be] fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills to subscribers will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits. 
(B)  Licensee shall bill all subscribers to its cable system in a uniform manner, regardless of subscriber's level of service. In no case shall any subscriber be billed for services in excess of 30 days prior to receipt of such service. Payment shall be due no sooner than the fifteenth day of each billing period, and due date shall be listed on each bill. Bills shall be mailed no later than the first day of the billing period. 
(C)  In case of a subscriber dispute, the licensee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. The licensee shall follow a written internal appeal procedure for resolution of subscriber disputes. 
(D)  Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than: 
(1)  The subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; 
(2)  For equipment deposits, upon the return of the equipment supplied by the license if service is terminated; 
(3)  For payment deposits, after 12 months of satisfactory customer payments. 
(E)  Credits for service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(F)  Any subscriber shall be entitled, upon request, oral or written, to licensee to a refund equal to one day's service for each subscriber's loss of service caused by licensee: (1) for each continuous 24-hour period or (2) for a period of two or more hours of any four days within a monthly billing period. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-6-6 - SUBSCRIBER SOLICITATION PROCEDURES. 
(A)  All personnel, agents, and representatives of the licensee, including subcontractors, shall wear a cable uniform or clearly display a photo-identification badge when acting on behalf of the licensee in the city. 
(B)  The licensee shall afford each subscriber of the cable system with a three-day right of rescission for ordering installation of cable service from the cable system provided that such right of rescission shall end upon initiation of physical installation of cable system equipment on such subscriber's premises. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-6-7 - DISCONNECTION AND TERMINATION OF CABLE SERVICES. 
    Licensee shall only disconnect or terminate a subscriber's cable service for good and just cause. In no event shall licensee disconnect said cable service for nonpayment without the prior written notification to the affected subscriber at least seven days prior to such disconnection or termination. In no event shall such disconnection or termination for nonpayment occur in less than 30 days after a subscriber's failure to pay a bill due. Where the licensee has improperly discontinued cable system service to any such subscriber, it shall provide free reconnection to the cable system to such subscriber. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-6-8 - RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS. 
(A)  A licensee shall not deny cable service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, or disability. A licensee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and as amended from time to time, relating to nondiscrimination. 
(B)  A licensee shall strictly adhere to applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state, and local regulations, and as amended from time to time. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-6-9 - PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY. 
(A)  At the time of entering into an agreement to provide any cable service to a subscriber and at least once a year thereafter, a licensee shall provide notice in the form of a separate, written statement to such subscriber that clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of: 
(1)  The nature of personally identifiable information collected or to be collected with respect to the subscriber and the nature of the use of such information; 
(2)  The nature, frequency, and purpose of any disclosure that may be made of such information, including any identification of the types of persons to whom the disclosure may be made; 
(3)  The period during which such information will be maintained by the licensee; 
(4)  The times and place at which the subscriber may have access to such information in accordance with subsection (A)(2) of this section; and 
(5)  The limitations provided by this article with respect to the collection and disclosure of information by a licensee and the right of the subscriber under subsections (I) and (J) to enforce such limitations. 
(B)  For purposes of this article, the term "personally identifiable information" does not include any record aggregate data that does not identify particular persons. 
(C)  Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, a licensee shall not use the cable system to collect personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent to the subscriber concerned. 
(D)  A licensee may use the cable system to collect such information in order to: 
(1)  Obtain information necessary to render a cable service or other service provided by the licensee to the subscriber; or 
(2)  Detect unauthorized reception of cable communications. 
(E)  Except as provided in subsection (1) of subsection (D), a licensee shall not disclose personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned. 
(F)  Licensee may disclose such information if the disclosure is: 
(1)  Necessary to render, or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by the licensee to the subscriber; 
(2)  Subject to subsection (J), made pursuant to a court order authorizing such disclosure, if the subscriber is notified of such order by the person to whom the order is directed; or; 
(3)  A disclosure of the names and addresses of subscribers to any cable service or other service, if: 
a.  The licensee has provided the subscriber the opportunity to prohibit or limit such disclosure; and 
b.  The disclosure does not reveal, directly or indirectly, the: 
i.  Extent of any viewing or other use by the subscriber of a cable service or other service provided by the licensee, or 
ii.  The nature of any transaction made by the subscriber over the cable system of the licensee. 
(G)  A subscriber shall be provided, free of charge, access to all personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber that is collected and maintained by a licensee. Such information shall be made available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a convenient place designated by such licensee. A cable subscriber shall be provided reasonable opportunity to correct any error in such information. 
(H)  A licensee shall destroy personally identifiable information if the information is no longer necessary for the purpose for which it was collected and there are no pending requests or orders for access to such information under subsection (G) or pursuant to a court order. 
(I)  Any person aggrieved by any act of a licensee in violation of this article may bring a civil action in a court of general jurisdiction, as provided in Section 631 of the Cable Act. 
(J)  Nothing in this Code shall be construed to prohibit the city from enacting or enforcing additional laws consistent with this article for the protection of subscriber privacy. 
(K)  A governmental entity may obtain personally identifiable information only if, in the court proceeding relevant to such court order: 
(1)  Such entity offers clear and convincing evidence that the subject of the information is reasonably suspected of engaging in criminal activity and that the information sought would be material evidence in the case; and 
(2)  The subject of the information is afforded the opportunity to appear and contest such entity's claim. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
ARTICLE 15-7: - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS 

§ 15-7-1 - REPORTS. 
(A)  Each year the licensee shall brief the offices of the City Manager, no later than 120 days after the end of the licensee's fiscal year. The briefing shall include a description of all major activities applicable to its operation during the preceding 12-month period. At the briefing, licensee shall submit a written report that includes the following information, specific to the city: number of homes passed, number of cable plant miles, number of subscribers for each type of cable service offered and the gross revenues from each source attributable to the operations of licensee from within the city. This report shall be verified as being correct by an officer of the company. There shall be submitted along with this report such other information reasonably related to license compliance as the city shall reasonably request. 
(B)  Upon request, there shall be provided to the city, copies of any communications and reports submitted by licensee to the FCC or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any manners affecting construction or operation of a cable system in the city. 
(C)  Upon request, there shall be provided to the city: 
(1)  Full financial statements for the previous year, including income statement, balance sheet, cash flow statement, and appropriate explanatory footnotes, for the licensee or any parent company. Financial statements for the licensee or any parent company shall be audited by an independent CPA, and all other statements shall be certified by an officer of the licensee to be an accurate reflection of licensee's books and records. In the event any audited financial report has not been published by the date due under this section, then the audited financial report shall be deemed presented on time if presented within 30 days after publication. Upon request by city, the licensee shall also provide an oral briefing to the City Manager of its financial condition. This will include revenues, operating expenses, and capital expenditures for the previous year. 
(2)  A projected income statement and statement of projected costs of construction of the cable system for the next two years, in connection with rate regulation. To protect the proprietary nature of such information, the city may review these reports at the local business office of the licensee. 
(3)  Licensee's annual and other periodic public reports and those of its parent, subsidiary, and affiliated corporations and other entities, as is reasonably appropriate. 
(4)  A report showing the results of an opinion survey identifying satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with cable services offered by licensee. The survey shall be in a format approved by the city and may be in a form that can be transmitted to subscribers with one or more bills for service. 
(D)  Licensee shall provide the city with regular reports, as needed, to establish licensee's compliance with the various standards and other provisions of this Code. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-2 - INSPECTION OF PROPERTY AND RECORDS. 
(A)  At all reasonable times, the licensee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the licensee, together with any appurtenant property of the licensee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the licensee or under its control that relate to license compliance and deal with the operations, affairs, transactions, or property of the licensee. 
(B)  The licensee shall at all times make and keep full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all cable system equipment installed or in use in streets, public rights-of-way, and other places in the city and make them available to the city for review upon request. 
(C)  The licensee shall provide the City Manager maps or sets of maps drawn to scale, showing the location of the licensee's underground and above ground facilities. Upon request, such maps or sets of maps shall be provided in an electronic format compatible with the current city electronic format. 
(D)  Plant survey report . Upon request of the city the licensee shall submit to the city an annual plant survey report that shall be a complete survey of the licensee's plant and a full report thereon. Such report shall be in sufficient detail to enable the city to ascertain that the service requirements and technical standards of the FCC and/or the license are achieved and maintained. If the city has reason to believe that portions or all of the system do not meet either the FCC technical standards, or those incorporated into the license agreement, at the city's request, but no more often than once per three years, the licensee and the city shall agree upon the appointment of a qualified independent engineer to evaluate and verify the technical performance of the cable system. The cost of such evaluation shall be borne equally by the licensee and the city. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-3 - PROTECTION OF CITY AGAINST LIABILITY. 
(A)  Indemnification . 
(1)  Licensee shall fully indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, elected officials, agents, attorneys, representatives, servants, and employees against any and all costs, damages, expenses, claims, suits, actions, liabilities, and judgments for damages, including but not limited to, expenses for legal fees, whether suit be brought or not, and disbursements and liabilities incurred or assumed by city in connection with: 
a.  Damage to persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of licensee, its servants, officials, agents, attorneys representatives, or employees; 
b.  Requests for relief arising out of any licensee action or inaction which results in a claim for invasion of right of privacy, for defamation of any person, firm or corporation; for the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark, or patent; or of any other right of any person, firm, or corporation; 
c.  Any and all claims arising out of licensee's failure to comply with the provisions of this Code or a license or any federal, state, or local law, or regulation applicable to licensee or the cable system; 
d.  Any and all disputes arising out of a claim by any party other than city wherein damages or other relief is sought (i) as a result of the city's cable system licensing of licensee or (ii) as a result of the renewal or non-renewal of licensee's cable system license. 
(2)  If a lawsuit covered by the provisions of subsection (A)(1) be brought against city, either independently or jointly with a licensee, or with any other person or municipality; the licensee, upon notice given by city, shall defend city at the cost of the licensee. If final judgment is obtained against city, either independently or jointly with licensee or any other defendants, the licensee shall indemnify city and pay such judgment with all costs and attorneys fees and satisfy and discharge the same. 
(3)  The city shall cooperate with the licensee and reserves the right to participate in the defense of any litigation. 
(4)  A licensee shall bring no claim or demand any right to a refund of license fees paid to the city as a percentage of gross revenues derived from services that are later determined to be telecommunications services rather than cable services. 
(5)  The city is in no manner or means waiving any governmental immunity it may enjoy or any immunity for its agents, officials, servants, attorneys, representatives, and/or employees. 
(6)  A licensee shall make no settlement in any matter identified above without the city's written consent, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Failure to inform the city of settlement shall constitute a breach of the license and the city may seek any redress available to it against the licensee whether set forth in this Code or under any other municipal, state, or federal laws. 
(7)  All rights of city, pursuant to indemnification, insurance, letter of credit, or performance bond(s), as provided for by this Code, are in addition to all other rights the city may have under this Code or any other code, rule, regulation, or law. 
(8)  The city's exercise of or failure to exercise all rights pursuant to any article of this Code shall not affect in any way the right of the city subsequently to exercise any such rights or any other right of city under this Code or any other code, rule, regulation, or law. 
(9)  It is the purpose of this article to provide maximum indemnification to the city under the terms and conditions expressed and, if there is a dispute, this article shall be construed (to the greatest extent permitted by law) to provide for the indemnification of the city by the licensee. 
(10)  The provisions of this article shall not be dependent or conditioned upon the validity of this Code or the validity of any of the procedures or agreements involved in the award or renewal of a license, but shall be and remain a binding right and obligation of the city and a licensee even if part or all of this Code, or the grant or renewal of a license, is declared null and void in a legal or administrative proceeding. It shall be expressly stated in a license, that it is the intent of the licensee and city, upon the effective date of the license, that the provisions of this article survive any such declaration and shall be a binding obligation of and inure to the benefit of the licensee and city and their respective successors and assigns, if any. 
(B)  Comprehensive liability insurance . 
(1)  Upon acceptance of a license, the licensee shall file with the City Clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such license maintain in full force and effect, at its own expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy or policies that shall insure licensee and provide primary coverage for the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees, against liability for loss or liability for personal injury, death, property damage (both automobile and non-automobile caused), or other damages. Such policy or policies shall include insurance against damages from unfair competition, copyright infringement (common law or statutory), and a failure of licensee to secure consents, occasioned by any activity or operation of licensee under such license, and regardless of any claimed or actual activities of city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees. The City Council, in any license granted, may waive the requirement for insurance from one or more perils mentioned in the last preceding sentence upon a finding that such insurance cannot be procured or cannot be procured at a reasonable cost, and in collection there with may reduce the otherwise required limits on coverage hereafter set forth. Such policy or policies shall be issued by a company approved by the City Manager and shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney, with minimum combined single limits of liability coverage in the amount of $3,000,000.00. The policy or policies shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as additional insured and contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification, or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the City Clerk 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof. No license granted under this Code shall be effective unless and until each of the foregoing policies of insurance as required in this subsection has been delivered to the City Clerk. Any substitute policy or policies shall be subject to the same approvals and shall comply with all of the provisions of this subsection. 
(2)  The City Council may require increases in the amount of types of coverage no more frequently than every three years, based on increases in the CPI, so as to ensure full protection of the City of Tolleson and the public. The licensee shall have six months from the date of notification from the City Manager to comply with any increase. 
(3)  A licensee may self-insure the above-described policy overages if such licensee or its parent is of sufficient financial standing to reasonably provide such insurance. A licensee that elects to self-insure shall file with the city a certificate of insurance as specified by the city. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-4 - LETTER OF CREDIT. 
(A)  Within 30 days after the award or renewal of a license, a licensee shall deposit with the city an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00 issued by a federally insured commercial lending institution. The form and substance of said letter of credit shall be used to assume the faithful performance by a licensee of all provisions of this and resulting license; and compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under a license and the payment by the licensee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, and taxes due to the city that arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system, including cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the licensee. 
(B)  The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the city by presentation of a draft at sight on the lending institution, accompanied by a written certificate signed by the City Manager certifying that the licensee has been found, pursuant to § 15-7-7(C) or § 15-7-8, to have failed to comply with, its license or license agreement, stating the nature of noncompliance, and stating the amount being drawn. Examples of the nature of the noncompliance for drawing upon the letter of credit include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure of the licensee to pay to the city any license fees or taxes after ten days written notice of delinquency. 
(2)  Failure of the licensee to pay to the city, after ten days written notice, after all judicial remedies have been exhausted, any amounts due and owing the city by reason of the indemnity provisions of § 15-7-3; 
(3)  Failure of the licensee to pay to the city any liquidated damages due and owing to the city pursuant to the license. 
(C)  The letter of credit shall be structured in such a manner so that if the city at any time draws upon the letter of credit, upon notice to the licensee by the issuing lending institution, licensee shall increase immediately the amount of available credit to the extent necessary to replenish that portion of the available credit exhausted by the honoring of the city's draft. The lending institution shall notify the city of the replenishment by licensee. The intent of this subsection is to make available to the city at all times a letter of credit in the amount of $5,000.00. 
(D)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by a license or authorized by law, and no action proceeding against a letter of credit shall affect any other right the city may have. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-5 - CONSTRUCTION BOND. 
(A)  Within 30 days after the award or renewal of a license, a licensee shall obtain and maintain throughout the period of system construction, at its cost and expense, and file with the City Clerk, a corporate surety bond issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of Arizona, and found acceptable by the City Attorney, in an amount established in a license agreement solely for the purpose of guaranteeing the timely construction and/or reconstruction of the cable system and the safeguarding of private property during construction and/or reconstruction. 
    The bond shall provide, but not be limited to, the following condition: There shall be recoverable by the city, jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all damages, losses or costs suffered by the city resulting from the failure of a licensee to satisfactorily complete construction and/or reconstruction of its cable system throughout the license area pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Code and such licensee's license. 
(B)  Any extension of the prescribed construction or reconstruction time limit must be authorized by the city. The construction bond shall be available throughout any such extension period. 
(C)  The construction bond shall be terminated only after the City Council finds that a licensee has satisfactorily completed initial construction and activation or reconstruction of its cable system pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Code and such licensee's license. 
(D)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the construction bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this Code or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such construction bond shall affect any other rights the city may have. 
(E)  The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement: 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 60 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, or written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-6 - LIQUIDATED DAMAGES. 
(A)  Each license granted by the city shall state that a licensee understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and performance requirements as stipulated in this Code and the license will result in damage to the city, and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage caused by delay or nonperformance; the license shall include provisions for liquidated damages to be paid by the licensee, in amounts set forth in the license and chargeable to the letter of credit for the following concerns: 
(1)  Failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in accordance with this Code and/or the license, unless the city council specifically approves the delay by motion or resolution; 
(2)  Failure to provide a cable connection within the time(s) set forth in § 15-4-3; 
(3)  Failure to properly restore the public right-of-way or to correct related violations of specifications, code, or standards after having been notified by the city to correct such defects; 
(4)  Failure to comply with subscriber service standards of this Code; 
(5)  Failure to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the cable system following a written request pursuant to § 15-4-5(A); 
(6)  Failure to provide in a continuing manner the type of services proposed in the accepted proposal for initial license or in the initial or renewal license unless the City Council specifically approves modification of a licensee's obligation; 
(7)  Failure to cure any violation of § 15-6-3, following notice and an opportunity to cure pursuant to the provisions of that article; and 
(8)  Any other action or non-action by the licensee, to which none of the above reasonably apply and damages cannot be estimated on a daily basis, and set forth in the license. 
(B)  If the City Manager concludes that a license is in fact liable for liquidated damages pursuant to this article, he/she shall issue to licensee by certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The notice shall set forth the nature of the violation and the amount of the proposed assessment. The licensee shall, within 30 days of receipt of such notice: 
(1)  Respond to the city in writing, contesting the city's assertion of violation and providing such information or documentation as may be necessary to support licensee's position; or 
(2)  Cure any such violation (and provide written evidence of the same), or, if, by the nature of the violation, such violation cannot be cured within such 30-day period, take reasonable steps to cure said violation and diligently continue such efforts until said violation is cured. Licensee shall report to the city, in writing, at 30-day intervals as to licensee's efforts, indicating the steps taken by licensee to cure said violation and reporting licensee's progress until such violation is cured. 
(C)  If licensee contests the city's assertion of violation or fails to respond to the city's notice of intent to assess liquidated damages, within 15 days the city shall schedule a hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 15-7-7. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-7 - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. 
(A)  Within 15 days of: 
(1)  Receipt of notice of contest pursuant to § 15-7-6(B)(1), 
(2)  Expiration of the response time referred to in §§ 15-6-3(G) or 15-7-7(C), or 
(3)  Notice from licensee that it contests an audit determination of license fees under § 15-3-2(D), 
an administrative hearing shall be scheduled by the City Manager. This shall be a public hearing, and licensee shall be afforded full due process, including, without limitation, an opportunity to be heard, to present evidence, and to cross examine witnesses. Within 15 days after the conclusion of such hearing, the City Manager shall issue a determination. In that determination the City Manager may: 
(1)  Find that licensee is not in violation of the terms of the license; 
(2)  Find that the licensee is in violation, but that such violation was with just cause and waive any liquidated damages that might otherwise be imposed; 
(3)  Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license, take corrective action and foreclose on all or any appropriate part of the letter of credit provided pursuant to § 15-7-4; 
(4)  Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license and impose liquidated damages; or 
(5)  In the case of a material violation recommend that the City Council terminate the license, provided that the City Council may take action on any such recommendation only after a public hearing as set forth in § 15-7-8. 
(B)  If the City Manager determines that licensee has committed a violation, the determination shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of reasons for the determination, including findings of fact. 
(C)  The decision of the City Manager shall become final unless licensee requests a public hearing before the City Council within 15 days of its receipt of the statement of reasons and findings of fact by the City Manager. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-8 - HEARING BY CITY COUNCIL. 
    If a public hearing before the City Council is requested by licensee or is held pursuant to §§ 15-7-7(A)(5) or 15-7-7(C), it shall be de novo and it shall convene within 30 days of the request therefor. The City Council may designate three of its members to act as a hearing subcommittee to collect all evidence in the matter and to present written findings of fact and conclusions of law to the entire City Council. All witnesses shall be sworn and shall be subject to cross-examination; however, formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The City Council's decision, which shall include findings of fact, shall be made not later than 45 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. In that decision, the City Council may: 
(A)  Find that licensee is not in violation of the terms of the license; 
(B)  Find that licensee is in violation but that such violation was with just cause and waive any liquidated damages or penalty that may otherwise be imposed; 
(C)  Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license, take corrective action and foreclose on all of any appropriate part of the letter of credit provided pursuant to § 15-7-4 to pay the cost thereof; 
(D)  Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license and impose liquidated damages; or 
(E)  In the case of a material violation of the license within the meaning of § 15-7-9, declare the licensee in violation and revoke the license. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-9 - REVOCATION. 
(A)  In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the City Council under this Code or otherwise, the Council shall have the right to revoke the license and all rights and privileges of the licensee thereunder upon a recurring or protracted substantial breach of the license terms and conditions, or this Code, which substantially affects the provision or quality of cable services, the ability of the City of Tolleson to effectively regulate the licensee, or Tolleson's collection of all fees and charges. The power of revocation shall not be used if the breach is a result of force majeure. The breaches appearing on the list set forth below in this article shall be considered substantial breaches. The list is not exhaustive: 
(1)  Willful or grossly negligent repeated violations of this Code, the license, or the representations made in the proposal process, or any rule, order, or regulation of the City of Tolleson made pursuant to this Code; 
(2)  An attempt to dispose of any of the facilities or property of the system authorized by the license to prevent city from acquiring it, as provided for herein; 
(3)  Attempt to evade any material provision of the license or practice any fraud or deceit upon the city or its subscribers or customers; 
(4)  Failure to begin or complete cable system construction, reconstruction, or cable system extension as provided under the license; 
(5)  Failure to provide the types of categories of programming and cable services promised; 
(6)  Recurrent failures to restore service on the entire or a substantial portion of the cable system after 96 consecutive hours of interrupted service except cable services promised; 
(7)  Recurrent service outages of the entire cable system or a substantial portion thereof which, in the aggregate, exceed ten days in any 30-day period; 
(8)  Recurrent failures after notice by the City Manager to provide service to any part of the licensee service area, consistent with § 15-4-3; 
(9)  Unlawful acts or omissions by licensee or its servants, officials, agents, representatives, or employees, which result in the city's refusal to award a license to any other person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity; 
(10)  Each failure to properly restore streets or to correct related violations of specifications, code, ordinance, or standards; 
(11)  Each failure to comply with subscriber service standards; 
(12)  Failure to comply with operational, maintenance, or technical standards; 
(13)  Failure to provide on a continuing basis the broad categories of programming specified in a license; 
(14)  Failure to provide the access channel requirements specified in a license; 
(15)  An unauthorized partial or total transfer of a license; 
(16)  Failure to commence construction as required in a license; 
(17)  Failure to cure any other violation of a license after notice and opportunity to cure; or 
(18)  Any other material action or non-action of a licensee regarding a requirement of a license. 
(B)  Before proceeding with a revocation hearing, the City Manager shall make a written demand that the licensee comply. If a violation by the licensee continues for a period beyond that set forth in the written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the City Council may revoke the license as provided in § 15-7-9. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-10 - CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY. 
(A)  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to a licensee are honored. 
(B)  If the license terminates, the licensee shall cooperate with the city, to ensure continuity of cable service to all subscribers for a period not to exceed 90 days. Said period may be extended by mutual agreement between the city and licensee. During such period, licensee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system. 
(C)  If licensee fails to operate the cable system for 96 consecutive hours without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the cable system or designate an operator until such time as licensee restores cable services under conditions acceptable to the city or a new permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for a licensee, the licensee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages that are the result of the licensee's failure to perform. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-11 - FAILURE OF CITY TO ENFORCE A LICENSE; NO WAIVER OF THE TERMS THEREOF. 
    A licensee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of a license or this Code by any failure of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-12 - WAIVERS. 
(A)  Any provision of this Code may be waived, at the sole discretion of the city, by resolution of the City Council. 
(B)  Licensee may submit a request for waiver to the City Council at any time during the license term. Such request for waiver may, at the sole discretion of the City Council, be set for public hearing and a decision shall be made within 120 days following its submission. 
(C)  The City Council may authorize the economic, technical, or legal evaluation of such licensee's waiver request and the licensee shall be required to reimburse the city for all expenditures incurred by the city in connection with such evaluation. The city may require that licensee deposit with the city an amount estimated by the city to cover the city's expenditures incurred in connection with such evaluation. 
(D)  This article is enacted solely for the convenience and benefit of the city and shall not be construed in such a manner as to create any right or entitlement for the licensee. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-13 - VALIDITY OF LICENSE. 
    Licensee shall acknowledge as a condition of acceptance of a license, that licensee was represented throughout the negotiations of any license award or renewal by its own attorneys and had opportunity to consult with its own attorneys about its rights and obligations regarding the license. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-14 - LICENSE SUBJECT TO OTHER LAWS. 
    The license is subject to and shall be governed by all applicable provisions of federal, state, and local law. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the license to the contrary, the licensee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof. Provided, however, if any such state or federal law or regulations shall require the licensee to perform any service, or shall permit the licensee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the licensee to perform any service, in conflict with the terms of the license or this chapter, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the licensee shall notify the City Attorney of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and this chapter or the license. 
    In the event of deregulation by the FCC, conformance to current FCC Rules or Regulations, as specified in this chapter may continue to be required by the city. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-15 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. 
(A)  When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk. 
(B)  Neither licensee nor any of its officers, or employees shall receive referral fees or gratuities from any television or radio sales or repair business. 
(C)  Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all notices which the city may give to a licensee or which a licensee may give to the city shall be given in writing and may be given by certified first class mail, postage prepaid addressed to licensee's most recent address on file with the city, and addressed to city. Such notices, when sent by mail and if received, shall be deemed given one day after deposit in the U.S. Mail. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-16 - FORCE MAJEURE. 
    With respect to any provision of this Code or any license granted pursuant thereto, the violation or noncompliance with which could result in the imposition of a financial penalty, liquidated damages, forfeiture, or other sanction upon a licensee, such violation or noncompliance shall be excused where such violation or noncompliance is the result of acts of God, war, civil disturbance, strike or other labor unrest, or similar events, the occurrence of which was not reasonably foreseeable by licensee and is beyond its reasonable control. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
§ 15-7-17 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. The City Council hereby declares that they would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portion of the Code shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the licensee or any license granted hereunder. 
( Ord. 540, N.S. , passed 5-27-2014) 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES 
Table 
I. EASEMENTS 
II. ANNEXATIONS/DEANNEXATIONS 
III. ZONING 
TABLE I: EASEMENTS 
  
Ord. No. Date Passed Description 438 5-9-2006 Dedicating a public utility easement, located generally along 96th Avenue, within an existing city right-of-way. Res. 1050 5-12-2009 Approving the amendment of an air rights easement with SVC Manufacturing. Res. 1075 12-15-2009 Extinguishing an easement for water utility purposes on and under certain real property situated within Maricopa County, generally located west of 99th Avenue, north of Washington Street and south of Van Buren Street. Res. 1079 2-23-2010 Abandoning and extinguishing certain easements on and under certain real property situated within Maricopa County, generally located west of 91st Avenue, north and south of the Southern Avenue alignment. Res. 1091 6-8-2010 Approving a partial termination of right-of-way and easement acquired pursuant to a public utility easement agreement. Res. 1092 6-8-2010 Approving a sewerline easement agreement with HD Phoenix, LLC. 493, N.S. 10-12-2010 Granting a power distribution easement to Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District, through, over, under and across certain real property, generally located south of Van Buren Street and west of 91st Drive. Res. 2022 12-6-2010 Abandoning a waterline easement, generally located along Roosevelt Street, east of 99th Avenue. Res. 2036  6-14-2011 Approving the contract and grant of easement with U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, relocating the Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District water distribution system pipeline and infrastructure. 532, N.S.  9-10-2013 Approving the park easement between the City of Tolleson and Tolleson Elementary School District No. 17. Res. 2151 11-18-2013 Approving the grant of an electrical power easement to the Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District. Res. 2182  5-27-2014 Terminating a portion of a public utility easement generally located along Buckeye Road, east of 89th Avenue. Res. 2190  6-24-2014 Terminating a portion of a public utility easement located at a part of the northwest quarter of Section 3, Township 1 North, Range 1 East of the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian, Maricopa County. Res. 2194  7- 8-2014 Temporary construction easement with 9207 West Van Buren, LLC. Res. 2195  7- 8-2014 Terminating a portion of a public utility easement located at the Rados Tolleson Center. Res. 2204  5-26-2015 Waterline esaement and access agreement with Old Dominion Freight Line, Inc. Res. 2213 11-17-2014 Approving release of a drainage easement to KMD Flagstaff LLC. Res. 2216 12- 9-2014 Approving the grant of a power distribution easement to the Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District located in the Van Buren right-of-way. Res. 2217 12- 9-2014 Approving the grant of a power distribution easement to the Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District located on City of Tolleson property. Res. 2244  4-14-2015 Easement access agreement with Jong and Young Chung for Van Buren Street improvements.  
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS/DEANNEXATIONS 
  
Ord. No. Date Passed Description 423 2-22-2005 Deannexing the portion of Sections 3, 10 and 11, Township 1 North, Range 1 East, G&SRB&M, contingent upon that same tract of land being annexed by the City of Phoenix. 437 4-11-2006 Annexing a tract of right-of-way located along Van Buren Street, between 96th and 99th Avenues, contingent upon approval by the Board of Supervisors, Maricopa County. 456 5-22-2007 Deannexing the portion of 75th Avenue, Van Buren Street to Buckeye Road right-of-way, contingent upon that same tract of land being annexed by the City of Phoenix. 473, N.S. 5-27-2008 Extending and increasing the corporate limits of the city by annexing thereto certain territory contiguous to the existing city limits located at the northwest corner of 75th Avenue and Buckeye Road. 498, N.S. 9-14-2010 Increasing the corporate limits of the city by annexing certain tracts contiguous to the existing corporate limits generally identified as 91st Avenue right-of-way, north and south of I-10. 506, N.S. 2-8-2011 Increasing the corporate limits of the city by annexing certain tracts contiguous to the existing corporate limits generally identified as 91st Avenue right-of-way, north and south of I-10. 509, N.S 4-12-2011 Increasing the corporate limits of the city by annexing certain tracts contiguous to the existing corporate limits generally identified as a portion of 79th Avenue and a portion of Buckeye Road. 512, N.S. 6-14-2011 Extending and increasing the corporate limits of the city by annexing certain territory contiguous to the existing city limits.  
TABLE III: ZONING 
  
Ord. No. Date Passed Description 343 6-27-1995 Rezoning approximately 4.6 acres at the southeast corner of 93rd Avenue and Monroe to Residential/Multi-Family (R-2). 344 7-11-1995 Clarifying and amending Ord. 343 regarding the zoning conditions of property located at the southeast corner of 93rd Avenue and Monroe. 370 6-23-1998 Rezoning the northernmost 8.2 acres of the 30 acre parcel or real property located at the northwest corner of Buckeye Road and the 95th Avenue alignment from Industrial District, Light Industrial Park District (I-1) to Industrial District, General Industrial District (I-2). 371 6-23-1998 Rezoning approximately 19,350 square feet of real property located at the southeast corner of 94th Avenue and Polk Street to General Commercial-2 District (C-2). 411 10-28-2003 Rezoning approximately 37 acres of real property located at the northwest corner of 99th Avenue and Buckeye Road from Light Industrial Park District (I-1) to General Commercial-2 District (C-2). 413 2-10-2004 Rezoning approximately 25 acres of real property located at the southeast corner of the 87th Avenue alignment and Van Buren Street from Light Industrial Park District (I-1) to Residential-Planned Area Development (R-PAD). 416 9-28-2004 Rezoning of property generally located south of the southeast corner of 87th Avenue and Van Buren to PAD District. 418 10-12-2004 Rezoning of property generally located at 116th South 92nd Avenue to Residential R-1-7. 422 2-8-2005 Amending Ord. 416. 446 8-8-2006 Rezoning of property generally located in the vicinity of the southeast corner of 83rd Avenue and Van Buren to Planned Area Development (PAD). 465, N.S. 1-11-2008 Rezoning the property generally located at the southeast corner of 91st Avenue and McDowell Road to General Commercial (C-2) District. 469, N.S. 3-11-2008 Rezoning approximately five acres of property generally located 990 feet west of the southwest corner of I-10 and 91st Avenue to General Commercial-2 (C-2). 474, N.S. 5-27-2008 Rezoning of property generally located at the northwest corner of 7th Avenue and Buckeye Road to Planned Area Development (PAD). 511, N.S. 6-7-2011 Rezoning of property generally located at the northeast corner of 91st Avenue and Buckeye Road to Planned Area Development District. 514, N.S. 6-14-2011 Rezoning of property generally located at the southeast corner of 99th Avenue and Roosevelt Street to General Commercial District (C-2) with a use permit. 528, N.S. 7-24-2012 Approving rezoning of property generally located at the northwest corner of 75th Avenue and Buckeye Road to Light Industrial (I-1) and General Commercial (C-2). 533, N.S.  9-10-2013 Approving rezoning of property generally located at 421 S. 99th Avenue to General Industrial District (I-2). 541, N.S.  6-24-2014 Approving rezoning of property generally located beginning 810 feet west of the 99th Avenue centerline, on West Buckeye Road, from General Commercial (C-2) to Planned Area Development (PAD). 542, N.S.  6-24-2014 Approving rezoning of property generally located at the southwest corner of 83rd Avenue and Interstate 10 from General Commercial (C-2) and Light Industrial (I-1) to Planned Area Development (PAD). 549, N.S. 10-28-2014 Approving rezoning of property generally located at the northwest corner of 80th Avenue and Buckeye Road from Light Industrial (I-1) to General Industrial (I-2). 555, N.S.  5-12-2015 Rezoning of property generally located south of Jefferson Street and west of 91st Drive from Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) to Residential 1-7 (R1-7). 571, N.S.  3-28-2017 Approving the rezoning of property generally located at the northwest corner of 75th Avenue and Buckeye Road from General Commercial District (C-2) to Light Industrial Park District (I-1). 575, N.S.  8-29-2017 Approving the rezoning of approximately 30 acres of property generally located at the southwest corner of 99th Avenue and Van Buren Street. 583, N.S. 12-18-2018 Approving the rezoning of property generally located at or near 125 South 92nd Avenue.  
PARALLEL REFERENCES 
References to Arizona Revised Statutes 
References to Resolutions 
References to Ordinances 
REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES 
  
A.R.S. Cites Code Section 4-209(B) 5-6-3 8 7-2-3 9-231 2-1-2, 2-3-5 9-232 2-1-3, 2-1-6, 2-1-46 9-232.01 2-1-5 9-233 2-1-60, 2-1-62 9-234 2-1-61, 2-1-63, 2-1-64, 2-1-65, 2-1-67, 2-1-69, 2-1-70, 2-1-72 9-235 2-1-4 9-236 2-1-21, 2-1-22, 2-1-23, 2-1-24 9-239 2-1-71, 2-3-2, 2-3-3, 2-3-4, 2-3-20, 2-3-21, 2-3-22, 2-3-23, 2-3-29, 2-3-33, 2-3-34, 2-3-31, 2-4-1, 2-4-2, 2-6-2 9-240 2-3-30, 2-3-33, 3-1-1, 3-1-2, 3-1-2, 3-1-4, 3-1-6 9-240(B)(3) 7-1-1, 7-1-3, 7-1-4, 7-1-8, 7-1-10, 7-1-12, 7-1-16, 7-1-17 9-240(B)(12) Art. 4-1, 7-1-7 9-240(B)(13) 7-1-11 9-240(B)(17) 7-1-14 9-240(B)(21) 7-1-2, 7-1-4, 7-1-6, 7-1-13, 7-1-15 9-240(B)(24) 7-1-8, 7-1-9 9-271 2-1-1, 2-1-2, 2-3-1, 2-3-2, 2-3-4 9-272 2-1-1 9-272.01 2-1-20 9-274 2-1-5, 2-3-4, 2-3-5, 2-3-20, 2-3-21, 2-3-22, 2-3-23, 2-3-24, 2-3-29, 2-3-30, 2-3-33, 2-3-34, 2-4-1, 2-4-2, 2-6-2 9-276(A)(1) 7-1-10 9-302 2-1-7, 2-3-22, 2-3-23, 2-3-24, 2-3-29, 2-3-30, 2-3-33, 2-3-34 9-303 2-3-1, 2-3-4, 2-3-24 9-461.01 2-2-1 9-461.02 2-2-2, 2-2-3, 2-2-4, 2-2-5, 2-2-6 9-461.06 2-2-20, 2-2-21, 2-2-22, 2-2-23 9-497 2-3-50, 2-3-51 9-500.14 2-4-4 9-591 12-4-156 9-812 3-1-7 9-813 3-1-8 9-821 2-1-43 9-821.01 2-1-40, 2-1-41 12-941 3-6-4 13, Chapter 4 7-4-4 13, Chapter 14 5-6-6, 5-7-6 13, Chapter 23 5-6-6, 5-7-6 13, Chapter 32 5-6-6, 5-7-6 13, Chapter 34 5-6-6, 5-7-6 13-105 5-6-3, 5-7-3 13-701 11-6-2 13-707 1-1-8 13-801 11-6-2 13-802 1-1-8 13-902 1-1-8 13, 1401 through 1406 5-6-6, 5-7-6 13-1602 10-1-36, 10-2-3 13-1802 10-1-36, 10-2-3 13-2407 3-7-23, 11-6-2 13-3107 7-4-3, 7-4-4 13-3112 7-4-3 13-3623 2-4-1 13-3724 10-1-36, 10-2-3 13-3899 9-2-6 13-3903 9-2-6 16, Chapter 4, Article 12 2-1-44 16-201 2-1-42 16-203 2-1-42 16-311 2-1-45 16-647 2-1-43 16-661 2-1-44 19, Chapter 1 3-1-5 19-123 3-2-5 19-124 3-2-5 19-141 3-2-5 19-142 3-1-5, 3-2-3, 3-2-4 19-143 3-2-2 22-402 2-6-1 22-403 2-3-1, 2-3-20, 2-6-2 22-404 2-6-5 22-406 2-6-5 22-421 2-6-3 22-422 2-6-3 22-423 2-6-3 22-425 2-6-4 26, Chapter 2 4-4-4, 4-4-6 28 2-8-50, 6-8-1 28, Chapter 4 2-6-5 28, Chapter 5, Article 3 1-1-8 28, Chapter 5, Article 4 1-1-8, 2-6-4 28, Chapter 8, Article 5 2-6-4 28-2409 6-4-10 28-2481 et seq. 6-7-1 28-2484 6-7-1 28-4801 et seq. 6-7-1 28-4832 6-7-1 28, Ch. 11 6-6-3, 6-7-8 33, Chapter 17, Article 1 5-10-2 33-1321(D) 5-10-2 34 3-5-3, 3-5-6, 3-5-105 36-1601 7-1-5 38-231 2-1-6 38-421 3-7-23 38-431.01 2-1-61, 2-1-65 38-431.03 2-1-61, 2-1-65, 2-1-66 38-501 et seq. 2-1-68 38-541 2-5-2 38-542 2-5-3 38-543 2-5-3, 2-5-4 38-545 2-5-1 39, Chapter 1 3-7-1 39-101 3-7-23, 3-7-25, 3-7-26 41, Chapter 1, Article 2.1 3-7-20, 3-7-23 41-151.15 3-7-22 41-151.16 3-7-23, 3-7-26 41-1461 et seq. 2-4-2 41-1750 2-4-1, 5-2-8, 5-6-4, 5-7-4, 5-8-5 41-3503 2-3-32 42-15103 5-10-4 42-5302 10-2-3 49-463 8-6-5 49-471 8-6-1, 8-6-3 49-513 8-6-5 49-701 8-1-2  
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS 
  
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section 546 8-9-1988 10-2-1, 10-2-2, 11-5-3, 11-5-4, 11-5-5, 11-5-6 595 7-24-1990 11-5-2 1050 5-12-2009 TSO Table I 1075 12-15-2009 TSO Table I 1079 2-23-2010 TSO Table I 1091 6-8-2010 TSO Table I 1092 6-8-2010 TSO Table I 2022 12-6-2010 TSO Table I 2029 4-12-2011 Added 12-1-130-12-1-135 2036 6-14-2011 TSO Table I 2043 6-28-2011 10-2-3 2079 4-10-2012 3-7-1, 3-7-2 2085 2-12-2013 Added 3-7-20-3-7-27 2094 7-24-2012 3-7-1, 3-7-2 2151 11-18-2013 TSO Table I 2167 3-11-2014 Rpld 2-3-1-2-3-5, 2-3-20-2-3-35, 2-3-50, 2-3-51 Added 2-3-1-2-3-5, 2-3-20-2-3-35, 2-3-50, 2-3-51 2182 5-27-2014 TSO Table I 2190 6-24-2014 TSO Table I 2194 7-8-2014 TSO Table I 2195 7-8-2014 TSO Table I 2204 5-26-2015 TSO Table I 2213 11-17-2014 TSO Table I 2216 12-9-2014 TSO Table I 2217 12-9-2014 TSO Table I 2244 4-14-2015 TSO Table I  
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES 
  
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section 161 11-22-1977 6-1-1 181 5-13-1980 6-4-9 203 11-10-1981 5-5-1 - 5-5-15 214 6-8-1982 6-7-1, 6-7-6 - 6-7-11 218 12-14-1983 7-1-2 236 10-23-1984 8-4-1 - 8-4-5 235 11-27-1984 3-3-1 - 3-3-3 243 4-23-1985 5-1-7, 5-1-8 262 6-10-1986 10-2-1, 10-2-3, 10-3-5 285 3-22-1988 10-6-1 - 10-6-17, 10-8-1 292 8-9-1988 5-1-8 298 10-10-1989 2-4-3 299 11-28-1989 7-1-7 343 6-27-1995 TSO Table III 344 7-11-1995 TSO Table III 352 5-28-1996 2-1-60 351 6-27-1996 7-2-1 - 7-2-7 363 2-10-1998 7-1-16 364 2-10-1998 8-2-3 - 8-2-9, 8-5-1 - 8-5-5 365 3-11-1998 5-6-1 - 5-6-24 366 3-11-1998 5-7-1 - 5-7-20 368 3-11-1998 5-8-1 - 5-8-17 369 5-12-1998 3-4-1 370 6-23-1998 TSO Table III 371 6-23-1998 TSO Table III 375 11-24-1998 2-4-3 383 6-22-1999 2-4-3 393 7-11-2000 3-5-1 - 3-5-7, 3-5-20 - 3-5-24, 3-5-40 - 3-5-48, 3-5-60, 3-5-61, 3-5-75 - 3-5-79, 3-5-90 - 3-5-92, 3-5-105 - 3-5-107, 3-5-120, 3-5-121, 3-5-135, 3-5-136, 3-5-150 - 3-5-153, 3-5-170 - 3-5-172, 3-5-185, 3-5-186, 3-5-200 - 3-5-203 403 5-13-2003 3-4-1 405 6-10-2003 2-6-5 411 10-28-2003 TSO Table III 412 11-10-2003 9-1-1 413 2-10-2004 TSO Table III 416 9-28-2004 TSO Table III 418 10-12-2004 TSO Table III 422 2-8-2005 TSO Table III 423 2-22-2005 TSO Table II 427 7-26-2005 5-6-4 428 7-26-2005 5-7-4 429 7-26-2005 5-8-5 433 1-10-2006 5-9-1 - 5-9-5 436 2-14-2006 2-4-3 437 4-11-2006 TSO Table II 438 5-9-2006 TSO Table I 439 5-23-2006 3-4-1 446 8-8-2006 TSO Table III 447 10-24-2006 5-1-8 448 11-28-2006 3-4-1 450 2-13-2007 2-6-5 452 3-13-2007 2-4-3 455 5-8-2007 9-1-1, 9-2-6 - 9-2-10 456 5-22-2007 TSO Table II 457 5-22-2007 2-4-3 458 7-10-2007 3-4-1 459 7-24-2007 2-4-3 461 8-14-2007 2-4-3 464 12-11-2007 3-4-1 465, N.S. 1-11-2008 TSO Table III 467 3-11-2008 3-3-21 468 3-11-2008 6-3-17 469, N.S. 3-11-2008 TSO Table III 471 3-25-2008 10-2-1, 11-5-6 473, N.S. 5-27-2008 TSO Table II 474, N.S. 5-27-2008 TSO Table III 475, N.S. 5-27-2008 2-6-2 479 10-14-2008 2-8-40 - 2-8-54 481 10-14-2008 2-9-1, 2-9-2 482, N.S. 5-15-2009 Adopting Ordinance 482, N.S. 5-15-2009 Adopting Ordinance 491, N.S. 6-22-2010 3-5-300, 3-5-400 492, N.S. 6-22-2010 5-10-1-5-10-4 493, N.S. 10-12-2010 TSO Table I 496, N.S. 9-14-2010 Added 2-2-30-2-2-35 498, N.S. 9-14-2010 TSO Table II 499, N.S. 10-12-2010 Added 2-4-1(C) 500, N.S. 1-18-2011 8-1-1, 8-1-2, 8-1-6, 8-1-8, 8-1-23-8-1-27 501, N.S. 11-9-2010 7-1-5 504, N.S. 2-8-2011 6-7-1-6-7-11 506, N.S. 2-8-2011 TSO Table II 509, N.S. 4-12-2011 TSO Table II 510, N.S. 5-24-2011 3-6-1 - 3-6-5 511, N.S. 6-7-2011 TSO Table III 512, N.S. 6-14-2011 TSO Table II 514, N.S. 6-14-2011 TSO Table III 516, N.S. 9-13-2011 8-6-1-8-6-5 518, N.S. 11-8-2011 2-3-1-2-3-5, 2-3-20-2-3-35, 2-3-50, 2-3-51, 2-6-2(B) 520, N.S. 12-13-2011 2-6-5 521, N.S. 3-11-2014 2-1-4 523, N.S. 7-24-2012 3-3-21 525, N.S. 9-11-2012 8-2-4-8-2-9 527, N.S. 10-9-2012 5-4-1-5-4-3 528, N.S. 7-24-2012 TSO Table III 529, N.S. 10-23-2012 8-1-41 530, N.S. 1-23-2012 3-2-5(C) 532, N.S. 9-10-2013 TSO Table I 533, N.S. 9-10-2013 TSO Table III 534, N.S. 11-18-2013 2-1-1(B) 2-1-3 2-1-20 2-1-21(A) 2-1-40 2-1-42 535, N.S. 11-18-2013 3-1-4, 3-1-5 538, N.S. 4-8-2014 2-7-3 4-1-1 4-3-1 539, N.S. 5-13-2014 3-5-22 3-5-172 540, N.S. 5-27-2014 Added 15-1-1, 15-2-1-15-2-12, 15-3-1-15-3-10, 15-4-1-15-4-7, 15-5-1-15-5-7, 15-6-1-15-6-9, 15-7-1-15-7-17 541, N.S. 6-24-2014 TSO Table III 542, N.S. 6-24-2014 TSO Table III 543, N.S. 6-24-2014 7-1-5 544, N.S. 10-14-2014 3-5-2, 3-5-3 3-5-21 3-5-40 545, N.S. 9-9-2014 Added 7-1-21 546, N.S. 9-9-2014 3-5-7 549, N.S. 10-28-2014 TSO Table III 551, N.S. 2-10-2015 3-5-172 553, N.S. 4-28-2015 Added 7-1-22 554, N.S. 5-12-2015 Added 7-1-23 555, N.S. 5-12-2015 TSO Table III 563, N.S. 6-14-2016 6-5-2(A) 565, N.S. 8-23-2016 2-3-22(C) 2-3-23(C) 2-3-25(C) 2-3-26(C) 2-3-27(C) 2-3-28(C) 2-3-29(C) 2-3-30(C) 2-3-31(C) 2-3-32(C) 2-3-34(C) 2-3-35(C) Rpld 2-3-33 Rnbd 2-3-34, 2-3-35 as 2-3-33, 2-3-34 567, N.S. 11-22-16 1-1-8 5-9-4 6-7-11 7-1-10(D) 9-2-6 9-2-6 9-2-10 10-6-3, 10-6-4 568, N.S.  2-28-2017 12-4-132(H) 570, N.S.  3-14-2017 2-1-60 571, N.S.  3-28-2017 TSO Table III 573, N.S.  5-30-2011 8-1-41(A) 8-2-3(A) 8-2-5 8-4-3 575, N.S.  8-29-2017 TSO Table III 578, N.S.  1- 9-2018 3-8-1-3-8-22 581, N.S.  5- 8-2018 3-4-1 582, N.S.  9-11-2018 Rpld 6-5-1-6-5-3 Added 6-5-1-6-5-3 583, N.S. 12-18-2018 TSO Table III  
CITY OF TOLLESON, ARIZONA ZONING CODE 
____________ 
VOLUME 2 
____________ 
2019 S-18 Supplement contains: 
Local legislation current through 
Ord. 584, N.S. passed November 13, 2018 and Ord. 583, N.S. passed December 18, 2018. 
____________ 

ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
CITY OF TOLLESON, ARIZONA 
CITY OF TOLLESON, ARIZONA ORDINANCE NO. 485, N.S. AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF TOLLESON, MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA, ADOPTING THE "CITY OF TOLLESON, ARIZONA ZONING CODE, CODE OF ORDINANCES, VOLUME 2" BY REFERENCE; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TOLLESON, MARICOPA COUNTY, ARIZONA, AS FOLLOWS: 
    SECTION 1: That certain document entitled the "City of Tolleson, Arizona Zoning Code, Code of Ordinances, Volume 2", three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 1048 of the City of Tolleson, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Ordinance. 
    SECTION 2: The City of Tolleson, Arizona Zoning Code, Code of Ordinances, Volume 2 is hereby amended by the corrections, additions, and changes set forth in the Correction/Errata List attached hereto as Exhibit A, and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. 
    SECTION 2: Penalties. Any person found guilt of violating any provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
    SECTION 3: Severability. If any section, subsection, or clause of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, subsections and clauses shall not be affected. 
    SECTION 4: Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed. 
    PASSED and APPROVED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Tolleson this 14th day of April, 2009. 
/s/   
      Adolfo F. Gámez, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Chris Hagen, City Clerk   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      Scott W. Ruby, City Attorney   
CHAPTER 12: - LAND USAGE 
ARTICLE 12-1: - BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION 
Stormwater Drainage Requirements 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 12-1-1 - CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. 
(A)  Chief Building Official. The Building Official and administrative authority, as may be referenced in any section of this chapter for all matters pertaining to any building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or any other inspections, shall be vested in the office of the Chief Building Official, provided that the Chief Building Official may authorize deputies as needed to perform any inspection work or other functions that may be required by this chapter with approval of the City Manager. 
(B)  Inspections. Whenever the duty or responsibility of making inspections for Fire Department or fire protection purposes is imposed upon or granted to any officer or person by this code, the designation of persons or officers shall be deemed to include the Chief Building Official and Fire Chief, or his or her designee as authorized by the Chief Building Official or his or her designee or Fire Chief or his or her designee. All inspections shall be performed and conducted by the Fire Chief, and Chief Building Official, or their authorized designees. No other person shall perform the inspections unless requested and authorized to do so by the Chief Building Official. 
(Am. Ord. 454, N.S., passed 4-10-2007; Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
§ 12-1-2 - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  Regardless of any provision to the contrary, in the various uniform codes adopted by this article, including, but not limited to, the International Building Code, the International Plumbing Code, the National Electric Code and the International Mechanical Code, the Chief Building Official or Building Inspector or his or her designated representative shall not issue a building permit for any new construction within the city limits unless the plans and specifications submitted for the proposed construction show that the floor on the new construction will be a minimum of 12 inches above grade as defined by the International Building Code. 
(B)  Any builder, developer, land subdivider or any other person who applies for a building permit or for approval of a plat plan for property located within the city limits shall furnish to the city staff a flood study or flood plan for the property in question. The flood study or plan required herein shall be in sufficient detail, as necessary, to qualify the property in question for United States Government Federal Flood Insurance. The foregoing requirement shall not apply to a property owner who desires to build a single-family residence where he or she intends to reside. 
(C)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in any of the various international codes adopted pursuant to this article, no structure classified as One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as defined in the most recent version of the International Residential Code adopted by the city pursuant to § 12-1-20, shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the City Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor pursuant to those provisions of the International Residential Code governing the issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
(D)  Any owner of property who causes the undertaking of any activity for which a building permit is required shall be liable for any costs and expenses attributable to any damage or harm caused to public or private property by the undertaking, except where the damage or harm is the purpose of the undertaking. Any person performing any part of the undertaking shall be liable for all costs and expenses attributable to any damage or harm caused to public or private property by the performance of that part of the undertaking by that person. In addition, the city may withhold any final approvals or certificates of occupancy relating to the undertaking until the damage or harm is corrected and all costs and expenses attributable thereto have been paid. 
(Ord. 348, N.S., passed 5-28-1996) 
§ 12-1-3 - CODE FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION. 
    All public works related construction, whether done by the city or by another entity, shall be done in accordance with the codes entitled the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction , 2015 edition, as amended, and the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard Details for Public Works Construction , 2015 edition, as amended, which are made a part of this chapter the same as though the codes were specifically set forth in their entirety herein; and the City of Tolleson 2018 Supplement to the Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard Specifications and Uniform Standard Details for Public Works Construction . 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009; Am. Ord. 505, N.S., passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 584, N.S. , passed November 13, 2018.) 
§ 12-1-4 - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL PROCESS. 
    Whenever a violation of this article is determined, whether during construction or at the plan review stage, and a person wishes to appeal the determination of city staff because of code interpretation, unreasonable hardship or other extraordinary circumstances, the person may appeal to the Board of Adjustment's hearing committee as follows. 
(A)  The person shall file a written appeal on forms provided by the Board of Adjustment no later than three business days from the date of the determination appealed from. 
(B)  The appeal will be heard by the Board of Adjustment after publication of public notice. 
(C)  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of the Mayor and Council members. At the request of the Mayor and Council members, other technical persons may be added for a particular appeal. 
(D)  Adequate information shall be provided by the appellant in order to fully describe the conditions in question. 
(E)  The applicant may, but is not required to, attend the Board of Adjustment meeting. 
(F)  If an appeal is denied by the Board of Adjustment, the appellant shall comply with the determination appealed from. 
INTERNATIONAL CODES 

§ 12-1-20 - ADOPTION. 
(A)  The following codes are hereby adopted and made of a part of this article the same as though the codes were specifically set forth in full herein. 
(B)  The following codes, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, which documents were made a public record by Resolution No. 2211, of the City of Tolleson, Arizona, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this section and the City of Tolleson Code as follows. 
(1)  The International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with amendments and exclusions as follows. 
(a)  The following appendix is hereby adopted as part of the Tolleson adoption of the International Building Code 2012 Edition: Appendix I: Patio Covers. 
(b)  The following appendices are hereby excluded and not adopted in the Tolleson adoption of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition: 
1.  Appendix A: Employee Qualifications; 
2.  Appendix B: Board of Appeals; 
3.  Appendix C: Group U-Agricultural Buildings; 
4.  Appendix D: Fire Districts; 
5.  Appendix E: Supplementary Accessibility Requirements; 
6.  Appendix F: Rodent Proofing; 
7.  Appendix G: Flood Resistant Construction; 
8.  Appendix H: Signs; 
9.  Appendix J: Supplementary Accessibility Requirements for Qualified Historic Buildings and Facilities; 
10.  Appendix K: Administrative Provisions; 
11.  Appendix L: Earthquake Recording Instrumentation; and 
12.  Appendix M: Tsunami-Generated Flood Hazard. 
(2)  The International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with amendments and exclusions, as follows. 
(a)  The following appendices are hereby adopted as part of the Tolleson adoption of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition: 
1.  Appendix B: Sizing of Venting Systems serving appliances equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I appliances and appliances listed for use and Type B Vents; 
2.  Appendix C: Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-vent Venting Systems; 
3.  Appendix D: Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an Existing Appliance Installation; 
4.  Appendix H: Patio Covers; 
5.  Appendix J: Existing Buildings and Structures; 
6.  Appendix L: Permits Fees (as previously adopted under 2006 IBC Residential Code until updated/changed by the City Council); 
7.  Appendix M: One Day Care R-3 Occupancy; and 
8.  Appendix O: Automatic Vehicular Gates. 
(b)  The following appendices are hereby excluded and not adopted in the Tolleson adoption of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition: 
1.  Appendix A: Sizing and capacities of Gas Piping; 
2.  Appendix E: Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings; 
3.  Appendix F: Radon Control Methods; 
4.  Appendix G: Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs; 
5.  Appendix I: Private Sewage Disposal; 
6.  Appendix K: Sound Transmission; 
7.  Appendix N: Venting Method; 
8.  Appendix P: Sizing of Water Piping System; and 
9.  Appendix Q: ICC Residential Code Electrical Provisions/National Electrical Code Cross Reference. 
(c)  The following code section is hereby excluded and not part of the adoption of International Residential Code, 2012 Edition: Section P2904 Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems. 
(3)  The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with amendments and exclusions as follows. 
(a)  The following appendix is hereby adopted as part of the Tolleson adoption of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition: Appendix A: Combustion Air Openings and Chimney Connector Pass-Through. 
(b)  The following appendix is hereby excluded and not adopted in the Tolleson adoption of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition: Appendix B: Recommended Permit Fee Schedule. 
(4)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with the following amendments: 
a)  The text of Section 103.1 General, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
The code official for the City of Tolleson shall be the City Engineer. 
b)  The text of Section 103.5 Fees, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
The fees for activities and services performed by the code official and designees in carrying out the responsibilities under this code shall be as approved by the City Council. 
c)  The text of Section 104.3 Right of Entry, is hereby amended by adding the following to the beginning of the Section: "Subject to all applicable requirements under Arizona law," 
d)  The text of Section 106.3 Prosecution of Violation, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
Any enforcement of this code shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City Code and A.R.S. Section 9-499, as amended. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 of this code and A.R.S. Section 9-499, as amended, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in City Code and A.R.S. Section 9-499, as amended. 
e)  The text of Section 107.1 Notice to Person Responsible, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
Whenever the code official or designee determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in City Code Section 8-2-5 and 8-2-6, as amended, to the owner, the owner's authorized agent or the owner's statutory agent, and to the occupant or lessee of the subject property. 
f)  The text of Section 107.2 Form, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 of this code shall be in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. Section 9-499, as amended, and City Code Section 8-2-5, as amended. 
g)  Section 107.3 Method of Service, is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(5)  The National Electrical Code NFPA 70, 2011 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, with amendments. 
(6)  The International Electrical Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with amendments. 
(7)  The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with amendments. 
(8)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, with amendments. The following appendices are hereby adopted as part of the Tolleson adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition. 
(a)  Appendix A: Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping; and 
(b)  Appendix B: Sizing of Venting System serving appliances equipped with draft hoods; Category I Appliances and Appliances listed for Use with Type B Vents. 
(9)  The International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with amendments. 
(10)  The International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with amendments. 
(11)  That certain document entitled City of Tolleson Swimming Pool/Spa Requirements, dated 1994, as published by the City of Tolleson, with amendments. 
(12)  The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., with amendments and exclusions. 
(a)  The following appendices are hereby adopted by the City of Tolleson as part of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition; 
1.  Appendix B: Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings; 
2.  Appendix C: Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution; 
3.  Appendix D: Fire Apparatus Access Roads; 
4.  Appendix E: Hazard Categories; 
5.  Appendix F: Hazard Ranking; 
6.  Appendix G: Cryogenic Fluids-Weight and Volume Equivalents; 
7.  Appendix H: Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous Material Inventory Statement (HSIS) Instructions: 
8.  Appendix I: Fire Protection System - Noncompliant Conditions; 
(b)  The following appendices are excluded and not adopted in the Tolleson adoption of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition: 
1.  Appendix A: Board of Appeals; 
2.  Appendix J: Building Information Sign; 
(c)  The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as adopted by the City of Tolleson, is amended by adding and/or amending the language of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition to read as follows: 
    The Fire Chief of the City of Tolleson, with input and assistance from Tolleson building officials, is authorized to adopt and enforce nationally recognized standards or requirements applicable in the City of Tolleson as a supplement to the currently adopted fire code for the City of Tolleson. The standards adopted may be updated from time to time as determined by the Fire Chief. In the event of any conflict or differences between the current fire code and the adopted standards, the provisions of the fire code shall apply. 
    Section 105 Permits 
    Section 105.7.17 Gate Access Automatic Control Device. A construction permit is required for the installation of automatic gates across fire department access roads. Automatic gates shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM 2200. 
    Section 105.7.18 Firefighter Air System. A construction permit issued by the City of Tolleson Building Department is required to install or modify a Firefighter Air System. 
    Chapter 2, Definitions 
    Point of Use. A location where an asphyxiate gas is being used to operate a piece of equipment or machinery including, but not limited to, ketchup dispensers, carbonation machines, cup machines, and drive-up windows. 
    Sky Lantern. A device designed to carry an open flame as an airborne light. 
    Chapter 3, General Requirements 
    Section 307.3 Extinguishment Authority. When open burning creates or adds to a hazardous situation, or a required permit for open burning has not been obtained, the Fire Chief or designated representative is authorized to order the extinguishment of the open burning operation. 
    Section 308.1.1 Sky Lanterns. The lighting of, and the release of sky lanterns shall be prohibited. 
    Chapter 5, Fire Service Features 
    503.2.4 Turning Radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall have a minimum 45-foot centerline radius (37 foot inside radius, 53 foot outside radius) on curves. 
    503.6 Security Gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus road shall be approved by the Fire Chief or fire code official. Where security gates are installed, they shall be automatic, and have a pre-emption device and Knox key switch installed. Pre-emption devices and a key switch shall be installed on all new automatic fire access gates installed after January 1, 2006. Gates installed without permits or proof of installation dates, shall be required to provide pre-emption devices and a key switch. The gate(s) with the pre-emption devices shall remain open for 30 minutes after the first emergency apparatus enters, to allow additional responding apparatus to enter during emergencies. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. Battery backup of electronic gate operators shall be required unless the gate is equipped with a failsafe which allows the gate to open in the event of a power failure. Electronic gates shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM 2200. A construction permit in accordance with the requirements of Section 105.7.17 shall be required for the installation of automatic gates. 
    505.1 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Where required by fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained. 
    507.3 Fire Flow. Fire flow tests used to design sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, and fire supply mains shall be performed by a contractor licensed by the State of Arizona, and who has a current business license issued by the City of Tolleson. The test shall be witnessed by the Tolleson Fire Department. 
    Chapter 6, Building Services and Systems 
    Section 606 Mechanical Refrigeration 
    606.8 Refrigerant Detector. Machinery rooms shall contain a refrigerant detector with an approved and distinctive audible and visual alarm. The alarm notification devices shall comply with the audible and visual requirements of the National Fire Alarm Code, NFPA 72. A supervisory alarm shall be activated when the mechanical ventilation system fails. The detector, or a sampling tube that draws air to the detector, shall be located in an area where refrigerant from a leak will concentrate. The alarm shall be activated at a value not greater than the corresponding TLV-TWA values shown in the International Mechanical Code. Detectors and alarms shall be placed in one or more locations to assure notifications of all occupants. 
    606.17 Alternative design requirements for anhydrous ammonia refrigeration systems. Refrigeration systems designed in accordance with ANSI/International Institute of Ammonia Refrigeration Standard 2, Equipment, Design and Installation of Ammonia Mechanical Refrigeration Systems, 1999 edition, and the International Institute of Ammonia Refrigeration, Ammonia Refrigeration Piping Handbook, 2000 edition, shall be exempt from requirements of Sections 602.12.4 and 606.12.5. The design drawings and specifications shall be sealed by an Arizona registered Professional Engineer. 
    606.17.1 Maintenance. Refrigeration systems shall be maintained in a safe manner that will minimize the life, health, and fire hazard of the installation. Installation shall be in accordance with the International Mechanical Code. Refrigeration systems shall be safely maintained in an operable condition, free from accumulation of oil, direct waste, excessive corrosion, other debris or leaks. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 6, anhydrous ammonia refrigeration systems shall be inspected and maintained in accordance with the International Institute of Ammonia Refrigeration Bulletin Number 109, IIAR Minimum Safety Criteria for a Safe Refrigeration System, 1997 edition. 
    606.17.2 Mechanical Integrity Audit. A Mechanical Integrity Audit shall be performed by an Arizona registered Professional Engineer every five years. A copy of this audit with a timeline for corrections of deficiencies shall be submitted to the Fire Chief or fire code official. 
    Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems 
    901.3.1 Modifications. No person shall remove or modify any fire protection system installed or maintained under the provisions of this code without the prior approval by the Fire Chief or fire code official. 
    901.6.3 Inspection and Testing. All fire protection systems shall be inspected and tested annually by a contractor licensed by the State of Arizona and who has a current business licensed issued by the City of Tolleson to work on the specific type of fire protection system being inspected or tested. 
    901.8.1 Removal or Tampering with Appurtenances. Locks, gates, key boxes, key switches, pre-emption devices, doors, barricades, chains, enclosures, signs, tags or seals which have been installed by or at the direction of the fire code official shall not be removed, unlocked, destroyed, tampered with or otherwise vandalized in any manner. 
    901.11 Clearance Around Fire Protection Systems and Equipment. A minimum of 3 feet clearance shall be maintained for access to fire protection equipment, including control valves and control panels. 
    903.2.8 Automatic Sprinkler Systems for One and Two Family Dwelling Units R-3 is specifically excluded and not a part of the adoption of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, nor any other part of the City Code. 
    903.4.1.1 Backflow Prevention Device. Backflow prevention devices shall be chained and locked in the open position, and shall be electrically supervised by a tamper switch which shall transmit an alarm to an approved supervising station or shall sound an audible alarm at a constantly attended location. Backflow prevention devices shall be accessible for annual servicing, inspection, and maintenance. 
    904.1.1 Certification of Service Personnel for Fire-Extinguishing Equipment. Service personnel providing or conducting maintenance on automatic fire-extinguishing systems, other than automatic sprinkler systems, shall possess a valid certificate issued by an organization acceptable to the fire code official for the type of system and work performed. 
    904.3.4.1 Kitchen Hood Systems. Where kitchen hood systems are installed in a building with a fire alarm system designed to notify the building occupants, actuation of the hood system shall initiate the fire alarm system. 
    906.2.1 Certification of Service Personnel for Portable Fire Extinguishers. Service personnel providing or conducting maintenance on portable fire extinguishers shall possess a valid certificate issued by an organization acceptable to the fire code official for the type of work performed. 
    912.2 Location. With respect to hydrants, driveways, buildings and landscaping, fire department connections shall be so located such that fire apparatus and hose connected to supply the system will not obstruct access to the buildings for other fire apparatus. Fire department connections (FDC) shall be remote from the building. 
    912.2.1 Visible Location. Fire department connections shall be located at the primary entrance to the site, fully visible and recognizable 
    Chapter 9 of the code is further amended by adding a new Section 915 entitled Firefighter Air System to read as follows: 
    915. Firefighter Air Systems 
    915.1 General. A Firefighter Air System is a complete, self-contained high pressure breathing air replenishment system consisting of a fire department air connection panel, remote air fill panels and high pressure interconnected piping, permanently installed within a structure, allowing fire department personnel to replenish empty self-contained breathing apparatus cylinders within close proximity to the location of the incident requiring emergency response, thus reducing the amount of travel distance, time and support personnel needed at an emergency incident. 
    915.1.1 Permits. A permit shall be required to install or modify a Firefighter Air System as set forth in Section 105.7.15 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as adopted. 
    915.2 Applicability. The requirements of Section 915 shall apply to all buildings and structures meeting the specifications set forth in 915.3 for which construction is completed after December 31, 2007 and to all expansions, alterations and modifications to existing buildings and structures meeting the specifications set forth in Section 915.3 completed after December 31, 2007 which require City of Tolleson approval. 
    915.3 Buildings and Structures Requiring Firefighter Air System. A Firefighter Air System shall be installed in buildings and structures located in the City of Tolleson meeting either of the following criteria: 
(1)  Buildings and structures commencing on the third (3 rd ) floor above grade level and every other floor above grade level thereafter; or 
(2)  Commencing on the second (2 nd ) floor below grade level and every other floor below grade level thereafter. 
    915.4 Enclosure Location 
    915.4.1 A fire department air connection shall be installed on the exterior of the building or within a remote monument at the exterior of the building and shall be interconnected to the building's interior remote air fill panels. The fill inlet and associated components of the air connection panel shall be contained in a lockable, weather tight enclosure. The panel shall be within fifty (50) feet of the building on an approved roadway or driveway, or other location approved by the Fire Chief or fire code official. The enclosure shall be visible and accessible on approach to the structure. 
    915.4.2 The exterior fire department connection panel shall be protected from vehicle traffic in accordance with this code and shall remain locked at all times, unless in use by fire department personnel. The key for the locking mechanism shall be stored in an approved key box installed at a location approved by the fire code official. The interior remote fire department air fill panels shall be located in stairwells commencing on the third (3 rd ) floor and every other floor thereafter. The panel shall contain all necessary equipment to allow firefighters to safely replenish a minimum of two (2) breathing air cylinders simultaneously. 
    915.4.3 Enclosures shall be marked "FIREFIGHTER AIR SYSTEM" on securely attached metal or plastic engraved plate. The lettering shall be in a color that contrasts with the enclosure front and in letters that are a minimum of two (2) inches in height with a 3/8 -inch brush stroke. 
    915.5 Testing Requirements. When fabrication, assembly and installation of the Firefighter Air System are complete, the entire system shall be tested in accordance with the following: 
    915.5.1 The system shall be inspected for leaks by pneumatically pressure testing the system to five thousand (5,000) pounds per square inch (psi) using oil-free dry air. An approved solution shall be used on each joint and fitting in the system. All leaks or failure to maintain five thousand (5,000) psi pneumatic pressure shall be documented by the system installer and forwarded to the system manufacturer for inspection, repair and/or replacement. 
    915.5.2 Upon successful completion of the five thousand (5,000) psi pressure testing, the entire system shall be pneumatically pressure tested to one and one-half (11/2) times the working pressure (7,500 psi) using oil free, dry air for at least one (1) hour. All leaks or failure to maintain 7,500 psi pneumatic pressure shall be documented by the system installer and forwarded to the system manufacturer for inspection, repair and/or replacement. 
    915.5.3 Upon successful completion of the 7,500 psi pressure testing, the entire system shall be retested for a period of twenty-four (24) hours. All leaks or failure to maintain 5,000 psi working pressure shall be documented by the system installer and forwarded to the system manufacturer for inspection, repair and/or replacement. 
    915.5.4 A test of the low pressure-monitoring switch shall be performed. Each air panel fill station shall be tested for compatibility with the fire department's SCBA Rapid Intervention Crew Universal Air Connection-RIC UAC. 
    915.5.5 System Acceptance and Certification. Prior to the final acceptance of the Firefighter Air System, the building owner shall provide for the testing and certification of the system. This shall include: verifying the system's compatibility with the fire department's SCBA apparatus, the system's ability to maintain 5,000 psi working pressure, the operability of the low pressure monitoring switch and that the system's air quality complies with this section. Prior to final acceptance, the building owner shall provide the fire department with written verification of a testing and certification contract. 
    915.6 Inspection. 
    915.6.1 The property owner shall be responsible for annual maintenance and testing of the Firefighter Air system. An air sample will be taken annually and certified as breathing air by a certified and licensed laboratory. Records shall be maintained on-site for a period of three years and made available to fire department officials upon request. 
    Chapter 50 Hazardous Materials - General Provisions 
    5003.2.2.1 Design and construction. 
(2)  Piping and tubing shall be identified to indicate the material conveyed and the direction of flow. Pipe labels shall be provided at a maximum spacing of 20 feet at each change of direction and on both sides of walls or floor/ceiling penetrations. 
(7)  Pressure test of piping constructed of non-metallic material used to convey hazardous materials shall be limited to hydrostatic tests. Pneumatic pressure testing of non-metallic piping shall not be permitted. 
    5004.9 Emergency alarm. 
    An approved manual emergency alarm system shall be provided in buildings, rooms or spaces used for storage of hazardous materials. The emergency alarm system shall be designed using the manual fire alarm requirements of the National Fire Alarm Code, NFPA 72. Emergency alarm initiating devices shall be installed outside of each interior exit or exit access door of the storage buildings, rooms or areas. Activation of an emergency alarm-initiating device shall sound an audible signal distinctly different than that of the fire alarm signal. Emergency alarm notification devices shall be yellow or amber in color. 
    Chapter 53, Compressed Gases 
    5301.1 Scope 
    Storage, use and handling of compressed gases in compressed gas containers, cylinders, tanks and systems shall comply with this chapter, and National Fire Protection Association standard, NFPA 55, Compressed Gases and Cryogenic Fluids, 2010 edition. Where there is a conflict between the International Fire Code, 2012 edition and NFPA 55, 2010 edition, the more restrictive provision shall apply. Partially full compressed gas containers, cylinders or tanks containing residual gases shall be considered as full for the purpose of the controls required. 
    5302.1 Definitions 
    Point of Use 
    5303.16.10.1 Insulated Liquid Carbon Dioxide Systems 
(A)  Gas detection shall be provided at each point of use whether the cylinder vessel, and/or container are located inside or outside the structure. Basements and/or subterranean spaces that could be physically entered, and which contain CO2 process lines, shall have gas detection. 
(B)  When a CO2 gas detection device reaches 15,000 ppm a local warning/supervisory alarm shall sound at a normally occupied location, and/or transit a supervisory signal to a supervising station if system is monitored offsite. 
(C)  When CO2 gas detection device reaches 30,000 ppm a general evacuation signal shall sound for the occupancy and transmit a gas specific alarm to a supervisory station if system is monitored offsite. 
(D)  Where there are less than two 50 1b. DOT approved cylinders stored and/or used inside or outside the structure, per system, gas detection and alarm systems shall not be required. 
    Chapter 55 Cryogenic Fluids 
    5501.1 Scope 
    Storage, use and handling of cryogenic fluids shall comply with this chapter and National Fire Protection standard NFPA 55, Compressed Gases and Cryogenic Fluids Code, 2010 edition. Where there is a conflict between the International Fire Code, 2012 edition and NFPA 55, 2010 edition, the more restrictive provision shall apply. Cryogenic fluids shall also comply with Chapter 50 requirements. Partially full containers containing residual cryogenic fluids shall be considered as full for the purposes of the controls required. 
(13)  The National Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, with amendments and the following exceptions: 
(a)  301: Merchant Vessels; 
(b)  302: Pleasure and Commercial Motor Craft; 
(c)  303: Marinas and Boatyards; 
(d)  306: Control of Gas Hazards on Vessels; 
(e)  307: Marine Terminals, Piers, and Wharves; 
(f)  312: Fire Protection of Vessels during Construction, Repair and Lay-Up; 
(g)  402: Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Operations; 
(h)  403: Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Services at Airports; 
(i)  405: Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Services; 
(j)  407: Aircraft Fuel Servicing; 
(k)  408: Aircraft Hand Portable Fire Extinguishers; 
(l)  409: Aircraft Hangers; 
(m)  410: Aircraft Maintenance; 
(n)  412: Evaluating Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Foam Equipment; 
(o)  414: Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Vehicles; 
(p)  415: Airport Terminal Buildings, Fueling Ramp Drainage, Loading Walkways; 
(q)  804: Fire Protection for Advanced Light Water Reactor Electric Generating; 
(r)  851: Hydroelectric Generating Plants; 
(s)  1720: Volunteer Fire Departments, Organization and Deployment; 
(t)  1925: Marine Fire Fighting Vessels; 
(14)  The Tolleson Fire Department Emergency Access Regulation, 2004 Edition, as published by the Tolleson Fire Department; 
(15)  The City of Tolleson Automatic Sprinkler System Ordinance, dated May 10, 2004, as published by the Tolleson Fire Department; 
(16)  The City of Tolleson Standard Detail Fireline Backflow Prevention Assembly, dated November 17, 2014. 

(Ord. 269, N.S., passed 3-10-1987; Am. Ord. 406, N.S., passed 10-14-2003; Am. Ord. 419, N.S., passed - -; Am. Ord. 424, N.S., passed 3-8-2005; Am. Ord. 449, N.S., passed 2-13-2007; Am. Ord. 463, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009; Am. Ord. 548, N.S. , passed 12-9-2014) 
§ 12-1-21 - MUST CONFORM TO ZONING CODE. 
    Whenever a building permit is issued and a building inspection performed, the building must conform to the provisions of the zoning code of Tolleson in addition to the provisions of this article. 
§ 12-1-22 - UNLAWFUL ACTIONS. 
    The building codes are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth herein in full and made a part and parcel of this section for controlling the installing, construction, remodeling, alteration, repair and conversion of buildings within the corporate limits of the City of Tolleson, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, repair, change, move, remove, maintain or use any house, building or structure in the City of Tolleson, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the building codes as herewith adopted by the Council of the City of Tolleson. 
(Ord. 449, N.S., passed 2-13-2007) 
§ 12-1-23 - PENALTY. 
(A)  Relating to inspections and enforcement of codes. As relating to inspections and enforcement of the Tolleson building, housing, fire, plumbing, electrical and life safety codes and inspections. 
(1)  General. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of the Tolleson zoning code and building codes shall be subject to the civil and criminal penalties described in division (A)(6). 
(b)  The owners, occupants, and authorized agents of property in violation of any provision of the zoning code or the building codes may be held individually and jointly responsible for the violation, the prescribed civil and criminal penalties for the violation and for abating the violation. 
(c)  Each day a violation of the zoning code and/or building codes continues shall constitute a separate civil or criminal offense unless the violation involves a billboard, as defined by the Tolleson zoning code, in which case the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-462.02, as amended, shall apply. 
(d)  The procedures and remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedures and remedies to which the city may otherwise be entitled by law. 
(e)  Any violation of the Tolleson zoning code and building codes is declared to be a public nuisance, and instead of, or in addition to, any civil or criminal enforcement measure authorized by this section, may be enjoined or restrained by the city as other nuisances are abated under authority of the city code and applicable state law. 
(2)  Evidence of identity; penalty for failure to provide. A person who fails or refuses to provide evidence of his or her identity to a duly authorized agent of the city upon request, when the agent has reasonable cause to believe the person has committed a violation of the city zoning code and/or building codes, is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Evidence of identity shall consist of a person's full name, residence address, and date of birth. 
(3)  Notice of violation. 
(a)  Upon the city receiving or obtaining notice of a violation of the city's zoning code and/or building codes, the city shall issue a written notice of violation to the property owner, occupant, or authorized agent for the property. 
(b)  A notice of violation may be issued by the Zoning Administrator, the Chief Building Official, or authorized designee of Chief Building Official or Fire Chief. 
(c)  The notice of violation shall set forth the nature of the violation, the action required to bring the property into compliance with the applicable ordinance or code, the time period provided to bring the property into compliance, and the person at the city to contact for further information. 
(d)  The time period provided for voluntary compliance shall be as follows. 
1.  Temporary signs and displays: Immediate compliance. 
2.  Unsafe signs: One calendar day (subject to division (A)(3)(g) below). 
3.  Temporary uses: Two calendar days. 
4.  Landscaping: Thirty calendar days. 
5.  All other violations: Ten calendar days. 
(e)  The time period for compliance may be extended if the official issuing the notice of violation determines that the owner, occupant, or agent for the property is making reasonable progress toward compliance. The Chief Building Official shall make all extensions in writing. 
(f)  Failure of the property owner, occupant, or authorized agent of the property owner to receive a notice of violation shall not preclude the subsequent issuance of a civil citation or criminal complaint, as applicable. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from taking immediate action to protect the public from an imminent hazard to health or safety as otherwise provided by law. 
(4)  Civil citations. 
(a)  Unless otherwise designated as a criminal offense in this section, if a violation continues past the time set forth in the notice of violation, a civil citation may be issued to the person responsible for the violation. 
(b)  A civil citation may be issued by a police officer or the Chief Building Official. 
(c)  The citation shall include the date of the violation, the location of the property, and reference to the section(s) of the zoning code and/or building code violated. 
(d)  The citation shall direct the defendant to pay the fine imposed pursuant to division (A)(6) of this section or appear in Municipal Court within ten days of the issuance of the citation. 
(e)  The citation shall provide notice that if the defendant fails to pay the fine or appear in Municipal Court as directed a default judgment will be entered in the amount of the fine designated on the citation for the violation. In addition, a default fee may be imposed for failure to appear as set forth in division (A)(6) of this section. 
(f)  Service of the citation may be accomplished and will be deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods: 
1.  Hand delivering the citation to the defendant; 
2.  Mailing a copy of the citation by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the defendant's last known address; and 
3.  Any means allowed for service of process by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure for the Superior Court. 
(5)  Civil procedure. 
(a)  The defendant shall, within ten days of the issuance of the citation, either pay the fine indicated on the citation or appear in Municipal Court to admit or deny the allegations contained in the citation. 
1.  The defendant may pay the fine in person or by mailing the citation with a check for the amount of the fine to the Tolleson City Court. By paying the fine, the defendant admits the violation described in the citation and accepts responsibility for the offense. 
2.  The defendant may appear in person or through an attorney in the City Court and either admit or deny the allegations contained in the citation. If the defendant admits the allegations, the Court shall immediately enter a judgment against the defendant in the amount of the fine for the violation charged. If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the Court shall set a hearing date for trial of the matter. 
(b)  If the defendant fails to pay the fine or appear in the City Court as directed by the citation, the Court shall enter a default judgment and impose the fine and default fee required by division (A)(6) of this section. 
(c)  If the defendant fails to appear at the time and place set for trial by the Court, the Court shall enter a default judgment and impose the fine and default fee required by division (A)(6) of this section. 
(d)  The Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be followed by the Tolleson City Court for civil violations of this section, except as modified or where inconsistent with the provisions of this section, local rules of the City Court or rules of the Arizona Supreme Court. 
(6)  Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any person that violates any provision of the zoning code and/or building codes shall be subject to a civil penalty of a minimum of $250 base fine, up to a maximum of $2,500 for the first violation, a minimum of $300 base fine, up to a maximum of $2,500 for a second violation, and a minimum of $350 base fine, up to a maximum of $2,500 for a third violation in any 24-month period. The dates of the offenses are the determining factor for calculating the 24-month period. 
(b)  The civil fine required by this division shall not be suspended in whole or in part. 
(c)  Any defendant that fails to pay the fine or appear in the City Court as directed by a citation issued pursuant to this section, or who fails to appear at the time and place set for trial of a matter arising under this section, shall be subject to an additional default fee equal to the applicable minimum civil penalty for the violation that caused the issuance of the citation. 
(d)  Any judgments issued by the Tolleson City Court shall be subject to all surcharges and fees imposed by state law in addition to the civil fines required by this section. 
(e)  Judgments shall be collected in the same manner as any other civil judgment as provided by law. 
(7)  Habitual offenders. 
(a)  A person found to be responsible for three or more civil violations of the zoning code and/or building codes within any 24-month period shall be deemed to be a habitual offender. Responsibility may be determined by admission, by default judgment or by judgment after hearing. The dates of the offenses are the determining factor for calculating the 24-month period. 
(b)  A habitual offender who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a criminal offense and subject to the penalties set forth in division (A)(10) below for each violation in excess of three civil violations within a 24-month period or any criminal violation under this section. 
(8)  Criminal complaints. The Chief of Police at the request of the Chief Building Official may seek the issuance of a complaint by the Tolleson City Prosecutor for criminal prosecution of a habitual offender or any person who commits a criminal offense as set forth in this section. 
(9)  Criminal procedure. Every criminal action and proceeding under this section shall be commenced and prosecuted in accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona relating to misdemeanors and the Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure. 
(10)  Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Upon conviction of a person for a criminal offense, including the habitual offender provisions set forth above, the Court may impose any combination of the following. 
1.  A sentence of incarceration not to exceed six months in jail. 
2.  A base fine not to exceed $2,500, exclusive of penalty assessments prescribed by law. 
3.  A term of probation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the elective penalty above, upon conviction of a habitual offender, the Court shall impose a base fine of not less than $750 for each count upon which a conviction is obtained. A judge shall not grant probation to a habitual offender, or suspend any part of a sentence or fine imposed upon a habitual offender, except on the condition that the habitual offender pays the mandatory minimum fines as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 449, N.S., passed 2-13-2007; Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
BUILDING PERMITS 

§ 12-1-35 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  Any individual, partnership, firm or corporation desiring to construct, erect or move any residential building or mobile home or associated outbuilding where the building or mobile home contains more than 120 square feet and unattached to any structure, or desiring to enlarge or substantially modify any residential building or mobile home where the work will involve an area of more than 120 square feet and unattached to any structure, shall first make application for a building permit to the Building Official and shall not commence any construction without first obtaining a building permit from the city. 
(B)  Any individual, firm or corporation desiring to construct any additions to an existing structure regardless of the size of the addition or structure shall first make application to the Building Official for a building permit and shall not undertake any construction, enlargement or movement without first obtaining a building permit from the city. 
(C)  Any individual, firm or corporation desiring to erect, construction, enlarge, move or substantially modify any commercial, industrial, quasi-public or public building or structure shall first make application to the Building Official for a separate building permit for each building or structure and shall not undertake any construction, enlargement or movement without first obtaining a building permit from the city. 
(D)  All applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by plans which have been drawn to scale and which show the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing buildings, if any, the building to be erected, enlarged, modified or moved, the location and layout of the structures with respect to front, rear and side property lines, and the location and layout of proposed off-street parking areas. Plans submitted for new construction or enlargement shall provide sufficient details of proposed structural features, and electrical, plumbing, and mechanical installations to permit evaluation of their adequacy by the Building Official. 
(E)  The term SUBSTANTIALLY MODIFY means the installation or removal of any interior or exterior wall or the addition or replacement of an amount of electrical wiring or plumbing equal to 25% or more of the installation in the modified building or structure. 
(F)  When a building permit is issued for a structure on a lot that is not on a dedicated street or which is not served by a sewer system, a statement to that effect will be placed on the building permit before issuance. 
§ 12-1-36 - FEES. 
    The Council may, from time to time, by resolution or ordinance adopt a schedule of fees for services provided by the city in connection with the issuance and inspection of all building permits. 
§ 12-1-37 - VALUATION. 
    The Council may, from time to time, by resolution or ordinance establish the method of building valuation to be used in connection with determining the amount of building permit fees. 
STREET NUMBERING 

§ 12-1-50 - ODD OR EVEN NUMBERS. 
    All buildings on lots facing north or west shall bear odd numbers and all buildings on lots facing south or east shall bear even numbers. 
§ 12-1-51 - EAST AND WEST NUMBERING. 
    The east, west numbering for the city shall follow the plan used in the City of Phoenix. 
§ 12-1-52 - NORTH AND SOUTH NUMBERING. 
(A)  Numbering on avenues running north and south shall start at Washington, in the first block bearing numbers from one to ninety-nine, and the second block with numbering in the one hundreds and each successive block in the next one hundred. 
(B)  Numbering on buildings on lots facing north or south in block one, two, three, four, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, City of Tolleson, and the south one-half of block one, Baden Subdivision, and the south one-half of block one and two Isabell Addition, shall be numbered in consecutively odd or even numbers as provided heretofore in their respective blocks for every 25 foot lot or the nearest fraction thereof. 
(C)  Numbering on buildings on lots in all other blocks of the city shall be numbered consecutively by odd or even numbers as theretofore provided for each 50 foot lot or part of a lot or the nearest fraction thereof. 
§ 12-1-53 - MORE THAN ONE BUILDING ON A LOT. 
    When more than one building to be numbered occupies a lot and both are facing the street, the second building shall be designated by the same number as the first with the addition of the figure one-half. Where the second building occupies the rear of the lot, it shall be known by the same numbering as the front building with the additional designation, rear. Where more than two buildings occupy a lot bearing one number, they shall bear that number plus the addition of the letters A, B, C and the like, in the same number as there are buildings. 
§ 12-1-54 - NUMERALS ON BUILDINGS. 
    All buildings shall be plainly marked with the proper numbers for that lot in figures not less than three inches high, placed within ten feet of the front entrance of the building and at least five feet above ground level. The numerals shall be in a position as to be clearly seen from the street immediately in front of the building. 
PAYBACK CHARGES FOR SPECIAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS OR FACILITIES 

§ 12-1-70 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this subarticle, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    BENEFITTED PROPERTY. Any lot, parcel or other area of real property, designated by the city pursuant to § 12-1-73, as utilizing or benefitting from a special public improvement. 
    COST. The actual cost of: 
(1)  Right-of-way or easement acquisition; 
(2)  Construction, acquisition or installation of the special public improvements, as determined by the contract price or by the actual costs; 
(3)  Inspection, testing and permit fees; 
(4)  Engineering and design fees related to the special public improvements; 
(5)  Five percent city administrative charge; and 
(6)  Other incidental fees, expenses and charges, including, but not limited to, capitalized interest required to complete or finance the special public improvements. 
    OWNER. The person or entity owning benefitted property utilizing or requesting to utilize the special public improvements. 
    PAYBACK CHARGE. The amount of money the owner of benefitted property shall pay to the city as the benefitted property's share of the cost of previously constructed or installed special public improvements. 
    SPECIAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Any and all public improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, drainage, water or sewer improvements or facilities financed by bonds or other indebtedness, including assessment bonds, of the city or a community facilities district. 
§ 12-1-71 - POLICY. 
    This article intends to provide for the collection of payback charges from owners of benefitted property. 
§ 12-1-72 - IMPOSITION OF PAYBACK CHARGES. 
    Upon construction or installation of special public improvements, the cost of which was paid by bonds or other indebtedness of the city or a community facilities district, including assessment bonds, the city may impose and collect a payback charge pursuant to the terms of § 12-1-73. 
§ 12-1-73 - PAYBACK CHARGE. 
(A)  When an existing special public improvement is to provide service or benefit to benefitted property which owner or predecessor in title to the owner of the benefitted property did not pay any portion of the cost of the special public improvement, or any part of the debt service of any bonds or indebtedness issued to finance the special public improvement, the city may impose on the benefitted property a payback charge. The payback charge shall equal the benefitted property's pro rata share of the cost of the special public improvement as determined by the city pursuant to division (C) below. The required payback charge shall be paid to and collected by the city prior to the connection to the special public improvement, the rezoning of the benefitted property, or the issuance of any permit related to the benefitted property, including but not limited to a building permit. No person shall extend service from the special public improvement to the benefitted property for which a payback charge has been identified, but has not been paid to the city without written approval of the city. 
(B)  The city may collect payback charges for any special public improvements financed by bonds or other indebtedness, including assessment bonds of the city of a community facilities district for a period of time commencing with the installation of the special public improvement and ending not more than 15 years after the installation date. Any owner of benefitted property who has paid its pro rata share of the cost of the special public improvement or has paid or is paying its pro rata share of the debt service charges of any bonds or indebtedness, the proceeds of which were used to finance special public improvements, shall not be required to pay a payback charge and shall have no claim to any payback charges paid to the city pursuant to this article. 
(C)  The City Manager shall determine what real property is benefitted by a special public improvement and shall calculate the amount of the payback charges. The benefitted property and the amount of the payback charges shall be determined by, first, determining the total area that is benefitted by the special public improvement in a manner more than a general public benefit and second, allocating the total cost of the special public improvement to the benefitted area in an equitable manner. The City Manager may retain the services of an engineer to assist in the calculations required by this division. The determination of the area benefitted and the allocation of the cost may utilize the methodologies utilized in levying assessments pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 48-571 et seq. and amendments thereto. 
UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITY LINES 

§ 12-1-90 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this subarticle, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    COMMUNICATION LINES. Any line that provides one or two-way transmissions by whatever means conveyed over lines in the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, transmissions of voice, video or data or anything of similar nature by which thought, idea or information is intended to be conveyed. 
    DEVELOPER. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication, trust, governmental agency or other legal entity that is responsible for the development or redevelopment of land that creates any demand for any utility service or causes alteration of existing utility services. 
    DEVELOPMENT/REDEVELOPMENT. Either initial construction on previously vacant land, or the cumulative expansion (since effective date of this subarticle) of greater than 25% of the building floor area existing or approved at the time of effective date of this subarticle, or the cumulative alteration (since effective date of this subarticle) at a cost exceeding 50% of the current estimated fair market value of the structure. 
    EXISTING UTILITY POLES AND LINES. The poles, wires, aerial cables and any other related facilities that are in place and in operation as of the effective date of this subarticle. 
    NEW UTILITY POLES AND LINES. The poles, wires, aerial cables and other related facilities that are not in place and in operation as of the effective date of this subarticle. 
    OFF-SITE. Public and private easements and street rights-of-way within the development and adjacent to the development. 
    ON-SITE. The individual lots, parcels, tracts and the like of the development. 
    POWER LINE EXTENSIONS. Those primary distribution lines that are to be extended through a developed or undeveloped area. 
    PRIMARY DISTRIBUTION LINE. An electric line used for electrical distribution or electrical feeder, single-phase or three-phase, having a voltage rating of 12,500 volts or less. 
    SECONDARY AND SERVICE LINES. Utility lines that provide electrical and communications service to commercial, industrial, residential and public use areas. 
    TRANSMISSION LINE. An electric line used for the bulk transmission of electricity between generating or receiving points and major substations or delivery points, having a voltage rating greater than 12,500 volts, including multi-functional static ground wire. 
    UNDERGROUND (UNDERGROUNDING). The placement of utility lines below ground, with the removal of above ground poles, wires and structures as applicable. 
    UTILITY COMPANY. Companies, corporations, and municipalities that undertake distribution and transmission of electricity, telephone, telegraph, radio, television or telecommunications, or any other communications over communication lines. 
    UTILITY POLES AND LINES. The poles, structures, wires, aerial cables and related facilities used in the distribution of electricity or communication lines. 
(Ord. 408, N.S., passed 8-12-2003) 
§ 12-1-91 - PERMITS FOR NEW OR RELOCATED OVERHEAD LINES OR UTILITY POLES. 
    New or relocated overhead lines or utility poles shall not be installed unless a utility permit is granted by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 408, N.S., passed 8-12-2003) 
§ 12-1-92 - UNDERGROUNDING OF OVERHEAD UTILITY LINES. 
(A)  All new or existing utility lines, other than transmission lines, shall be placed underground in conjunction with a development/redevelopment project that has been submitted for approval under the provision of the Tolleson City Code, Revised . This requirement shall also apply to primary distribution lines and all communication lines, including underbuild on transmission poles, except for communication lines installed on transmission poles in the static neutral position. The required undergrounding shall be completed prior to approval and occupancy of the project. 
(B)  The (re)developer or owner of a (re)development project shall be responsible to make necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for the installation of required underground facilities, including arrangements for the payment of any cost, as one of the conditions of plan approval. Nothing contained herein is intended to obligate a providing utility company to install underground facilities without reimbursement except where the utility company is acting as a (re)developer. 
(C)  In those instances where poles to be removed include street lights, the street lights will be replaced with freestanding poles and luminaries by the (re)developer in accordance with the approved street light standards or agreements of the serving utility. 
(D)  The undergrounding requirement shall also apply to all situations where utility companies plan a system upgrade of power or communication line extensions that result in more conductors or wires on a pole. Individual pole mounted equipment shall not be considered an upgrade, such as transformers, switches, splice cases and capacitor banks. The cost for this undergrounding is to be borne by the affected utility company. All new electrical and communication lines requiring a right-of-way permit, other than electrical transmission lines, shall be placed underground. New communication lines, including upgraded replacement lines, will not be allowed to be underbuilt on existing utility poles except for lines installed in the static neutral position. 
(E)  The undergrounding requirement shall apply to all situations where a governmental agency is acting as a (re)developer or has initiated a construction effort that requires the relocation of existing overhead utility lines. Nothing contained herein is intended to obligate a providing utility company to install the underground facilities without reimbursement from the governmental agency for any costs in excess of those not already the obligation of the utility company. 
(F)  Where utility lines are required to be placed underground due to a combination of needs generated by (re)development, utility system upgrade, and governmental improvement projects, there shall be an equitable sharing of the cost of that undergrounding effort. 
(G)  The undergrounding requirement shall not apply to the normal maintenance and repair of existing utility poles and lines. Temporary overhead line installations used to facilitate construction projects, maintenance activities or emergency restoration of power and communications will be allowed subject to approval of the City Engineer. 
(H)  The undergrounding requirements shall apply regardless of the existence of easements for overhead lines. 
(I)  Equipment appurtenant to the underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pull boxes, pedestal cabinets, service terminals, telephone splice closures, concealed ducts or other similar on-the-ground facilities normally used with or as part of an underground utility system, may be maintained above ground. The city maintains the right to approve the location and appearance of all surface-mounted communication equipment. 
(J)  The undergrounding requirements of this article shall not apply to electrical transmission lines. 
(Ord. 408, N.S., passed 8-12-2003) 
§ 12-1-93 - DEFERMENTS OF UNDERGROUNDING. 
(A)  (1) Deferment of undergrounding off-site lines may be requested from the City Engineer for a (re)development with small frontage, where the cost is substantially more per unit length than it would otherwise be if a longer length (usually a minimum of 660 feet), including the (re)development frontage, were being undergrounded at the same time. 
(2)  At all times, on-site lines shall be placed underground. 
(B)  A request for deferment shall be requested in writing to the City Engineer and include the following. 
(1)  The (re)developer shall procure from the appropriate utility companies a reliable estimate of the current cost for undergrounding what is required along the (re)development frontage, including new and existing lines in the adjacent off-site frontage. 
(2)  The (re)developer shall procure from the appropriate utility companies a reliable estimate of the current cost for undergrounding a longer, more practical length that includes the (re)development frontage, usually a minimum of 660 feet. 
(3)  If the project involves improvements in the public right-of-way (bike paths, sidewalks, landscaping and the like) and deferment of undergrounding will involve costs of future restoration of those improvements, the (re)developer shall furnish a reliable estimate of the future restoration costs in current dollars. 
(C)  In reviewing a request for deferment, the City Engineer shall consider the costs of installing overhead utilities, the cost of undergrounding the utilities, and the status of development in the area affected by the request. 
(D)  If deferment is authorized by the City Engineer, the (re)developer shall deposit with the city a sum sufficient to cover all deferred construction required herein. Monies received shall be used by the city for undergrounding utilities associated with (re)developments within the city boundaries. 
(E)  (1) Utility companies may request deferment of undergrounding for power line extensions through undeveloped areas. The request with justification shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
(2)  No deferred compensation fees will be required for this type of deferment. 
(F)  If deferment is denied by the City Engineer, the (re)developer or utility company may appeal the Engineer's decision to the City Council. 
(G)  If deferment is approved by the City Engineer, an interested party who is affected by the decision may appeal the decision to the City Council. 
(Ord. 408, N.S., passed 8-12-2003) 
§ 12-1-94 - WAIVER OF UNDERGROUNDING. 
(A)  The requirement for undergrounding may be waived for the following reasons: 
(1)  When the (re)developer or utility company can show that the costs are extraordinarily disproportionate to the costs for the proposed (re)development; 
(2)  New utility poles and wires erected for purely temporary purposes, such as providing temporary building construction power, emergency power, telephone service or the furnishing of power to temporary outdoor activities. A permit for the temporary use shall be obtained from the city. The length of the temporary use shall be specified in the permit and may not exceed 12 months. An additional six-month permit may be issued upon a finding of necessity by the city; 
(3)  Poles or luminaries, but not wires or other conduits, used exclusively for street lighting; and 
(4)  When the (re)developer or utility company can demonstrate that all other utility lines in the same easement and running parallel to the electrical line in question are above ground. 
(B)  Requests for a waiver to the undergrounding requirements shall be submitted, in writing, to the City Engineer. 
(C)  In reviewing a request for waiver, the City Engineer shall consider the cost of installing overhead utilities, the costs of undergrounding the utilities, and the status of development in the area of the request. 
(D)  If a waiver is denied by the City Engineer, the (re)developer may appeal the Engineer's decision to the City Council. The Council's decision is final. 
(E)  If a waiver is approved by the City Engineer, an interested party who is affected by the decision may appeal the decision to the City Council. 
(Ord. 408, N.S., passed 8-12-2003) 
§ 12-1-95 - WAIVER FOR ALTERNATE PLAN. 
    The City Council may waive portions or all of this subarticle when a developer, utility company or governmental agency presents an alternate plan for undergrounding lines which provides greater public benefit than would be accomplished by a strict application of this subarticle. 
(Ord. 408, N.S., passed 8-12-2003) 
§ 12-1-96 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of §§ 12-1-90 through 12-1-95 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day of violation which is continued shall be a separate offense punishable as herein above described. 
(Ord. 408, N.S., passed 8-12-2003) 
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION 

§ 12-1-110 - PURPOSE. 
    This subarticle sets forth the requirements for the control of pollutants that are or may be discharged to the City of Tolleson Public Storm Drain System. The purpose of this subarticle is to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws related to storm water management, including but not limited to, the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. ) the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 122), and the city's Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (AZPDES) Permit (Arizona Administrative Code R18-9-A902). 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-111 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this subarticle, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    ARIZONA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY (ADEQ). The state agency charged with enforcement of environmental laws and regulations. 
    ARIZONA POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (AZPDES) STORM WATER PERMIT. A permit issued by ADEQ which authorizes the discharge of storm water pursuant to Arizona Administrative Code R18-9-A902, which incorporates 40 C.F.R. § 122.32. 
    BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to storm water. BMPS also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from outdoor storage areas. 
    CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. 
    DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director. 
    DISCHARGE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, injecting, placing, releasing, leaching, dumping, or disposing into or on any land in a manner that may cause pollution. 
    ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The federal agency charged with enforcement of environmental laws and regulations. 
    NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA which authorizes the discharge of storm water pursuant to the Clean Water Act § 402 (33 U.S.C. § 1342). 
    NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). A form submitted to ADEQ notifying of person's intent to be covered under a separate AZPDES storm water permit, as required by federal and state law. 
    PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. 
    POLLUTANT. Shall have the same meaning as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.2, and includes but is not limited to any solid, liquid, gas, or other substance that can alter the physical or chemical properties of water including, but not limited to fertilizers, solvents, sludge, petroleum and petroleum products, solid waste, garbage, biological materials, radioactive materials, sand, dirt, animal waste, acids, and bases. 
    PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    PUBLIC STORM DRAIN SYSTEM. All or any part of the publicly-owned and maintained roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, and dry wells located within public easements, right-of-way, parks, common areas, retention areas, or other publicly-owned or maintained real property designed or used for collecting, holding, or conveying storm water. 
    STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, surface runoff and drainage. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-112 - DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY FOR ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. 
    The Director of Public Works is delegated the authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties set forth in this subarticle and to administer and enforce provisions of this subarticle. The Director of Public Works may designate other employees to exercise the powers and perform the duties, as the Director deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-113 - PROHIBITION OF NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE TO THE PUBLIC STORM DRAIN SYSTEM; EXEMPTIONS. 
(A)  Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this subarticle, no person shall cause or allow the discharge to a public right-of-way or public storm drain system of any substance that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
(B)  Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this subarticle, no person shall use, store, spill, dump, or dispose of materials in a manner that those materials could cause or contribute to the addition of pollutants to storm water. 
(C)  Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section: 
(1)  Discharges authorized by a separate NPDES or AZPDES permit; 
(2)  The following categories of non-storm water discharges are permissible unless otherwise prohibited under divisions (C)(3), (C)(4) or (C)(5): 
(a)  Water line flushing; 
(b)  Landscaping irrigation; 
(c)  Diverted stream flows; 
(d)  Rising groundwaters; 
(e)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20); 
(f)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(g)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(h)  Foundation drains; 
(i)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(j)  Irrigation water; 
(k)  Springs; 
(l)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(m)  Footing drains; 
(n)  Lawn watering; 
(o)  Individual residential car washing; 
(p)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(q)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(r)  Street wash water; 
(s)  Discharges from emergency fire fighting activity; 
(t)  Dust control watering; or 
(u)  Any other activity that the Director identifies is not a significant contributor of pollutants during the city's AZPDES storm water permit term. (40 C.F.R. § 122.34(b)(3)(iii)). 
(3)  No person shall discharge to the public storm drain system any exempted discharge under this section if the Director or assigned designee identifies and provides written notice to the person that the discharge has the potential to be a source of pollutants to receiving waters, waterways, or groundwater. 
(4)  No person shall discharge to the public storm drain system that would result in or contribute to a violation of the AZPDES storm water permit issued to the city. Liability for any discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge. 
(5)  No person shall establish, use, maintain, or continue any connection to the public storm drain system which has caused or is likely to cause a violation of this section. This prohibition is retroactive and shall apply to any connection that was made in the past, regardless of whether it was made under permit or other authorization, or whether it was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-114 - OPERATING FACILITIES OR ACTIVITIES. 
(A)  All persons owning or operating premises or engaged in activities who are required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or ADEQ a notice of intent (NOI) to comply with an NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit shall provide a copy of the notice to the Director upon request. Facilities required to apply for a storm water permit are identified in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14). 
(B)  All persons engaged in activities which will or may reasonably be expected to result in pollutants entering the public storm drain system shall undertake best management practices (BMPS) to minimize the pollutants, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of pollutants to the public storm drain system and comply with the cleanup and notification requirements of this subarticle. The measures shall include the requirements imposed by federal, state, county, or local authorities. BMPS are site-specific and are described in the document "Stormwater Management For Industrial Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans And Best Management Practices" (EPA 832-R-92-006) or other guidance documents available from EPA and/or ADEQ. 
(C)  If a best management practice is required by the Director to prevent a pollutant from entering the public storm drain system, the person receiving the notice of the requirement may petition the Director to reconsider the application of the BMPS to the premises or activity. The written petition must be received within ten working days setting forth any reasons and proposed alternatives. The Director will act within 30 days of the petition. 
(Ord 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-115 - CONSTRUCTION SITES. 
(A)  All persons engaged in construction activities who are required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or ADEQ a notice of intent to comply with an NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit, shall provide the city with copies of the NOI and the NPDES storm water permit issued by ADEQ. Construction activities that will disturb one acre or more of land area or smaller land areas if they are part of a larger common plan of development or sale are required to apply for a storm water permit (40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(15)). 
(B)  Any person performing construction shall not cause or contribute to a violation of the AZPDES storm water permit issued to the city. Liability for any discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge. Any person performing construction shall undertake best management practices to minimize pollutants (including sediments) from leaving the construction site, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of pollutants to the public storm drain system, and comply with the cleanup and notification requirements of this subarticle. Site operator shall ensure erosion and sediment control and control waste and properly dispose of wastes, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. The measures shall include the requirements imposed by federal, state, county or local authorities. BMPS are site-specific and are described in the document "Stormwater Management For Construction Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans And Best Management Practices" (EPA 832-R-92-005) or other guidance documents available from EPA and/or ADEQ. 
(C)  If a best management practice is required by the Director to prevent a pollutant from entering the public storm drain system, the person receiving the notice of the requirement may petition the Director to reconsider the application of the BMPS to the premises or activity. The written petition must be received within ten working days setting forth any reasons and proposed alternatives. The Director will act within 30 days of receipt of the petition. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-116 - POST-CONSTRUCTION. 
    Property owners or operators shall ensure long-term operation and maintenance of post-construction storm water runoff control mechanisms, such as retention basins, dry wells and other measures described in 40 C.F.R. § 122.34(b)(5)(iii). 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-117 - CLEANUP AND NOTIFICATION. 
(A)  As soon as any owner or operator has actual or constructive knowledge of any discharge which may result in pollutants entering the public storm drain system, the person shall promptly take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery of the source and the extent and proceed with containment and cleanup of the discharge. 
(B)  The owner or operator shall notify the Director of the discharge in both of the following manners: 
(1)  By telephone as soon as practical or by calling 9-1-1 if hazardous materials are involved; and 
(2)  By written report identifying the discharge source, extent, pollutant, measures taken to mitigate the discharge, and preventative measures put in place to prevent a subsequent discharge. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-118 - INSPECTIONS. 
(A)  Authority to inspect. Upon presentation of credentials and at all reasonable or necessary hours, all authorized employees of the city shall have access to all premises and to all records pertaining to those premises for purposes of ensuring compliance with this article. Inspection, interviewing, copying, sampling, photographing, and other activities conducted on the premises shall be limited to those which are reasonably needed by the city in determining compliance with the requirements of this subarticle. All persons shall allow the activities under safe and non-hazardous conditions with a minimum of delay. 
(B)  Monitoring activities. The Director may order any person engaged in any activity or owning or operating on any premises which may cause or contribute to discharges of pollutants to the public storm drain system in violation of this subarticle or any applicable NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit condition to undertake the monitoring activities and analyses and furnish the reports as the Director reasonably may specify. The costs of these activities, analyses, and reports shall be borne by the recipient of the order. 
(C)  Access refusal. If an authorized employee of the city has been refused access to any premises, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this subarticle, or that there is a need to inspect, interview, copy, photograph or sample as part of an inspection and sampling procedure of the city designed to determine compliance with the requirements of this subarticle or any related laws or regulations, or to protect the environment and the public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the City Court. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-119 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. 
(A)  Collection of charges. Charges levied pursuant to this subarticle shall be collected by the Department of Public Works. The Director shall make and enforce economic and efficient management and protection of the city's storm drain system. 
(B)  Owner of record. The owner of record of the property upon which a violation of this subarticle occurs shall be presumed to be a person having lawful control over the activity or premises unless it is demonstrated that another person has knowingly and in good faith accepted responsibility for the activity at issue. If more than one person is identified as the owner, the persons shall be presumed to be jointly and severally in lawful possession and control of the activity or premises. 
(C)  Notice of violation. The Director may issue a written notice of violation to any person who has violated or is in violation of this subarticle. Failure to comply with any act required in the notice of violation shall be a separate violation for each day beyond the thirtieth day following the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. In appropriate situations the Director may notify the person orally either in person or by telephone prior to, and in some cases in lieu of, written notification. 
(D)  Consent orders. The Director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, negotiated settlement agreements or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance. The documents will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document, including an identification and description of the best management practices and measures to utilize in implementing the order. The documents shall have the same force and effect as any other orders issued under this subarticle and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(E)  Cease and desist orders. When the Director finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subarticle or any related laws or regulations, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, the Director may issue an order to the person directing them to cease and desist all violations and direct the person to immediately comply with all requirements; and take appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the person. A person's failure to comply with an order of the Director issued pursuant to this subarticle shall constitute a violation of this subarticle. 
(F)  Civil penalties. In addition to any other enforcement authority contained in this subarticle, the Director may issue a civil citation to any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subarticle or any related laws or regulations. A person who violates any requirement of this subarticle or any applicable NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit condition shall be civilly liable to the city for a sum not to exceed $25,000 per day for each violation. 
(G)  Criminal penalties. A person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this subarticle, or any related laws or regulations shall, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $25,000 per day for each violation and/or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months. 
(H)  Criminal prosecution. Some intentional violations may constitute criminal violations of federal, state, and city law, and that under the circumstances, the Director may seek the assistance of the EPA, the state or the city prosecutor to commence civil and/or criminal action against any person who violates any requirement of this subarticle or any applicable NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit condition. 
(I)  Revoking or withholding of permit. In addition to or in lieu of all other available penalties, the city may revoke or withhold any permit, approval or license to construct improvements to real property or operate a business in the city if the holder of the permit, approval, or license is in violation of any requirement of this subarticle or any applicable NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit condition. 
(J)  Liability for costs. The Director may assess liability for costs to any person in violation of this subarticle for all actual costs incurred by the city in surveillance, sampling and testing, abatement, and remediation associated with a discharge. Additionally, the Director may assess liability for costs to any person whose discharge resulted in a violation of the city's AZPDES storm water permit. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-120 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this subarticle or any part of the Code adopted herein by reference, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
§ 12-1-121 - PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this subarticle shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment, or both a fine and imprisonment as specified herein. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein described. 
(Ord. 453, N.S., passed 3-27-2007) 
STORMWATER DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS 

§ 12-1-130 - STORMWATER DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS; PURPOSE. 
(A)  The relatively flat topography and lack of defined drainage patterns within the city necessitates special attention for controlling stormwater collection and retention. Regulatory controls and measures are identified in this chapter to minimize stormwater problems and to ensure that developments in the city are not subject to flooding, nor will they contribute to the flooding potential of properties both upstream and downstream, during construction and after full development has occurred. 
(B)  It is not the intent of these requirements to abrogate sound engineering judgment, but to establish some design guidelines and criteria. In general, unless modified herein, the design criteria and calculations shall be as specified in the "Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Arizona, Volume I, Hydrology, 4th Edition", "Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Arizona, Volume II, Hydraulics", and "Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Arizona, Volume III, Erosion Control, 2nd Edition." 
( Ord. 507, N.S. , passed 4-12-2011; Res. 2029 , passed 4-12-2011) 
§ 12-1-131 - CONCEPTUAL DRAINAGE PLAN. 
    A conceptual stormwater collection and retention plan shall be submitted with a preliminary plat or site development plan and must be approved prior to the approval of such plat or plan. In the design of the development, every effort shall be made to utilize the natural slope of the land for the stormwater collection system. Subsurface drainage systems shall be discouraged wherever possible. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(A)  Method of collection (surface and/or subsurface). 
(B)  Depth, side slopes and area of retention. 
(C)  Calculations of volume held and required. 
(D)  Highwater elevation and invert of pipes. 
(F)  Method of disposal of water within 36-hours. 
(G)  Any other data to form a complete plan. 
( Ord. 507, N.S. , passed 4-12-2011; Res. 2029 , passed 4-12-2011) 
§ 12-1-132 - SUBDIVISION AND PARCEL REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  All water which falls within the parcel to be developed, including the respective one-half of all streets adjacent to the parcel, for a 100-year storm of six-hour duration (approximately two and six-tenths inches) as established by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14, must be retained within the boundaries of the parcel. The method of collection and retention shall be approved by the City Engineer. The method of retention calculation and drainage flows shall conform to § 12-1-134. 
(B)  Two or more developers may join together to provide a common retention facility. A letter of agreement signed by all developers participating in the common retention facility must be approved by the city and the recorded plat shall indicate that the retention area is a joint facility. In the case of single-user developments, the letter of agreement will be recorded as an encumbrance against all participating parcels. The joint retention area must meet all criteria as a single area. 
(C)  All retention basins shall have a design capacity to preclude a water depth in excess of three feet resulting from a ten-year, six-hour duration storm rainfall of approximately one and seven-tenths inches. The depth of retention basins shall be measured from the nearest adjacent top of curb. Side slopes shall be hinged to conform to the following slope/depth ratios: 
BASIN DEPTH MAXIMUM SLOPE First 3 feet 4:1 From 3 feet to 6 feet 8:1 From 6 feet to 9 feet 10:1 Basin depth greater than 6 feet subject to city approval  
(D)  Retention volumes in excess of a ten-year, six-hour duration storm may be retained in areas other than the retention basin, such as paved parking areas, with the permission of the city. Where allowed, the maximum depth ponding on parking lots shall be eight inches. The maximum water depth allowed in any retention basin resulting from a 100-year, six-hour duration storm shall be four feet. 
(E)  In no event shall stormwater stand in the retention basins longer than 36 hours. Where possible, basins may be drained by pumping or controlled gravity flow into existing storm drainage lines or irrigation ditches when approved by the controlling agency. With the permission of the city, the right-of-way area from one foot in back of sidewalk may be used for the retention basin. 
(F)  Retention basins shall not encroach upon public or private utility easements. 
(G)  All retention basins that will be controlled by the city shall be improved by the developer per city guidelines for retention basin development and installed prior to the city's acceptance of the retention. The landscape plan shall be submitted with the engineering plans. Retention basins, when not privately maintained, shall be dedicated to the city in fee title as stormwater retention basins or drainage rights-of-way. In the case where private retention basins receive water other than that which falls upon the property and adjacent streets and/or alleys, the areas shall be designated as easement areas for retention purposes and shall have a recorded restrictive covenant requiring perpetual maintenance. 
(H)  On-lot retention is permissible in single-family residential developments providing that the lots contain not less than 18,000 square feet and are fully irrigated. The lot shall be depressed to contain the indicated design storm, including that of street runoff. 
(I)  Curbed streets shall be designed and constructed to carry the stormwater runoff from a ten-year storm between curbs. When peak flows from the design storm exceed the street capacity, a subsurface storm drainage system shall be provided to convey the excess stormwater. Local and secondary collector streets serving one-acre or larger lots designed for on-lot retention may be constructed with a ribbon curb. Local streets, serving lots of 18,000 square feet to one (1) acre in size designed for on-lot retention, may be designed with 18-inch curb depressions at each lot to permit street runoff to flow into the depressed lots. 
(J)  Peak flows from a 100-year storm shall be carried within the limits of public right-of-way or a dedicated drainage easement. The finished floor elevation of all buildings shall be a minimum of 14 inches above the 100-year floodplain elevation or the emergency outlet elevation, whichever is greater. 
( Ord. 507, N.S. , passed 4-12-2011; Res. 2029 , passed 4-12-2011) 
§ 12-1-133 - NON-SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENTS. 
(A)  All stormwater from a 100-year storm of six-hour duration (approximately two and six-tenths inches) as established by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14, shall be retained on-site. All stormwater within the right-of-way adjacent to the site shall be retained within the site unless other means of disposal of the water (i.e., storm drain, irrigation ditch, or drainage-way) is designed and constructed to convey that water. 
(B)  A maximum of 50% of the required retention can be held upon asphalt, concrete or other hard surface with permission of the city. When allowed, the maximum depth of ponding on such hard surfaces shall not exceed 12 inches. 
(C)  The city shall not be responsible for the design, performance, operation or maintenance of the retention basin. 
(D)  The retention basin shall conform to § 12-1-132 and calculations and drainage flows shall conform to § 12-1-134. 
(E)  The property owner of a single lot zoned Rl-10 or smaller will be excluded from the requirements to provide on-site retention. 
( Ord. 507, N.S. , passed 4-12-2011; Res. 2029 , passed 4-12-2011) 
§ 12-1-134 - RETENTION CALCULATIONS AND DRAINAGE FLOWS. 
(A)  Retention calculations shall be submitted as follows: 
V = (D/12) AC 
A = Area (square feet or acres) 
V = Volume required to be retained (cubic feet or acre-feet) 
D = 100-year, six-hour rainfall (inches) 
C = Runoff factor for tributary areas* 
(*Initial planning only, final drainage design will utilize "C" values based on weighted averages or City Engineer approval.) 
General: 
Pavement (asphalt, concrete, brick, etc.) ..... 0.95 
Roofs ..... 0.95 
Grass lawn (average slope 0 - 7%) ..... 0.20 
Grass lawn (steep 7%) ..... 0.35 
Desert lawn or rock lawn ..... 0.70 
Farmland ..... 0.10 
Bare ground (vacant lots) ..... 0.25 
Undeveloped desert ..... 0.40 
Commercial, Industrial Area ..... 0.80 
Residential Area ..... 0.65 
Multi-Unit Area: 
Townhouses, mobile home parks ..... 0.75 
Apartments ..... 0.75 
(B)  The point or points in which natural drainage flows from a property prior to development shall remain the same after the property has been altered for the development. 
(C)  Drywells or exfiltration trenches are required in the City of Tolleson to drain surface retention areas. A 50% clogging factor shall be applied to the percolation rate used in computing dry up times. 
( Ord. 507, N.S. , passed 4-12-2011; Res. 2029 , passed 4-12-2011) 
§ 12-1-135 - PENALTY. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of these stormwater drainage requirements shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein above described. 
( Ord. 507, N.S. , passed 4-12-2011; Res. 2029 , passed 4-12-2011) 
ARTICLE 12-2: - SUBDIVISIONS 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 12-2-1 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    AGREED SCHEDULE. A time schedule agreed upon by the subdivider and the Planning and Zoning Commission for the installation of required public improvements and the sequence in which each will be installed. 
    ALLEY. A minor public right-of-way used primarily for vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION. A contract secured by a bond in an amount and with surety satisfaction to the City Engineer, guaranteeing completion of public improvements which are shown on the subdivision preliminary plan. 
    BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The chief legislative body of the County of Maricopa. 
    BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance between the street line, right-of-way and buildings or any projection thereof, other than steps, eaves or overhangs. 
    CROSSWALK. A public right-of-way used primarily for pedestrian travel through or across any portion of a block. 
    CUL-DE-SAC. A short, minor street having but one end open for motor traffic; the other being terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
    EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use, for a specific purpose or purposes, of a designated strip of land to the general public, a corporation or other individuals. 
    LOT. A portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both, and having frontage on a dedicated street. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a street or crosswalk may be included. 
    LOT FRONTAGE. The front dimension of a lot measured along the street right-of-way. 
    LOT WIDTH. The width of the lots at the building line measured parallel to the street right-of-way. 
    MAJOR STREET PLAN OR OFFICIAL MAP. A part of the master plan showing the location and dimensions of principal thoroughfares. (Land shown in parks along the thoroughfares is not deemed part of the street right-of-way.) 
    MAJOR THOROUGHFARES. A street of great continuity, existing or planned which serves or is intended to serve foreign and local traffic, and which is designated on the major street plan as a limited access highway, major street, thoroughfare, parkway or other term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street system of the city and surrounding area. MAJOR THOROUGHFARES are only those streets designated on the master street plan, including additions or corrections thereto. 
    MASTER PLAN. The comprehensive plan made by the city and adopted by the Council which indicated the physical development of the city all as provided by law; the term includes any unit or part of the plan separately adopted and any amendment to the plan or parts thereof. 
    OFFICIAL MAP. The map established by the Council as provided by law, showing the streets theretofore existing and established by law as public streets and any amendments thereto adopted by the Council, as appropriate, or additions thereto resulting from approval of subdivision plats and the subsequent recording of the approved plats. 
    PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the city. 
    PLANNING DEPARTMENT. The City Planning Department. 
    PLAT OF SUBDIVISION. A map showing the division of any tract of land into two or more parcels, and prepared for the purpose of recording. 
    PROTECTIVE COVENANT. A restriction on the use of private property within a subdivision for the purpose of providing mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development. PROTECTIVE COVENANTS regulating the use of land represent and express agreement between the subdivider and the lot purchaser. 
    PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Any of the following: road way pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, watermains, sanitary and storm sewers and appurtenant construction as related to the subdivision preliminary plan. 
    SIDEWALKS. The portion of a street or crosswalk, paved or otherwise surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only. 
    STREET. A right-of-way designed for vehicular and pedestrian traffic regardless of its designation by name, such as street, thoroughfare, avenue, lane, place, drive or the like. 
    STREET - ACCESS OR FRONTAL. A street running parallel to or adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of a major street or highway and which has as its purpose the relief of the major street from the local service of abutting properties. 
    STREET - MINOR. A street of limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood. 
    STREET - SECONDARY OR COLLECTOR. A street designed to serve as an important trafficway for a neighborhood or as a feeder to a thoroughfare. The determination of street classification in any specific instance shall rest with the Council. 
    STREET STANDARDS. The city standard specifications, as adopted or amended. (MAG specs) 
    SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein. 
    SUBDIVISION. A division of land into two or more lots, tracts or parcels for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, except for division of land which qualifies as a lot split as specified in § 12-2-23 of this article and any division of land located in a zoning district zoned commercial or industrial, which land is subject to and encumbered by an enforceable development agreement, signed by the city, which complies with the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and amendments thereto, and which development agreement expressly waives the application of this article. 
    SUBDIVISION PRELIMINARY PLAN. A drawing showing a proposed subdivision of land together with the public improvements which are to be installed therein. 
(Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-2 - PRELIMINARY PLAN. 
(A)  The subdivision preliminary plan is intended to precede and supplement the final plat of subdivision which is to be recorded. Its purpose is to show all facts needed to enable the Planning and Zoning Commission and the administrative officers of the city to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question and the proposed public improvements are satisfactory from the stand point of public interest. All required engineering and surveying work must be performed by or under the supervision of a registered engineer or surveyor, as the case may be, registered in accordance with the provisions of the Arizona State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. 
(B)  The following graphic descriptive items are required to be shown on a subdivision preliminary plan: 
(1)  Items pertaining to title. 
(a)  Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in Tolleson, city or county; 
(b)  Location by section, township, range, county, state; 
(c)  Names, addresses and phone numbers of owner, developer and engineer responsible for engineering details; 
(d)  Scale: The plan shall be submitted at any of the following scales: One inch equals 40, 50, 60, 100 or 200 feet to the inch; 
(e)  Date; and 
(f)  North point. 
(2)  Existing items pertaining to plan. 
(a)  Boundary of the proposed subdivision accurately indicated by a heavy solid line; 
(b)  Locations, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways; railroad and utilities rights-of-way; parks and other public open spaces; permanent buildings; section and corporation lines; within or adjacent to the tract; 
(c)  Location of nearest public utilities; 
(d)  Names of adjacent subdivision and owners of adjoining parcels or un-subdivided land (shown by dotted lines); 
(e)  Zoning districts of property to be subdivided and all abutting properties; 
(f)  Existing contours with intervals to be determined by the City Engineer. Elevations shall be based on sea level or city datum; 
(g)  Irrigation or drainage canals, and any other significant physical items; and 
(h)  Description of benchmark or primary control points used. 
(3)  Items pertaining to proposed development. 
(a)  Layout of streets, including names and widths of proposed streets and width of crosswalks and easements. Proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other street within the city; 
(b)  Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots; 
(c)  Parcels of land intended to be dedicated, temporarily reserved for public use, or to be reserved for deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision and the conditions (if any) of the dedication or reservation; 
(d)  Building setback lines, shown graphically along all streets, with dimensions; 
(e)  Indication of any or all lots on which a use other than residential is proposed by the developer. This does not constitute approval of the zoning by the Planning and Zoning Commission at the time of subdivision approval or in the future; and 
(f)  All public improvements proposed or as required by §§ 12-2-60 et seq . 
(4)  Additional information. The following information shall be submitted to, and approved by the City Engineer prior to approval of a preliminary plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(a)  Typical street cross-sections (or half-sections) at a scale not smaller than one-quarter inch equals one foot showing widths of roadways, and location and widths of sidewalks. Where considerable cut and fill are involved, or whether grading will affect adjacent properties, several actual cross-sections showing proposed grading may be required and their locations indicated on the plan; 
(b)  Profile of each street and alley, with tentative grades (including adequate extension, where necessary, beyond subdivision boundaries) including any proposed sewer lines and manholes; 
(c)  Plan and profiles of proposed sanitary, storm water or combined sewers, with grades and pipe sizes. Drainage area shall also be shown. A closed level circuit shall be established with benchmarks in order to insure a proper drainage pattern between existing and newly constructed streets; and 
(d)  1. Where it is necessary for access to trunk or lateral connections across or between lots, the developer shall provide not more than ten-foot wide easements and incorporate easements on the plans submitted for approval. 
2.  Scale: 
a.  Horizontal: Same as plan; and 
b.  Vertical: one inch equals ten feet. 
(Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
PROCEDURES 

§ 12-2-20 - PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE. 
(A)  While the subdivision is still in preliminary planning stage, it is recommended that the subdivider consult the Manager's office to determine conformity to the master plan, including the major street plan and official map, the zoning code, and compliance with these regulations, rules of procedure and requirements for the design and installation of public improvements as required by the city. 
(B)  Upon receiving favorable consideration, the subdivider may then proceed to prepare the preliminary plat for submission. 
(C)  Favorable consideration by the Manager's office under no circumstances shall be construed as preliminary or tentative approval. 
§ 12-2-21 - PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT. 
(A)  On reaching conclusion, informally as described in § 12-2-20 regarding the subdivider's general program and objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, as specified in § 12-2-2, together with other supplementary material as deemed necessary by the Manager's office or other departments of the city government regulating installation of public improvements. 
(B)  Six copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission at least seven days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. 
(C)  Within 30 days after the submission of the preliminary plat and other materials submitted for conformity thereof to these regulations and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him or her, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend its recommendation as conditional approval and state the conditions of the approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefore by letter, noting reasons therein, including citation of, or reference to, the rules and regulations violated by the plat. 
(D)  The City Council shall review the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission's recommendation and approve or reject the preliminary plat. The reasons for a rejection of the preliminary plat shall be made on the record of the City Council. The action of the City Council shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the City Council. 
(E)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the City Council and the Council upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the conditional approval, if any. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
§ 12-2-22 - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT. 
(A)  The final plat to be prepared as specified in §§ 12-2-40 et seq. shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that, the portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 
(B)  The original and four copies of the final plat, and other supplementary material required for approval, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission at least seven days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. It shall also be required that the above material be submitted to the Planning Commission within six months after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, the approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Planning Commission. The filing of a unit of the preliminary plat automatically extends approval of the preliminary plat for six months. 
(C)  Within 30 days after the submission of the final plat and supplementary material required for approval, the Planning Commission shall recommend its final actions, except as provided in § 12-2-61. 
(D)  The City Council shall take final action on any final plat, based upon the Planning Commission's recommendation, and application of the City Code to the plat. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
§ 12-2-23 - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF LOT SPLIT. 
(A)  Any division of land into three or fewer parts in which no right-of-way dedication, utility extension or other off-site public improvement are involved may be processed as a lot split subject to approval by the City Manager and City Engineer. 
(B)  Any proposed lot split shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission to determine compliance with applicable platting, subdividing and zoning regulations. The City Manager or City Engineer may require the submittal of any additional information as is pertinent to make this determination. 
(C)  The plat shall be prepared by an Arizona registered surveyor or professional engineer on mylar 24 inches by 36 inches with a two-inch left margin, suitable for recording, and shall include provisions for the signature by the Mayor, City Manager, and City Engineer. 
(Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-24 - FILING FEES. 
(A)  Each subdivision, as defined herein, shall be accompanied by a completed application form as provided by the city, and a non-returnable/non-refundable filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. Each submission of a preliminary plat for conditional approval in accordance with § 12-2-21 shall be accompanied by non-returnable/non-refundable per page review fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. Each submission of a final plat for final approval in accordance with of § 12-2-22 shall be accompanied by a non-returnable/non-refundable per page review fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. 
(B)  The following is the list of non-returnable/non-refundable per page review fees applicable to this article. 
Type of Submission Additional Per Page Fee Preliminary Plat $200 per page Final Plat $200 per page  
(Ord. 349, N.S., passed 5-28-1996) 
FINAL PLAN 

§ 12-2-40 - FINAL PLAN OF SUBDIVISION. 
    No subdivision as defined by this article shall be made of land without the preparation and recording of a plat of subdivision, as defined in § 12-2-1 of this article, in accordance with the provisions of the rules and regulations; except as exempted from the platting by § 12-2-23 of this article. The final plat of subdivision is the official recordable plat. It shall be submitted within six months following the Planning and Zoning Commission's authorization to proceed under the provisions of the subdivision preliminary plan. 
§ 12-2-41 - FINAL PLAT. 
(A)  The final plat shall be drawn on mylar or an approved permanent reproducible material, exactly 24 inches by 36 inches. 
(B)  The final plat shall be submitted only at one of the following scales: 
(1)  One inch equals 40, 50, 60, 100 or 200 feet to the inch; and 
(2)  It is preferred that the scale be one inch equals 100 feet. 
(C)  Where necessary, the plat may be submitted on several sheets and accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. 
(Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-42 - RECORDING PLATS. 
(A)  The recording plats shall be exact duplicates of the final plat. The recording plats shall be reproduced on an approved paper stock exactly 24 inches by 36 inches. 
(B)  The recording plats shall be submitted at the same scale as the final plat. 
(Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-43 - ITEMS REQUIRED TO BE SHOWN ON FINAL PLAT. 
(A)  Items pertaining to title. 
(1)  Name of subdivision and unit number; 
(2)  Location by section, township, range, county, state; 
(3)  Names, addresses and phone numbers of owners, engineers and surveyors including the engineer's or surveyor's seal properly affixed; 
(4)  Scale; 
(5)  Date; and 
(6)  North point. 
(B)  Graphic items pertaining to plat. 
(1)  Boundary of the proposed subdivision with accurate distance and bearings to primary control points; 
(2)  Exact location and width of all streets and alleys within and adjoining the plat; 
(3)  Names of streets within and adjoining the plat. All streets must be named. The names of new streets shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other street in the city; 
(4)  Bearings and distance to the nearest established street lines or political subdivision boundaries, or section or patent corners or other official monuments; 
(5)  Lengths of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature and tangent bearings; 
(6)  All easements for rights-of way provided for public services or utilities, including purposes and any limitations of the easements; 
(7)  All lot lines, numbers or letters, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths and with bearings or angles related to street and alley lines; 
(8)  Accurate description of location of all monuments or markers used. These monuments or markers shall have been located and in place prior to approval of final plat. Monuments or markers to be constructed in accordance with city standard specifications, as adopted or amended, and located as specified by the City Engineer; 
(9)  Accurate outlines of any areas to be dedicated for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon; and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common use of all property owners in the subdivision; and 
(10)  Building setback lines, shown graphically along all streets, with dimensions. 
(C)  Other items to be shown on final plat. 
(1)  Any restrictive covenants to apply to lots in the subdivision other than those set forth in the zoning code, or other ordinances of the city, shall be signed by the owner(s) and shall be printed in the subdivision plat or recorded in the office of the Recorder of Maricopa County with a notation on the plat. If restrictive covenants are filed or altered after the final plat has been recorded, a certified copy of the same shall be furnished to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Engineer; 
(2)  Description of restriction on sewer easements, if the easements are involved; 
(3)  The following certification, signed by a professional civil engineer or surveyor registered in the State of Arizona, "I hereby certify this subdivision conforms to all regulations and requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City of Tolleson"; 
(4)  A space with lines for signatures and dates reflecting each of the following certifications: 
(a)  Mayor and City Clerk certifying the date the plat was approved by the City Council; 
(b)  City Manager; 
(c)  City Engineer; and; 
(d)  Maricopa County Health Department, where applicable. 
(5)  A signed and notarized certification by the owner(s) of their approval of the plat and the dedication of streets, alleys, easements and any other public areas. 
(Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-44 - DOCUMENTS REQUIRED. 
(A)  A reproducible copy of the final plat, with proper signatures, shall be transmitted to the City Engineer. 
(B)  Two recording plats, with proper signatures, shall be required. One shall be recorded in the Recorder's office of Maricopa County and one shall be furnished to the Maricopa County Assessor's office. 
(C)  Four copies (blueprint) of the final plat shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
(D)  Two copies of the complete plans and profiles for street and alley improvements shall be submitted for the approval of the City Engineer prior to approval of the final plat by the City Council. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009; Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-45 - ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION. 
    Prior to recordation of a final plat, the subdivider shall either install required improvements and repair existing streets and other public facilities damaged in the development of the property or execute and file with the City Manager an agreement between himself or herself (subdivider) and the city, specifying the period within which required improvements and repairs shall be completed and providing that, if the work is not completed within the period specified, the city may complete the work, and recover the full cost and expense, together with the court costs and attorney fees necessary to collect the amounts from the subdivider. 
(A)  The subdivider shall file with the agreement, to assure his or her full and faithful performance thereof, one of the following: 
(1)  A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Arizona; 
(2)  A personal bond co-signed by at least one other person together with evidence of financial responsibility and resources of those signing the bond sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of ability to proceed in accordance with the agreement; and 
(3)  Cash deposit. 
(B)  The assurances of full and faithful performance shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and shall be for a sum approved by the City Engineer as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs and related engineering and incidental expenses. 
(C)  If the subdivider fails to carry out provisions of the agreement and the city has un-reimbursed costs or expenses resulting from the failures, the city shall call on the bond or cash deposit for reimbursement. If the amount of the bond or cash deposit exceeds costs and expenses incurred by the city, it shall release the remainder. If the amount of the bond or cash deposit is less than the costs and expenses incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to the city for the difference. 
(Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

§ 12-2-60 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
    All public improvements shown on the preliminary plan and any additional improvements that may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission, as a condition for approval of the final plat, shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. All improvements constructed shall meet the city standard specifications, as adopted or amended. 
§ 12-2-61 - STREETS AND DRAINAGE. 
(A)  Access. Any land hereinafter subdivided shall have frontage on an existing dedicated and improved street, road or highway. Where the proposed subdivision does not meet this condition, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide access by means of a dedicated and improved street or road. 
(B)  Grading. All streets within the limits of the subdivision shall be graded full width of the dedicated right-of-way, and all roadways shall be improved to meet the city standard specifications, as adopted or amended. 
(C)  Drainage. Any land which is considered to be excessively irregular shall be provided with proper drainage where drainage is adequate, all appurtenant structures such as combination curb and gutter, driveway and alley entrances, valley gutters, culverts and the like will be constructed. Where subsurface drainage is required, all manholes, inlets or connections to existing systems shall be required. This work shall be done prior to any street surfacing. 
(D)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks of the width and type as required by the city standard specifications, as adopted or amended, shall be constructed on both sides of all streets within the subdivision and in all crosswalks. 
§ 12-2-62 - UTILITIES. 
(A)  Sewer. Sewer lines shall be installed to serve all lots within the subdivision in accordance with the minimum standards of the city. Where sewer service is not available, a system for disposal of sewerage shall be installed in accordance with minimum requirements of the City-County Health Department. Plans for disposal systems and sanitary sewer shall be approved by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. 
(B)  Water. Water mains shall be installed to serve all lots within the subdivision, or certified evidence shall be submitted by the subdivider that potable water is available in sufficient quantity. 
(C)  Electricity. Certification from the local electric power company, that electrical service is available and will be provided, shall be submitted by the subdivider. Location of power distribution poles and street lights standards shall be indicated on preliminary plat. 
(D)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with requirements of the City Engineer and the City Fire Chief and the recommendation of the Board of Fire Underwriters. 
(E)  Street lighting. Street lighting shall be provided at intervals not to exceed 600 feet. Where street lights are required in the center of the block, the developer shall provide the necessary easement from the alley to the street right-of-way line. 
(F)  Street name signs. Signs shall be placed at all street intersections. Specifications for design, construction, location and installation shall be in accordance with city standard specifications, as adopted or amended. 
(G)  Utility connections. Where practicable, no utilities shall be installed under any streets except where access lines are required from one area to another. 
(Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-63 - SCHEDULE OF INSTALLATION. 
(A)  The improvements required to be made under these regulations shall be installed in compliance with schedules agreed upon during approval of preliminary plan. 
(B)  Installation of all improvements shall be done under supervision of the City Engineer or under the supervision of the offices of the city having jurisdiction. 
(Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

§ 12-2-75 - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF ACCEPTABILITY. 
(A)  Master plan. Streets shall conform substantially to the master plan adopted by the city and any revisions or amendments thereof. Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes any part of a street indicated as a major thoroughfare on the major street plan of the master plan, the part of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. It is the intent of this article to provide a 100-foot dedication for all major thoroughfares (50 feet measured each side of centerline of the proposed thoroughfare) except as provided by § 12-2-76. Where frontal or access roads are deemed necessary, additional right-of-way shall be 50 feet on either side of the major thoroughfare. 
(B)  Public open spaces and sites. Where, as indicated by the master plan, a proposed subdivision contains, wholly or in part, a proposed public open space or a proposed site for a public building, the sites shall be reserved unless the concerned authority states it has no intention of development in the area. The Planning and Zoning Commission will immediately notify the concerned authority. 
(C)  Neighborhood plan. If a tentative plan has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the neighborhood of the proposed subdivision, the street system of the latter shall conform substantially thereto. 
(D)  Un-subdivided portion of tract. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require a sketch of the tentative future street system beyond the limits of the tract adjacent to the land area presently being subdivided. 
(E)  Provisions for future subdivision. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, the parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and logical subdivision. 
(F)  Reserved strips prohibited. There shall be no "reserved" strips controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. 
§ 12-2-76 - STREETS. 
(A)  Circulation. The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets, thoroughfares or un-subdivided land, as may be required by the City Council. Minor residential streets should be so planned as to discourage their use by non-local traffic. Where a street will eventually be extended beyond the plat, but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim turn-around may be required. 
(B)  Major thoroughfares. If a new subdivision involves frontage on a major thoroughfare, as defined herein, the street layout should be planned to avoid, as far as possible, any private residential driveways from having direct access to the thoroughfares by providing access or frontal streets. 
(C)  Existing streets. Existing streets (constructed or recorded) in adjoining territory shall be continued at equal or greater width and in similar alignment by streets proposed in the subdivision, unless variations are approved by the City Council. 
(D)  Cul-de-sac. Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 600 feet, unless necessitated by topography or other circumstances beyond the subdivider's control. 
(E)  Half-streets. No half-street shall hereinafter be accepted. Where there exists a dedicated or platted half-street adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half, being a minimum width to meet this article, shall be platted. 
(F)  Stub streets. Where a subdivision adjoins un-subdivided land, stub streets shall be provided at locations as determined by the City Council to insure future access and traffic circulation. 
(G)  Intersections. All street intersections shall be at right angles. Where, because of topographic or other reasons, an intersection cannot be at right angles, the intersection shall be designated to insure safety. 
(H)  Easements. Easements for slopes and utilities shall be dedicated to the public where necessary. The easements shall be at least eight feet wide across the rear or front of all lots, except that a utility easement adjacent to unsubdivided lands shall be at least ten feet wide. In addition, easements may be required at other suitable locations. 
(I)  Dimensional standards. 
(1)  Minimum width. 
(a)  The street right-of-way and roadway width shall not be less than the minimum width shown in the following table: 
Type of Street Minimum Right-of-Way
Width Minimum Roadway
Width Secondary or collector - residential 60 feet or 90 feet 40 feet or 64 feet Minor - residential 60 feet 38 feet Minor - less than 1,500 feet in length 50 feet 36 feet Access or frontal 50 feet 32 feet Alley 20 feet 20 feet Cul-de-sac 50 feet 36 feet  
(b)  Major thoroughfares, industrial and commercial street right-of-ways and roadway width shall be determined by the Council when approving the plat. 
(2)  Alignment; minimum standards. 
(a)  Two copies of the complete plans and profiles for street and alley improvements shall be submitted for approval of the final plat by the City Council. 
(b)  Vertical curves: 
1.  Arterial streets: As determined by the City Engineer; and 
2.  Secondary or local streets: Minimum length 100 feet, except in cases approved by the City Engineer. 
(c)  Horizontal curves: 
1.  Major thoroughfares, access and frontal streets: 500 feet; 
2.  Secondary or collector streets: 200 feet; 
3.  Minor streets: 100 feet; and 
4.  Alleys: Laid out to provide turning radius at alley intersection. 
(3)  Reversed curve. Unless approved by the City Engineer, all streets shall have a tangent of 100 feet between reverse angles. 
(4)  Curb radii. At the intersection of two streets, property line corners shall be rounded by an arc of 20 foot radius. The minimum radii shall be increased when the smallest angle of intersection is less than 90 degrees, or in any case where the City Engineer considers an increase necessary. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009; Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-77 - BLOCKS. 
(A)  Length of residential blocks shall not be more than 1,000 feet long unless approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Blocks longer than 800 feet in length shall have a crosswalk near the center of the block where required as necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(B)  Irregular shaped blocks (including super blocks) intended by cul-de-sacs containing interior parks or playgrounds and adequate parking space, will be acceptable when properly designed and covered by agreements as to maintenance of the park areas. 
(C)  If frontage on a thoroughfare is involved, the long dimension of the block shall preferably front thereon by means of an access or frontal road, in order to create as few intersections as possible with the thoroughfare. 
(D)  Blocks intended for business or industry shall be of a length and depth as may be considered most suitable for their prospective use by the Planning and Zoning Commission, including adequate provision for parking, on-site loading and unloading and buffer zone, as required by the zoning code. 
§ 12-2-78 - LOTS. 
(A)  General. The minimum width of residential lots for all subdivision shall be 50 feet at the building line and shall have a minimum area as approved by the county health unit, unless larger area is required by the zoning code. 
(B)  Length and width ratio. It is desirable that the length of a lot shall not be more than four times its width. 
(C)  Fronting on thoroughfares. Lots fronting on thoroughfares should be of a depth to accommodate setbacks as set forth in zoning code. 
(D)  Double frontage. Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except to overcome disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(E)  Side lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street lines unless, in the opinion of the City Council, a variation from this rule will give a better street and lot plan. 
(F)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit the maintenance of the side street building line after providing a minimum building width of 30 feet, and a side yard, as is required by the zoning code, on the interior side of the lot. 
(G)  Building sites. Every lot must contain a suitable building site, which will provide minimum yard requirements in compliance with the zoning code. 
(H)  Street frontage. Every lot shall front on a public street having a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet for a distance of not less than 50 feet measured along the right-of-way line. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

§ 12-2-90 - ADMINISTRATION. 
    The provisions of this article shall be administered by the City Manager and appeals from any decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall go to the Council; provided that, notice of the appeal shall be given to the Planning and Zoning Commission 30 days preceding any meeting pertaining to the appeal held by the Council. 
§ 12-2-91 - LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT. 
    The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of a plan and program for complete community or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Engineer provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which also provides the covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to, and achievement of, the plan. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009; Am. Ord. 502, N.S., passed 12-14-2010) 
§ 12-2-92 - SALE OF LOTS BY METES AND BOUND DESCRIPTION. 
    The sale of property to be used as lots, plots or building site and subdivisions only be a metes and bounds description shall be presumed to be an attempt to evade the provisions of this article, and an instrument shall not be eligible for filing and recording in the office of the County Recorder. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
§ 12-2-93 - ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building on any property other than a lot of record prior to adoption of these regulations or a re-subdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision without approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
§ 12-2-94 - VIOLATIONS. 
    Any person, firm or corporation notified, in writing, by the city of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall have the violation corrected within 30 days after receipt of notification. If not corrected within the specified time, enforcement of this Article shall be pursuant to § 12-1-23 of this Code. 
(Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
ARTICLE 12-3: - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

§ 12-3-1 - CITY ENGINEER APPOINTED FLOODPLAIN MANAGER. 
    The City Engineer is appointed/designated as the Floodplain Manager for the city and will serve as the community point of contact on National Flood Insurance Program issues for county, state and federal officials. 
(Ord. 430, N.S., passed 8-9-2005) 
§ 12-3-2 - ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. 
    Those certain documents designated "Flood Insurance Study for Maricopa County, Arizona and Incorporated Areas dated October 16, 2013" (the "FIS"), "Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated October 16, 2013" (the "FIRM") and "Floodplain Regulations for Maricopa County (2011 Revision)" (the "Floodplain Regulations"), copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk, which documents were made public records by Resolution No. 2136 of the City of Tolleson, Arizona are hereby adopted by reference, as the basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas for floodplain management in the City of Tolleson. The special flood hazard areas documented in the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Maps are the minimum area of applicability of the floodplain management regulations and may be supplemented by studies for other areas as allowed in the regulations. 
(Ord. 430, N.S., passed 8-9-2005; Am. Res. 2140 , passed 7-23-2013) 
§ 12-3-3 - LEGAL BASIS. 
    That public record in the Floodplain Management Regulations for Maricopa County (2000 Revision), three copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted as the legal basis for implementing floodplain management in this community. 
(Ord. 430, N.S., passed 8-9-2005) 
§ 12-3-4 - SEVERABILITY. 
    If any portion of this article is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, all remaining portions of this article shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 430, N.S., passed 8-9-2005) 
§ 12-3-5 - VIOLATION; PENALTY. 
(A)  It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization required by A.R.S § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters without securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613. A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(B)  Any person found guilty of violating any provision of the Floodplain Management Regulations of the Flood Control District of Maricopa County adopted herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both a fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
(Ord. 430, N.S., passed 8-9-2005; Am. Ord. 431, N.S., passed 9-13-2005) 
ARTICLE 12-4: - ZONING 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 12-4-1 - TITLE. 
(A)  This article shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Tolleson . 
(B)  The boundaries of use districts established in this zoning code shall be designated on the Tolleson zoning map, hereby declared to be part of this article. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-2 - PURPOSE. 
    The purpose of this article and the intent of its application is the promotion of the public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety and general welfare; and to provide for adequate light and air, safety from fire, panic and other dangers and the avoidance of over-crowding of land and undue concentrations of population; and to provide for the separation of land uses to prevent undue discomfort and hazard. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-3 - INTERPRETATION. 
(A)  This zoning ordinance hereby establishes the Tolleson Zoning Administrator, whose office shall be filled by the Tolleson City Manager or his or her designated appointee. 
(B)  The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to determine the appropriateness of land uses and zoning district boundaries for the use district, hereby established, when doubt or disagreement occurs; the Zoning Administrator may request determination of the cases from the Tolleson Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(C)  Use district boundary lines are intended, generally, to follow existing property lines, center lines of streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way, or as may be indicated on the Tolleson zoning map; determination of exact location of use district boundaries shall be made as mentioned herein. 
(D)  When a use is not specifically listed in the sections designated as "Permitted Uses," it shall be assumed that the uses are hereby expressly prohibited unless the Tolleson City Council determines that the use is similar to and not more objectionable than the uses already listed. When any use is listed in a less restrictive district, the use may not be permitted in a more restricted district without amendment of this article. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-4 - EFFECT. 
(A)  Except as hereinafter provided, no buildings, structures or premises shall hereinafter be used and no building or structure or part thereof shall be constructed, erected, reconstructed, extended, moved, enlarged or materially altered except in conformity with the provisions of this article for the district in which it is located. 
(B)  Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been granted before the enactment of this article and the construction of which, from the plans, shall have been started within 60 days of the date of the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-5 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(A)  This zoning ordinance shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator who shall, in no case, grant any permit for the construction or alteration of any building or structure if the building or structure, as proposed to be constructed, reconstructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(B)  The Zoning Administrator may authorize, upon application and hearing, variances from the terms of this article per the requirements set forth herein. The Zoning Administrator may refer, without a decision or recommendation, variance applications to the Board of Adjustment for review and hearing. 
(C)  The Zoning Administrator may not: 
(1)  Make any changes in the uses permitted in the zoning classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of the zoning ordinance; provided, the restriction in this division shall not affect the authority to grant variances; and 
(2)  Grant a variance if the special circumstance applicable to the property are self-imposed by the property owner. 
(D)  The Zoning Administrator shall fix a reasonable time for hearing any request for variance and shall give notice of hearing by both publication in the newspaper of general circulation in the City of Tolleson and posting notice in conspicuous places on the property affected at least 15 days prior to the hearing. An applicant for a variance shall provide notice of the application by letter to all property owners of the property within 150 feet of the property that is subject of the variance request. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 409, N.S., passed 9-9-2003) 
§ 12-4-6 - VIOLATION AND PENALTIES. 
    Compliance with the zoning ordinance shall be enforced pursuant to § 12-1-23. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
§ 12-4-7 - REPEAL. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-8 - SEVERABILITY. 
    Should any portion or provision of this ordinance be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-9 - DEFINITIONS AND TERMS. 
(A)  For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural include the singular number; the word SHALL is mandatory and not permissive; the word PERSON includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, clubs or associations. The following words and terms, when applied in this zoning ordinance, shall carry full force when used interchangeably: Lot, plot, parcel or premises; used, arranged, occupied or maintained; sold or dispensed; construct, reconstruct; erect, alter, structurally or otherwise, but not the term "maintain" or any form thereof. The term CITY shall mean the City of Tolleson. The term BOARD shall mean the Tolleson Board of Adjustment. COMMISSION shall mean Tolleson City Planning and Zoning Commission. CITY COUNCIL shall mean Tolleson City Council. 
(B)  For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    ABUTTING. Contact at boundary with street or alley. 
    ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of the building or main use. 
    ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES. A parking space reserved for use by vehicles showing disabled insignia or license plates 
    ADDITIONAL OFF-STREET PARKING. Off-street parking in addition to that required by the zoning ordinance or city code. 
    ADJACENT. Nearby, but not necessarily touching. 
    ADJOINING. Touching at some point. 
    ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished, or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. 
(a)  A commercial establishment, having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or which are characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified anatomical areas." 
(b)  A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
2.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
(c)  A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Other business purposes will not serve to exempt commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(a)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; 
(b)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(c)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. A business that offers any of the following entertainment during any part of any two or more days within any continuous 30 day period: 
(a)  Topless or bottomless dancers, male or female striptease dancers or male or female go-go dancers whose clothing less than completely and opaquely covers: 
1.  Human genitals and pubic region; 
2.  Buttocks; and 
3.  Entire female breast below a point immediately above the tip of the areola. 
(b)  Nude models or models where costuming is as described in division (a) above. 
(c)  MUD WRESTLING, WET T-SHIRT OR OTHER SIMILAR ENTERTAINMENT. Nothing in the definition of ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education, or other similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
    ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(a)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(b)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(c)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    ADULT NOVELTY STORE. A commercial establishment which: 
(a)  As one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; 
2.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities," excluding condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products; or 
3.  A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of the above-listed items and still be categorized as an ADULT NOVELTY STORE . Other business purposes will not serve to exempt the commercial establishment from being categorized as an ADULT NOVELTY STORE so long as one of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental for consideration the above listed items; or 
    ADULT THEATER. An open-air drive-in theater or an enclosed building open to the public, not including private guest quarters of hotels and motels: regularly used for presenting any film or plate negative, film or plate positive film or tape designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition, or films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen, or images from an on-site or off-site electronic or magnetic storage medium, including but not limited to any hard disk, floppy disk, diskette, disk pack, cd rom, hologram, magnetic tape, or cards, or any other device capable of creating a display on a screen or other viewing media, depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons, customers, or members therein. 
    ALCOHOL. A colorless, volatile flammable liquid C2H6O that is the intoxicating agent in fermented and distilled liquors. (See Ord. 328, N.S., passed 4-26-1994) 
    ALLEY. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    ANNEXED LAND. Any land annexed to the City of Tolleson. 
    APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for a single family. Each APARTMENT shall be considered a dwelling unit. 
    ATTACHED BUILDING. A building which has any part of its exterior or bearing wall in common with another building or which is connected to another building by a roof. 
    AUTO COURT. Same as HOTEL . 
    AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place of business having pumps and storage tanks from which liquid fuel is dispensed at retail directly into the motor vehicle, and the servicing of motor vehicles, including tire and tube repairing, battery charging, storage of merchandise and supplies relating to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of lubricants, automobile washing and grease racks. When incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. 
    AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. See JUNK YARD . 
    AWNING. A structure attached to a building or other permanent structure in a fixed position with a flexible or rigid covering, including structures which are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources. 
    BANNER. A temporary sign composed of fabric, pliable plastic, paper, or other light material not enclosed in a rigid frame, and secured or mounted so as to allow the movement of the atmosphere to move the sign. 
    BAR. An establishment the main use of which is to serve spirituous liquors to be consumed on the premises. Food may or may not be served. Usually a counter and stools are present. 
    BEAUTY SHOP. An establishment that provides a variety of beauty and personal care services such as hair cutting, styling and treatment, manicures, pedicures, facials, body waxing, nail sculpturing, body wraps, eyebrow and eyelash tinting, makeup application, massage, permanent hair removal, other similar services and retail sales of hair and beauty products. 
    BILLBOARD. An off-premise advertising sign that is not a digital billboard. 
    BLOCK. That property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, or nearest intersecting street and railroad right-of-way, un-subdivided acreage, waterways, but not an alley of such size as to interrupt the continuity of development of both sides thereof. 
    BOARDINGHOUSE. A dwelling in which not more than five rooms are occupied as guest rooms and in which food may be served to the occupants thereof. Any dwelling in which more than five rooms are occupied as guest rooms shall be deemed as a hotel. The term BOARDINGHOUSE does not include institutions for persons requiring physical or mental care by reason of age, infirmity or disease. (See FAMILY. ) 
    BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel. 
    BUILDING AREA. The total areas taken on a horizontal plane at the mean grade level of the principal buildings and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, steps, roof overhangs, and balconies. 
    BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area defined on a lot in which all improvements must be made, including grading and alterations to existing landscaping. These include, but are not limited to house, accessory buildings, pool, patios, driveways, visitor parking, fencing, or walls. The BUILDING ENVELOPE defines the maximum allowable construction/improvement area on the lot. The BUILDING ENVELOPE must be identified on all design review submittals. 
    BUILDING FA&CCEDIL;ADE. The face or elevation of a building. 
    BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the natural grade level to the highest level of the roof surface of flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, or to the mean height between eaves and ridge of gable, gambrel or hip roofs. 
    BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building. 
    BUILDING FRONT LINE. Those portions of any building on a lot which are parallel with or most parallel with the front property line and create the total front profile of the building, excluding projections such as awnings, open fire balconies, fire escape stairs, open canopies not used for coverage and storage of chattel; see YARD definitions. 
    BUILDING PERMIT. An authorization to construct a structure as issued by the Development Services Department. 
    CANOPY. A structure attached to a building or other rigid structure in a fixed position with a flexible or rigid covering, including structures which are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources. 
    CARPORT. An open building the principal use of which is the storage of motor vehicles, at least two sides of which shall be at least 50% open. 
    CENTER. A group of three or more businesses associated by common agreement or under common ownership, with common parking facilities. 
    CLINIC. A place for group medical services not involving overnight housing of patients. 
    CLUB. An association of persons, whether or not incorporated, religious or otherwise, for social purposes, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit. 
    COMMERCIAL USE. A use operated for profit or compensation. 
    COMMON AREA. Land in a residential development held in common and/or single ownership and not reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual tenant or owner. 
    COMMUNITY BUILDING. A public building designed or used for community activities of an educational, recreational or public service nature. 
    CONDOMINIUM. Ownership of real property wherein the interest in the underlying land is undivided. 
    CONSTRUCTION PROJECT. The erection, installation, remodeling, or alteration of durable facilities upon, under, or over the ground. This shall include, but is not limited to, buildings, roadways, and utility pipes, lines, poles, or other structures. 
    CONTIGUOUS. In contact with. 
    CONVENIENCE MARKET. A small scale retail establishment the primary purpose of which is the sale of fresh and packaged food, dry goods, and nonprescription medicine primarily to customers from the immediate area. A CONVENIENCE MARKET may include sale of gasoline and package liquor. A CONVENIENCE MARKET shall not exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
    COOKING FACILITIES. An area of a dwelling unit or guest house which includes a sink and a significant cooking appliance, including, but not limited to, a range, oven or microwave oven. 
    CONVALESCENT HOME. Same as REST HOME. 
    COURT. An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and bounded on two or more sides by buildings. 
    COVERAGE. That portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, regardless of whether the building or structure is intended for human occupancy. 
    CUL-DE-SAC. The turn-around at the end of a dead end street. 
    DAY CARE CENTER/FACILITY. A facility that regularly provides day care for persons for less than 24 hours. Dependent care solely includes childcare. 
    DETENTION BASIN. A facility for the temporary storage of storm water runoff. 
    DIGITAL BILLBOARD. An off-premise advertising sign which displays electronic or digital static images that are changed via electronic means and control. 
    DIRECT ACCESS TO OFF-STREET PARKING. The provisions of direct access, without the necessity of using the public sidewalk, between the building and an off-street parking facility either within the building or adjacent to it. The parking facilities must be available to the tenants or customers of the building. 
    DORMITORY. A building or that portion thereof other than a hotel, motel, boarding house, fraternity house, or sorority house containing three or more rooming units or guest rooms or sleeping facilities for more than five persons. The rooming units or guest rooms shall be for residential purposes only. 
    DRIVE-IN / DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT. Any establishment where food or beverages are dispensed and where food or beverages are consumed either on or off the premises. 
    DRIVE-IN THEATER. An open-air theater designed for viewing by the audience from motor vehicles. 
    DRIVEWAY. A private, vehicular access connecting a house, carport, parking area, garage, or other buildings with the street. 
    DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a building containing cooking accommodations and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    DWELLING GROUP. Two or more buildings on the same lot each containing one or more dwelling units. 
    DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or buildings attached to each other and containing two or more dwelling units. The term MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING is intended to apply to dwelling types as triplex, fourplex, and apartments where any dwellings have their primary access to a common hallway or corridor. 
    DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building containing only one family unit. 
    EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
    EXTERIOR WALL. Any wall that defines the exterior boundaries of a building or site. 
    EMPLOYEE. As used in the context pertaining to sexually oriented businesses, a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the business. EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
    ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHED. Means and includes any of the following: 
(a)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(b)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(c)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(d)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, including legal wards of the individuals and usual servants, living together as a single-housekeeping unit in a dwelling; or a group of not more than five persons, who need not be related, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling; or a group of not more than six unrelated, developmentally disabled persons living together as a single housekeeping unit with operators and staff, not to exceed eight total residents, in a dwelling if care is provided on a 24-hour basis and licensed, operated and supported and supervised by the State of Arizona. 
    FLOODPLAIN. The channel and the relatively flat area adjoining the channel or a natural stream or river that has been covered by the floodwater of a 100 year frequency storm. 
    FLOOR AREA. For purposes of determining the required number of off-street parking spaces for businesses not part of an office or retail center, floor area is the total area within a building and/or open land area used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, including the area occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not include floors or parts of floors used principally for non-public purposes such as storage, automobile parking, incidental repair, processing or packing of merchandise, show windows; or rest rooms or powder rooms; or offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or the building. 
    GARAGE, DETACHED. A traditional method of garage treatment typically locating the garage at the rear of a property with single lane access to the structure and separating the garage structure from the primary structure by a minimum of five feet. Also see §§ 12-4-150 through 12-4-153. 
    GARAGE, PRIVATE. An attached or detached accessory building for the storage of not more than three vehicles, of which not more than one may be a commercial vehicle of less than two tons and no vehicle shall exceed two tons. 
    GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage used for the care, repair or equipment of automobiles, or where the vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the structure. 
    GRADE. The average elevation of the ground adjoining the structure or building upon which the sign is erected. 
    GROSS BUILDING AREA. The sum of the gross floor area of all buildings located on the premises, including the thickness of walls separating the interior from the exterior of all such buildings. 
    GROUP HOME. A residential facility for six or more unrelated persons providing living facilities, sleeping rooms, and meals and which shall have a permit issued by the appropriate government agency as a boarding home. 
    GUEST HOUSE. A structure for human habitation, containing one or more rooms with bath and toilet facilities, but not including a kitchen or cooking facilities which would provide a complete housekeeping unit. 
    GUEST ROOM. A room occupied by one or more persons not members of the family, in which no cooking facilities are provided. 
    HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation, profession, activity or use which is clearly a customary, incidental and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood; and which is conducted totally within the dwelling unit and accessory buildings on the premises by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit. The activity emits no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare beyond the premises and is limited to hours of operation between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
    HOME OCCUPATION does not include barber and beauty shops, commercial stables, veterinary offices, clinics, kennels or hospitals, real estate offices, nor restaurants, bars or other eating and drinking establishments. 
    HOTEL. A building designed for occupancy as the more or less temporary abiding place for individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which there are six or more guest rooms or apartments and in which provisions are made for automobile parking on the premises. 
    HOSPITAL. A place for the treatment or care of human aliments and shall include sanitarium, preventorium and maternity home. 
    JUNK YARD. The use of any lot, whether inside or outside a building, for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other motor vehicles or machinery; or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from the dismantling or wrecking; or for the storage or keeping of junk including scrap metal or other scrap materials. 
    KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs, at least six months old, are kept. 
    LANDSCAPE. Areas including trees, shrubs, ground covers, vines, walkways, ponds, fountains, sculptures and other organic or inorganic materials used for creating an attractive appearance, excluding those areas used for vehicular access. 
    LICENSEE. A person, under Tolleson Ordinance Nos. 365, 366 and 368 in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
    LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access. 
    LODGING HOUSE. Same as BOARDINGHOUSE. 
    LOT. A parcel of land, or two or more contiguous parcels to be used as a unit under the provisions of this article as shown in the records of the Maricopa County Assessor's office, and having its principal frontage on a street. In any district where a half street has been dedicated, lots facing on the half street shall be deemed to have frontage on a street. 
    LOT, AREA. The total horizontal area within the property lines of a lot or parcel of land including land over which easements have been granted, but not including any land within the limits of a street or alley upon which the lot abuts. 
    LOT, CORNER. A parcel of land located at the intersection of two or more streets. The front of a corner lot shall be considered to be on that street in which the lot fronts by reason of adjacent buildings or it shall be considered the more narrow of the lot's two street frontages. 
    LOT COVERAGE. The total structural coverage provided on a lot or site inclusive of all roofed areas or structures capable of supporting a roof divided by the net area of the lot or size. The first three feet of roof overhang or projection shall not be included in the lot coverage. 
    LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot. 
    LOT, THROUGH. A lot with two street frontages other than a corner lot; both street frontages shall be considered the lot's frontage. 
    MAINTENANCE. The replacing, repairing or upkeep of a part or parts of a building, parking facility or site landscaping which have been made unusable or un-functional by ordinary wear or tear, by the weather or by overgrowth. For purposes of signage, maintenance shall mean the replacing, repairing, or repainting of a portion of a sign structure; periodic changing of bulletin board panels; or renewing copy which has been made unusable by ordinary wear and tear, weather, or accident. The replacing or repairing of a sign or sign structure or the repainting of a painted wall sign when 50% or more of the total area has been damaged or is to be renovated, as determined by the Building Official, shall not be considered maintenance. 
    MASONRY WALL. The wall shall be constructed of standard eight inch by eight inch by 16 inch and shall be in conformance with ASTM C90 for load bearing concrete masonry unit. See Ord. 380 for the wall and requirements. 
    MEDICAL MARIJUANA. "Marijuana" for "Medical Use" as those terms are defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801. 
    MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION LOCATION. Any facility, building, or location that grows, cultivates or processes medical marijuana, including, but not limited to the following: 
(a)  A medical marijuana dispensary that cultivates medical marijuana on its site; 
(b)  The one additional location, if any, duly identified pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2806(E) during the process of registering a medical marijuana dispensary where marijuana will be cultivated for sale at a medical marijuana dispensary; 
(c)  Any location for the cultivation of marijuana by a qualifying patient or designated caregiver permitted under A.R.S. § 36-2801 et seq. ; and 
(d)  Includes a facility that incorporates or processes medical marijuana into a consumable or edible product. 
    MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary as defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801 and duly registered and certified pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2804. 
    MOBILE FOOD VENDING UNIT. Mobile food vending unit: any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, kiosk, pushcart, stand, display, blanket, ground covering or other device designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which only food is peddled, vended, sold, served, displayed, offered for sale or given away. 
    MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A person who sells, serves, offers for sale, or gives away only food from a mobile food vending unit which is parked or located on a parcel of private. 
    MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable dwelling over 32 feet in length and over eight feet wide, constructed to be towed on its own chassis and designed so as to be installed with or without a permanent foundation for human occupancy as a residence, or two or more units separately towable, but designed to be joined into one integral unit, as well as, a portable dwelling composed of a single unit except that it does not include recreational vehicle as defined in this section, hereinafter. 
    MOBILE HOME PARK. Any plot of ground used or offered for use, in whole or in part, for the parking of two or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for the accommodation. 
    MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A subdivision designed and intended exclusively for the residential use of one mobile home per lot. 
    MOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing apartments, and/or rooming units, each of which maintains a separate outside entrance. The building or group of buildings being designed, intended, or used primarily for the accommodation of automobile travelers, and providing automobile parking conveniently located on the premises; see HOTEL. 
    NEIGHBORHOOD. An area of a community with characteristics that distinguish it from other areas and which may include distinct ethnic or economic characteristics, housing types, schools or boundaries defined by physical barriers, such as major highways and railroads or natural features such as rivers or canals. 
    NIT. A unit of measurement of luminance, or illuminative brightness equal to one candela per square meter. 
    NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time this article became effective and which was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use which does not conform to the use of the district in which it is located, or which does not comply with all the height and area regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    NON-CONFORMING USE. A use of a building or land lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this article which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located, as set forth in this article. 
    NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Arizona or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
(a)  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; 
(b)  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
(c)  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
    NUDE, NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    NURSERY SCHOOL. An institution for the care of five or more children of preschool age, the activity of which shall be conducted between the hours or 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Even though some instruction may be offered in connection with such care, the institution shall not be considered a school within the meaning of this article. A NURSERY SCHOOL shall be licensed by the appropriate government agency. 
    NURSING HOME. A health care institution other than a hospital or personal care home which is licensed by the Arizona State Department of Health Services as a skilled nursing facility for two or more unrelated persons; same as REST HOME. 
    OFF-PREMISE ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign displaying advertising copy or information that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not located, remanufactured, or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    OWNER. A person recorded as such on the records of the City Assessor, including his or her duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary, and a person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question. 
    PARCEL. One or more pieces of land separated from other pieces by description as in a subdivision or by metes and bounds as shown on records in the County Assessor's office. 
    PERMITTED USE. A use specifically permitted or analogous to those specifically permitted. 
    PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY (PWSF). An unmanned facility for the provision of personal wireless services as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and any amendments thereto. Personal wireless service facilities are composed of three or more of the following components: (A) antennae; (B) mount; (C) cables; (D) support structure; (E) equipment cabinet/shelter; and (F) wall or security barrier. A PWSF is also commonly referred to as a "cell tower." 
    PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURE. A PWSF which is either: 
A.  Virtually invisible to the casual observer, such as an antenna behind louvers on a building, or located inside a clock tower, steeple or similar structure; or 
B.  Camouflaged with stealth design to blend in with surroundings to the extent that it is indistinguishable by the casual observer from the structure on which it is placed or the surroundings in which it is located, such as structures commonly referred to as "monopalms," "monopines" or "flag pole" designs. 
    PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, FREESTANDING.A self-supported structure, to include monopoles, lattice cell towers and alternative structures, designed for use as a PWSF. For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, guyed PWSFs shall also be considered freestanding. 
    PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, GUYED. A cell tower that is supported by the use of cables (guy wires) that are permanently anchored to the ground and designed to support PWSF antennas. Guyed PWSFs shall not be considered alternative structures for the purpose of this zoning ordinance. 
    PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, LATTICE. A tower that is self-supporting with multiple legs and cross-bracing of structural steel, designed to support PWSF antennas. Lattice PWSFs shall not be considered alternative structures for the purpose of this zoning ordinance. 
    PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, MONOPOLE. A single, upright pole, engineered to be self-supporting and requiring no guy wires or lateral cross-members, designed to support PWSF antennas. Monopoles shall not be considered alternative structures for the purpose of this zoning ordinance. 
    PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT. A development encouraging innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development designed to accomplish a more efficient, aesthetic, and desirable urban landscape for all citizens and residents of Tolleson. 
    PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. A master planned area which predetermines development standards related to streets, water and sewer services, drainage considerations, trails and open space, lighting, and landscaping construction and an area which is usually controlled by a master developer and maintained by a master homeowners association. 
    PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. A group of dwelling units with common areas which are designed as an integrated functional unit and with the permissibility of potential bonus density and considerable flexibility in the selection of building setbacks, lot areas and street configuration as long as the public health, safety and welfare are maintained. 
    PLAT. An engineered map representing a tract of land showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets. 
    PROFESSIONAL USE. The rendering of services of a professional nature and/or registered by the State of Arizona: 
(a)  Architects, engineers, and surveyor; 
(b)  Doctors of medicine, osteopathy, dentistry, and optometry; 
(c)  Lawyers; 
(d)  Accountants; 
(e)  Consultants and practitioners who are recognized by the appropriate above licensed professions; 
(f)  Chiropractors, chiropodists, and naturopaths; and 
(g)  Dispensing opticians. 
    PROHIBITED USE. A use which is not specifically permitted or analogous to those specifically permitted. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular type unit 32 feet or less in length and eight feet or less in width primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle; the term includes trailer, trailer houses, boats and other types of recreational vehicles. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any lot, tract or parcel of land used or offered for use in whole or in part with or without charge for the parking of occupied recreational vehicles, tents or similar devices used for temporary living or sleeping quarters for recreational camping or travel purposes. 
    RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any permanently located building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body to sustain public worship and religion related uses; the term includes churches, temples, mosques and other commonly used worship facilities. 
    RESIDENTIAL CONVENIENCE MARKET. 
(a)  A business the principal purpose of which is the sale of goods, products, or materials and provision of services directly to residents of the multiple family development in which it is located, this includes, but is not limited to, the following: laundry and dry cleaning drop off and pick up; sale of food, beverages, household supplies, toiletries; package drop off and pick up; postal substation; and videotape sale and rental. 
(b)  RESIDENTIAL CONVENIENCE MARKET shall not include: 
1.  Any use which is considered an adult use under this article; 
2.  Automobile servicing or sale of fuel; or 
3.  Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    RESIDENTIAL DENSITY. The number of dwelling units divided by the gross acres of the legally described development area. 
    RESIDENTIAL USE. Habitation by individuals, families or groups, including single-family and multiple dwellings, dwelling groups, mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks. 
    REST HOME. Premises used for the housing of and caring for the ambulatory, aged or infirm. There shall be only incidental convalescent care not involving surgery, physical therapy or other similar activities, such as is customarily provided in sanitariums and hospitals. 
    RESTAURANT. An establishment other than a boarding house where meals which are prepared therein may be secured by the public. 
    RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, or similar exclusive public use. 
    ROOMING HOUSE. Same as BOARDINGHOUSE. 
    SCREENING. A device or materials used to conceal one element of a development from other elements or from adjacent or contiguous development. SCREENING may include one or a combination of the following materials of sufficient mass to be opaque or which shall become opaque after 12 months and which shall be maintained in an opaque condition: walls, berms or plantings. 
    SCHOOL. A place of general instruction, including grades kindergarten through 12 and college, but not including business colleges, nursery schools, dancing schools, riding academies or specialized trade or vocational schools. 
    SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    SERVICE STATION. Same as AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. 
    SETBACK. The required minimum distance between the building line and the related front, side, or rear lot line and over which no part of any building may extend, except as otherwise provided. When the property abuts a dedicated right-of-way, the distance shall be measured from the dedicated right-of-way line or future right-of-way line as shown on the street classification map. When the property abuts a private street, the distance shall be measured from the back of the tract or easement used for the private accessway. 
    SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(a)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(b)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    SIGN. Any device or display of any letters, words, numerals, figures, graphics, emblems, pictures or any parts or combination of, for the purpose of providing identification, advertising or directional information for a specific business, service, product, person, organization, place or building; included in this term are any attention-attracting media such as banners, logo sculptures and obtrusively colored fascia and architectural elements which are visible beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the same is made. 
    SLEEPING ROOM. A room, other than a guest room, in which no cooking facilities are provided. 
    SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. 
(a)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(b)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses: 
(a)  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries; 
(b)  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
    SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following: 
(a)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(b)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
(c)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (b) above. 
    STORY. A space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement ceiling which is less than four feet above the average grade level shall not be considered a STORY . A mezzanine floor shall be considered a STORY if it exceeds 40% of the area of the floor next below it. 
    STREET. A public or private thoroughfare, including road, highway, drive, lane, avenue, place, boulevard and any other thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground. 
    STRUCTURE HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the natural grade level to the highest level of the structure. 
    SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT. Of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist on the effective date of Ordinance 432. 
    TEMPORARY FENCE. Structure used to enclose an outdoor activity or use for a period as set forth in Section 703.C that is contained fully above ground and includes no permanently implanted or affixed footing. 
    TOURIST COURT. Same as HOTEL . 
    TRAFFIC STUDY. A study and/or analysis of the movement of people and goods at a specific location or within a specified area over a given period of time. 
    TOWNHOUSE. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in a subdivided lot. 
    TRAILER or TRAILER HOUSE. Same as RECREATIONAL VEHICLE . 
    TRAILER PARK or TRAILER CAMP. Same as RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK . 
    TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. Of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(a)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(b)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(c)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
    USE. The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased. 
    USE PERMIT. An authorization to conduct a use or activity when the authorization is required by this article and when established according to the procedures in §§ 12-4-165 through 12-4-170. 
    VARIANCE. A deviation from any term or standard contained in this article and authorized according to the procedures in §§ 12-4-165 through 12-4-170. 
    YARD. A required space, other than a court, on a lot unoccupied by a structure or unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein, and measured as the minimum horizontal distance from a main building to the property line opposite the building line, excepting those projections of a main building permitted elsewhere hereinafter. 
    YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across, the full width of the lot and lying between the front lot line abutting a street and the nearest point of the main building. On a corner lot, the front yard is the yard measured along the least lot line width abutting a street. 
    YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest point of the main building. 
    YARD, SIDE. A yard extending across the full length of a lot and lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest point of the main building extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the absence of either of the yards, from the front to the rear lot lines, respectively. 
    YARD, STREET SIDE. Same as SIDE YARD on a corner lot abutting more than one street, other than the front yard. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 432, N.S., passed 9-27-2005; Am. Ord. 477, N.S., passed 11-18-2008; Am. Ord. 503, N.S., passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 550, N.S. , passed 1-13-2015) 
RESIDENTIAL USE DISTRICTS 

§ 12-4-20 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 
(A)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The single-family residential districts are intended to provide for low-density, single-family residential uses on varying lot sizes to accommodate the differing lifestyles of the citizens of Tolleson from rural to urban residential to mobile home residential lot ownership. 
(2)  The single-family residential districts are comprised of the following use districts: 
(a)  Residential 1-35 District (R1-35): family housing district with larger size lots, allowing outdoor enjoyment, privacy and amenities as per division (B)(6) of this section; 
(b)  Residential 1-18 District (R1-18): family housing district with semi-large size lots, allowing outdoor enjoyment, privacy and amenities as per division (B)(6) of this section; 
(c)  Residential 1-7 District (R1-7): family housing with moderate lot sizes, allowing outdoor enjoyment and privacy; and 
(d)  Residential Mobile Home District (R1-MH). 
(B)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  One single-family site-built, detached dwelling per lot; 
(2)  Public community buildings and parks; 
(3)  Temporary construction offices and model homes in conjunction with a construction project, and only for the duration of the project, not to exceed 12 months, unless a time extension is granted by use permit; 
(4)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to residential uses, such as the keeping of fewer than four domesticated dogs or cats, the construction of fences, pools, private garages and storage sheds; provided that, the use does not include any activity commonly conducted as a business; 
(5)  In the R1-MH District, one mobile home per lot is required in lieu of a site-built residence, as the primary, single-family detached dwelling; and 
(6)  In the R1-18 and R1-35 Districts, private stables and corrals, barns, livestock shelters or storage sheds, not used as a dwelling, nor for the raising and/or breeding of livestock, poultry or other animals for commercial or income purposes are permitted as follows: 
(a)  Not more than 18 fowl may be kept, held or maintained; roosters are prohibited; and 
(b)  No structure housing or protecting livestock, fowl or other animals shall be erected within 50 feet of any dwelling unit. 
(C)  Uses subject to use permit. Only specific uses are designated as uses permitted subject to a use permit in each zoning use if approved by the Tolleson City Council at a public meeting as per §§ 12-4-165 through 12-4-170, Procedures. 
(1)  Public and quasi-public buildings and uses for public utilities, schools and religious institutions; however, storage, repair and corporation yards, warehouses and similar uses are prohibited. 
(2)  Customary home occupations and professional offices conducted within the home. 
(3)  Public and private, non-commercial recreational areas, such as golf courses, country clubs and community swimming pools. 
(4)  One guest house per lot, accessory to the main dwelling, and not used for compensation. See definitions of guest house and the requirements. 
(D)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Commercial and industrial uses; 
(2)  Multiple dwellings and dwelling groups; and 
(3)  Mobile homes, except as permitted in the R1-MH District; travel trailers and recreational vehicles are prohibited as dwelling units in all single-family residential districts. 
(E)  Yard, height and area requirements. 
Single-Family Residential Districts District Minimum
Lot Area Maximum Building Height Minimum Yard-Building Setbacks Front Side Street Side Rear R1-35* 35,000 sf 30 feet/2 story 30 feet 20 feet 25 feet 20 feet R1-18* 18,000 sf 30 feet/2 story 30 feet 10 feet 20 feet 20 feet R1-7* 7,000 sf 30 feet/2 story 25 feet 5 feet 10 feet 15 feet R1-MH 7,000 sf 15 feet/1 story 20 feet 5 feet 10 feet 15 feet * Maximum building lot coverage including, slabs on grade, patios, gazebos, storage sheds (not over 120 square feet), and driveways, walkways shall be 50%. For property zoned R1-7 prior to 1987, the maximum lot coverage including slabs on grade, patios, gazbos, storage sheds (not over 120 square feet), driveways, walkways shall be 45%.  
(F)  Minimum lot area. For property zoned R1-7 prior to 1987, the minimum lot area required is 6,000 square feet. The minimum yard-building setback for the property are: 
(1)  Front: 22 feet; 
(2)  Side: four feet; 
(3)  Street side: eight feet; and 
(4)  Rear: 13 feet. 
(G)  Encroachment into pre-1987 R1-7 minimum front yard-building setback. For existing legal non-conforming single-family site-built, detached dwelling structures which encroach into the minimum front yard-building setback, any building addition which further encroaches into the front yard-building setback is only allowed if permitted by the City Council through the approval of a use permit application. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 561, N.S. , § 1, passed 12-8-2015) 
§ 12-4-21 - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, MOBILE HOME PARK, AND RECREATION VEHICLE PARK DISTRICTS. 
(A)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The multi-family residential district, mobile home park and recreational vehicle park districts are intended to provide for medium to higher residential densities. These districts allow for rental apartments, townhouses and condominiums and other cluster-type dwellings, as well as, for rental mobile home spaces and tourist-oriented recreational vehicle parks. 
(2)  The multi-family residential, mobile home park and recreational vehicle park districts are comprised of the following use districts: 
(a)  Residential Multi-Family District (R-2): residential zone intended to provide for and encourage the orderly development of principally two-family residence in area appropriate for medium density development; 
(b)  Residential Mobile Home Park District (R-MHP): district for the accommodation of manufactured or mobile home living on individually sectioned lots within the park; and 
(c)  Recreational Vehicle Park District (RVP): district provides for suitable park for placement and occupancy of recreational vehicles on rented spaces. 
(B)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  In the R-2 District, the following site built uses are permitted: 
(a)  All uses permitted in the R1-7 District; 
(b)  Multiple dwellings; 
(c)  Dwelling groups; 
(d)  Boarding houses; 
(e)  Private clubs and lodges, wherein the chief activity of such is not customarily carried on as a business; 
(f)  Home occupations; 
(g)  Nursery schools and day care centers; 
(h)  Religious institutions; 
(i)  Schools; 
(j)  Schools and academies for the teaching of fine arts; 
(k)  Public and quasi-public buildings and uses for public utilities and governmental entities; storage, repair and corporate yards, warehouses and similar uses are, however, prohibited; 
(l)  Public and private non-commercial recreational areas, such as golf courses, country clubs and swimming pools; and 
(m)  Parking lots appurtenant to the permitted use. 
(2)  In the R1-MHP District, the following uses are permitted: 
(a)  Mobile home parks; 
(b)  One mobile home per park space in accordance with the density, size and setbacks stipulated in this section; 
(c)  Accessory uses, buildings and structures, customarily incidental to residential uses of a mobile home park, including common laundry, toilet and bathing facilities, recreation areas and amenities. See §§ 12-4-150 through 12-4-153 for detached accessory buildings. 
(d)  One park manager's residence and office, which may be housed in site-built buildings. 
(3)  In the RVP District, the following are permitted: 
(a)  Recreation vehicles and travel trailer parks; 
(b)  One recreation vehicle, travel trailer or tent per park space in accordance with the density, size and setbacks stipulated in this section; 
(c)  Accessory uses, buildings and structures, customarily incidental to residential uses of a recreation vehicle park, including common laundry, toilet and bathing facilities, recreational areas and amenities and minor retailing of household commodities for use of park occupants only. See §§ 12-4-150 through 12-4-153 for detached accessory buildings. 
(d)  One park manager's residence and office, which may be housed in site-built buildings. 
(C)  Uses subject to use permit. Only specific uses are designated as uses permitted subject to a use permit in each zoning use if approved by the Tolleson City Council at a public meeting as per §§ 12-4-165 through 12-4-170, Procedures: 
(1)  In the R-2 District: 
(a)  Professional offices; and 
(b)  Research and medical laboratories wherein no sales, manufacturing or storage of products shall be permitted on the premises. 
(2)  In the R-MHP District, spaces for recreational vehicles, travel trailers and tents; the uses shall be limited to not more than 10% of the total spaces for both mobile homes and recreational vehicles in the park. 
(D)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Commercial and industrial uses, except for residential rentals and those permitted in division (C)(1) above; and 
(2)  Site-built dwellings in the R-MHP and RVP Districts, except as permitted for park manager's residence. 
(E)  Yard, height and area requirements. 
Multi-family Residential, Mobile Home Park and Recreational Vehicles Park Districts District Minimum Lot Area Minimum
Area
per D.U. Maximum Building Height Minimum**
Common
Rec.
Area/D.U. Minimum Lot Line
or Rental Space Line/Yard Setbacks Minimum Mh and RV Park
Perimeter
Yards Front Side Street Side Rear R-2**** 7,000 sf 1,000 sf*** 40 feet/3 story 300 sf 25 feet 10 feet 15 feet 15 feet - R-MHP* 10 acres 3,500 sf 15 feet 300 sf 5 feet 10 feet - 5 feet 20 feet RVP 5 acres 1,500 sf 15 feet 100 sf 5 feet 5 feet - 5 feet 20 feet * Minimum requirements for area per dwelling unit and minimum yard setbacks from rental space lines apply to spaces intended for mobile home rental occupancy; where spaces have been permitted for recreational vehicle rental within a mobile home park, use RVP minimum requirement standards for the recreational vehicle spaces. ** Minimum common recreational area shall not include perimeter park yards or setback areas or area within required rental space envelopes. *** Actual density permitted is subject to site plan approval of proposed development. **** Maximum building lot coverage including, slabs on grade, patios, gazebos, storage sheds (not over 120 square feet), driveways walkways shall be 40%. For property zoned R-2 prior to 1987, the maximum lot coverage including slabs on grade, patios, gazebos, storage sheds (not over 120 square feet), driveways, walkways shall be 45%.  
(F)  Minimum lot area. For property zoned R-2 prior to 1987, the minimum lot area required is 6,000 square feet. The minimum yard-building setback for the property are: 
(1)  Front: 22 feet; 
(2)  Side: five feet; 
(3)  Street side: ten feet; and 
(4)  Rear: 13 feet. 
(G)  Encroachment into pre-1987 R-2 minimum front yard-building setback. For existing legal non-conforming dwelling structures which encroach into the minimum front yard-building setback, any building addition which further encroaches into the front yard-building setback is only allowed if permitted by the City Council through the approval of a use permit application. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 561, N.S. , § 2, passed 12-8-2015) 
§ 12-4-22 - LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING REGULATIONS. 
    Refer to §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102 for landscape and screening requirements for all use districts. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-23 - OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS. 
    Refer to §§ 12-4-115 through 12-4-119 for off-street parking requirements for all use districts. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-24 - SIGN REGULATIONS. 
    Refer to §§ 12-4-130 through 12-4-135 for signage requirements for all use districts. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-25 - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS. 
    Refer to §§ 12-4-150 through 12-4-153 for additional regulations, exceptions and encroachments which may be applicable. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

§ 12-4-40 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  The commercial districts are intended to provide for the various types of business activities and needs of the citizens of Tolleson. The commercial districts are separated into classifications ranging from neighborhood service and retailing to city-wide general retailing and entertainment to downtown urban mixed use enterprises. 
(B)  The commercial districts are comprised of the following use districts: 
(1)  Neighborhood Commercial - 1 District (C-1): Uses intended to provide limited retailing, services, and offices, generally on small parcels serving the residential neighborhoods; 
(2)  General Commercial - 2 District (C-2): Uses of general retail, services, offices, major master planned retail shopping centers in respondence to the community's demand for goods and services; and 
(3)  Commercial Office Residential Entertainment (CORE) District: Refer to §§ 12-4-90 through 12-4-99 for CORE District requirements. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015) 
§ 12-4-41 - PERMITTED USES. 
(A)  In the C-1 District, the following uses are permitted in enclosed buildings with exterior walls and roof systems of materials approved and accepted by the International Building Code: 
(1)  Retail stores, department stores, sales rooms; 
(2)  Banks and financial institutions, excluding those that are non-chartered; 
(3)  Professional and general offices; 
(4)  Tailor, dressmaker and alteration shops; 
(5)  Small and household appliance repair stores; 
(6)  Beauty and barber shops; 
(7)  Bakery shops; 
(8)  Grocery and convenience stores, markets; 
(9)  Pharmacies and drug stores; 
(10)  Restaurants, cafés and cafeterias, excluding dancing and entertainment; 
(11)  Radio and television stations, telephone exchanges; and 
(12)  All uses permitted in the R-2 District subject to all R-2 zoning requirements if a multifamily dwelling and subject to all R1-7 zoning requirements if a single family dwelling; and 
(B)  In the C-2 District, the following additional uses including the above uses in division (A) 1-11, excepting R-2 uses, are permitted in buildings with exterior walls and roof systems of materials approved and accepted by the International Building Code: 
(1)  General retailing with incidental wholesaling and assembly; 
(2)  Printing shops; 
(3)  Trade, business, dancing and music schools, except those of a primarily industrial character such as welding schools; 
(4)  Drive-in and drive-through restaurants; 
(5)  Bars, without live entertainment; 
(6)  Miniature golf and driving ranges; 
(7)  Skating rinks and bowling alleys; 
(8)  Movie theaters; 
(9)  Swimming pools, tennis and health clubs and other similar commercial recreational facilities; 
(10)  Hotels and motels; 
(11)  Veterinarian clinics and offices, outdoor kennels prohibited; 
(12)  Second hand and antique stores not including pawnbrokers, dealers of precious items, scrap-metal dealers, and jewelry auctions; and 
(13)  Electronic data processing. 
(14)  Medical marijuana dispensary, subject to the requirements of §12-4-154. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 347, N.S., passed 5-28-1996; Am. Ord. 472, N.S., passed 5-13-2008; Am. Ord. 526, N.S., passed 7-24-2012; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 1, passed 12-8-2015; Am. Ord. 566, N.S. , passed 9-27-2016; Am. Ord. 577, N.S. , § 1, passed 11-14-2017) 
§ 12-4-42 - USES SUBJECT TO USE PERMIT. 
(A)  In the C-1 District. Only specific uses are designated as use permitted subject to a use permit. All use permits must be approved by the Tolleson City Council at a public meeting as per §§ 12-4-165 through 12-4-170, Procedures: 
(1)  Dry cleaning and laundry stores, including self-service, for clothing and small household items; 
(2)  Commercial buildings constructed of metal siding; 
(3)  Civic administration and facilities; 
(4)  Clinics, rest homes, philanthropic and charitable institutions; and 
(5)  Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Council to be similar to those permitted hereinabove and not detrimental to the purpose of the C-1 District, nor to the public safety and welfare. 
(B)  In the C-2 District. In the C-2 District, the following additional uses including the above uses in division (A) above are designated as use permitted subject to a use permit. All use permits must be approved by the Tolleson City Council at a public meeting as per §§ 12-4-165 through 12-4-170, Procedures: 
(1)  Establishments providing live entertainment, including bars, night clubs and dance halls; 
(2)  Pool and billiard halls; 
(3)  Sales of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, planes, and motorcycles; 
(4)  Mini-storage warehouses; 
(5)  Bus terminals and taxi dispatch stations; 
(6)  Outdoor retailing; 
(7)  Commercial game arcades within 300 feet of any school as defined herein; 
(8)  Automotive repair shops dedicated to performing repairs on passenger vehicles (See Ord. 347, N.S., passed 5-28-1996); 
(9)  Commercial cleaning and dyeing plants for the cleaning of carpets, rugs and other large items; 
(10)  R-2 Multi-Family Residential uses; 
(11)  Digital billboards, subject to approval pursuant to the requirements of § 12-4-132(H); 
(12)  Funeral service establishments, mausoleums and cemeteries; 
(13)  Public garages (See Ord. 357, N.S., passed 5-28-1996); 
(14)  Parking lots, private and public; 
(15)  Hospitals, clinics and sanitariums; 
(16)  Laboratories: testing and research; and 
(17)  Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Council to be similar to those permitted herein above and not detrimental to the purpose of the C-2 District, nor to the public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 347, N.S., passed 5-28-1996; Am. Ord. 477, N.S., passed 12-18-2008; Am. Ord. 526, N.S., passed 7-24-2012; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015) 
§ 12-4-43 - PROHIBITED USES. 
(A)  In the C-1 District, any use conducted outdoors. 
(B)  In the C-1 and C-2 Districts, all manufacturing, industrial and general warehousing uses. 
(C)  Billboards in C-1 and C-2, except digital billboards in the C-2 District subject to approval pursuant to the requirements of § 12-4-132(H). 
(D)  In the C-1 and C-2 Districts, any sexually oriented businesses. 
(E)  In the C-1 and C-2 Districts, any outdoor storage exceeding six (6) feet in height. 
(F)  Mobile homes, travel trailers and recreational vehicles are prohibited as dwelling units in all C-1 and C-2 Districts. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 2, passed 12-8-2015) 
§ 12-4-44 - YARD, HEIGHT, AND AREA REQUIREMENTS. 
Commercial Districts District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Area per D.U. (4) Maximum Building Height Minimum Common Area/D.U. Minimum Building Setbacks (1) Res'l Com'l Front Side Street Side Rear C-1 6,850 sf - 1,000 sf 30 feet 300 sf 20 feet (2) 0 feet (2) 20 feet (2) 0 feet (2) C-2 6,850 sf - 1,000 sf 50 feet (3) 300 sf 25 feet (2) 0 feet (2) 25 feet (2) 0 feet (2) (1) Represents minimum standards for non-residential uses; residential uses must comply with minimum standards required for the R-2 District, see Section §§ 12-4-20 et seq. (2) When commercial uses are adjacent to any residential use or district, the required building setback shall be 25 feet along the abutting lot line for proposed developments in excess of 10,500 square feet of land area. Building setbacks for proposed commercial developments, less than or equal to 10,500 square feet of land area shall be as determined by site plan approval. (3) Maximum building height within 30 feet of any residential district. The maximum height may be increased one foot for each three feet of additional setback to all setbacks to a maximum height of 60 feet. (4) Actual density permitted is subject to site plan approval of proposed development. NOTE: Maximum building lot coverage in the Commercial (C-1, C-2) Districts is 40%.  
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 451, N.S., passed 3-13-2007; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015) 
§ 12-4-45 - LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING REGULATIONS. 
    Refer to §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102 for landscaping and screening requirements for all use districts. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015) 
§ 12-4-46 - OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS. 
    Refer to §§ 12-4-115 through 12-4-119 for off-street parking requirements for all use districts. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015) 
§ 12-4-47 - SIGN REGULATIONS. 
    Refer to §§ 12-4-130 through 12-4-135 for signage requirements for all use districts. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015) 
§ 12-4-48 - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS. 
    Refer to §§ 12-4-150 through 12-4-153 for additional regulations, exceptions and encroachments which may be applicable. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 2, passed 6-9-2015) 
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

§ 12-4-60 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  The industrial districts are intended to provide for industrial businesses, including research and development, warehousing, wholesaling, manufacturing and assembling. The industrial districts are divided into two classifications to allow for light garden industrial parks and for general, heavy industrial uses. 
(B)  The industrial districts are comprised of the following use districts: 
(1)  Light Industrial Park District (I-1): promote and protect light manufacturing, warehouses, research and development industries, to cluster industries into planned industrial parks, to minimize incompatibility of industrial uses with adjacent land uses, provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for businesses and manufacturing firms free from offensive land uses in modern, landscaped buildings and surroundings; and 
(2)  General Industrial District (I-2): promote and protect large and intensive industrial manufacturing plants and their appurtenant uses, to provide attractive and well maintained planned industrial parks for the location of the activities. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-61 - PERMITTED USES. 
(A)  The I-1 Light Industrial District, is intended to provide a mixture of uses including light manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling, research and development, office and support retail services. Permitted uses shall not create any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, gas, fumes, soot, heat, glare or explosions. In the I-1 District the following uses are permitted in enclosed buildings with exterior walls and roof systems of materials approved and accepted by the International Building Code including walls made out of brick, stone, masonry, concrete or concrete block. 
(1)  Commercial uses limited to the following: 
(a)  Restaurants, cafés and cafeterias; 
(b)  Office supply stores; 
(c)  Office equipment repair shops; and 
(d)  Other retail commercial operations directly related to and in support of the primary industrial use. 
(2)  Industrial, scientific laboratories development and testing offices or business laboratories research offices; 
(3)  Medical and dental laboratories, equipment manufacturing, offices and clinics; 
(4)  General office buildings and financial services, bakeries, electronic offices; 
(5)  Computer centers construction and agricultural machinery centers; 
(6)  Manufacturing or assembly of finished products or subcomponents, excluding the basic processing of raw materials, engines, rebuilding furniture; 
(7)  Motion picture, television and video taping studios and production-related facilities; printing, publishing upholstering; 
(8)  Temporary construction offices and sheds, appurtenant signs and storage incidental to a construction project, only for the duration of construction not to exceed 12 months; 
(9)  One caretaker's residence; 
(10)  Wholesaling and warehousing, but excluding dead vehicle storage, trucking companies, and moving/storage companies; 
(11)  Outdoor storage only if screened by a six-foot high solid wall with stored items not to exceed eight feet; 
(12)  Construction offices and repair shops such as carpentry, plumbing, electrical, upholstery and appliance repair; 
(13)  Plant nurseries; 
(14)  Other uses similar to those permitted under the I-1 District as determined by the Zoning Administrator, and subject to the approval of a use permit pursuant to §§ 12-4-168 through 12-4-170; 
(15)  Medical marijuana dispensary, subject to the requirements of § 12-4-154. 
(B)  In the I-2 District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the I-1 District, except that commercial uses in division (A)(1)(a) above are prohibited; 
(2)  General warehousing and storage yards; 
(3)  Wholesaling; 
(4)  Any fabrication, assembling, bottling, manufacturing, packaging or processing uses, except as restricted hereinafter in this section; 
(5)  Heavy equipment sales, rental, repair and storage; 
(6)  Public utility equipment storage yards; 
(7)  Freight depots, express companies, dispatch and distribution centers; 
(8)  Animal kennels and hospitals; 
(9)  Other uses similar to those permitted under the I-2 District, subject to the approval of a use permit pursuant to §§ 12-4-168 through 12-4-170. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 472, N.S., passed 5-13-2008; Am. Ord. 484, N.S., passed 3-10-2009; Am. Ord. 503, N.S., passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 557, N.S. , § 3, passed 6-9-2015; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 3, passed 12-8-2015; Am. Ord. 564, N.S. , passed July 12, 2016) 
§ 12-4-62 - USES SUBJECT TO USE PERMIT. 
(A)  In the I-1 District. Only specific uses are designated as uses permitted subject to a use permit in each zoning use if approved by the Tolleson City Council at a public meeting as per §§ 12-4-165 through 12-4-170, Procedures: 
(1)  Hospitals and other resident health care facilities; 
(2)  Public utility buildings, structures and appurtenances; 
(3)  Antennas in excess of 25 feet in height; and 
(4)  Bottling of non-alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to milk, soft drinks and iced tea, coffee and other similar drinks and beverages. (See Ord. 328, N.S., passed 4-26-1994) 
(5)  Dancing and entertainment where in conjunction with a hotel facility. 
(6)  Hotels, motels. 
(7)  Digital billboard, subject to approval pursuant to the requirements of § 12-4-132(H). 
(8)  Pawnbrokers, dealers of precious items, scrap-metal dealers, jewelry auctions and related uses. 
(9)  Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Council to be similar to those permitted and not detrimental to the purpose of the I-1 District, nor to the public safety and welfare. 
(10)  Storage of gasoline and petroleum products for emergency power of generation or for refueling of commercial vehicles as an accessory use to wholesaling or warehousing facility permitted under § 12-4-61(A)(10). 
(11)  Medical marijuana cultivation location, subject to the requirements of § 12-4-154. 
(B)  In the I-2 District. 
(1)  Public utility plants and storage; 
(2)  Manufacturing or storage of chemicals, ice, gases, gasoline and petroleum products, paints and varnishes; 
(3)  Manufacturing or processing of powder, flour, grains, glue, fertilizers and feeds; 
(4)  Tanneries, meat packing and smoking plants; 
(5)  Animal slaughter houses; 
(6)  Junk yards, salvage and wrecking yards; screen of use with minimum eight foot screen masonry wall as per Ordinance 380; 
(7)  Outdoor entertainment and activity uses, including stadiums, circus, carnival, religious revival, music and dance festivals, swap meets, fairs, races and auctioneer grounds; 
(8)  Foundries and metal fabrication plants; 
(9)  Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Council to be similar to those permitted and not detrimental to the purpose of the I-2 District, nor to the public safety and welfare; 
(10)  Medical marijuana cultivation location, subject to the requirements of § 12-4-154. 
(C)  In the I-2 District with a minimum 1,000 foot separation from other similar uses, sexually orientated businesses are allowed under the provisions of Ordinance 432, N.S., Ordinance 365, N.S. and Ordinance 366, N.S. 
(D)  In the I-2 District, digital billboards, subject to approval pursuant to the requirements of § 12-4-132(H). 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 477, N.S., passed 11-18-2008; Am. Ord. 484, N.S., passed 3-10-2009; Am. Ord. 526, N.S., passed 7-24-2012; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 4, passed 12-8-2015; Am. Ord. 564, N.S. , passed July 12, 2016) 
§ 12-4-63 - PROHIBITED USES. 
(A)  All residential and commercial uses, except as specifically noted herein. 
(B)  Any use which emits offensive odors, dust, noxious gas, noise, vibration, smoke, heat or glare beyond the zoned lot boundaries on which the use is located. 
(C)  Any outdoor use or storage areas which are not screened from public streets and adjacent properties in compliance with §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102, as amended by Ordinance 380, § 1 for these regulations. 
(D)  Billboards. 
(E)  Any use which does not comply with screening, as amended by Ordinance 380, and landscaping requirements of §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102, including the screening of loading areas, parking, mechanical equipment, storage and refuse. 
(F)  Any use which the City Council finds detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-64 - YARD, HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS. 
Industrial Districts District Maximum Building Height Minimum Yard-Building Setbacks** Front Side Street Side Rear I-1 75 feet 25 0 15 0 I-2 75 feet* 25 0 15 0 * Specialized industrial manufacturing and storage structures may exceed this height limitation subject to City Council approval. ** When adjacent to any residential use or district, the required side yard and rear year setbacks shall be a minimum of 60 feet along the abutting lot line in the I-1 District and a minimum of 90 feet along the abutting lot line in the I-2 District.  
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 451, N.S., passed 3-13-2007; Am. Ord. 484, N.S., passed 3-10-2009; Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009) 
PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

§ 12-4-80 - PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT. 
    A development encouraging innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial development designed to accomplish a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable urban landscape for all citizens and residents of Tolleson. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 415 A, N.S., passed 9-28-2004) 
§ 12-4-81 - PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. 
(A)  There is herewith established a Planned Area Development District (P.A.D.) which is intended to provide an alternative zoning district to the conventional zoning and development approaches and processes in the City of Tolleson, Arizona in order that within this designated District the following goals may be achieved: 
(1)  To enhance the city's development growth in order that the public health, safety and general welfare be enhanced as Tolleson sees increased urban development; 
(2)  To encourage innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development so that greater opportunities for better housing, recreation, shopping and employment may extend to all citizens and residents of Tolleson; 
(3)  To reflect changes in the technology of land development; 
(4)  To encourage a more creative approach in the utilization of land in order to accomplish a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable development which may be characterized by special features of the geography, topography, size or shape of a particular property; and 
(5)  To provide a compatible and stable development environment, in harmony with that of the surrounding area. 
(B)  The P.A.D. may include any development having one or more principal uses or structures on a single parcel of ground or contiguous parcels. The P.A.D. shall consist of harmonious selection of uses and groupings of buildings, parking areas, circulation and open spaces, and shall be designed as an integrated unit, in a manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and convenient urban area development. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 415 A, N.S., passed 9-28-2004) 
§ 12-4-82 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS. 
(A)  Conformance with general plan. The land uses and design of the proposed P.A.D. shall be consistent with the Tolleson general plan. 
(B)  P.A.D. regulations. 
(1)  The minimum total P.A.D. shall be no less than five acres unless the applicant can show that the minimum P.A.D. requirements should be waived because the waiver would be in the public interest and that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  Unusual physical feature of the property itself or of the surrounding area are such that development under the standard provisions of this article would not be appropriate in order to conserve a physical or terrain feature of importance to the neighborhood or community; 
(b)  The property is adjacent to or across the street or alley from property which has been developed under the provisions of this section and will contribute to the amenities of the area; and 
(c)  The use of the P.A.D. concept will encourage the use of otherwise undevelopable property, particularly in the case of small undeveloped parcels surrounded or partially surrounded by developed property. 
(2)  Waiver of the five-acre minimum requirement may be recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon a finding that one or more of the above conditions enumerated herein exist. 
(C)  Uses in a P.A.D. Any use or combination of uses may be allowed in a P.A.D. provided it conforms to and is consistent with the Tolleson general plan and provided the uses are specifically identified as permitted uses upon approval of the P.A.D. If a use is not specifically identified in an approved P.A.D., such use is not permitted. 
(D)  Residential density in P.A.D.s. 
(1)  Residential development in a P.A.D. may be provide for a variety of housing types allowed in any one of the basic residential zoning districts. In addition, the number of dwelling units allowed may be flexible relative to the number of dwelling unit per acre that would be permitted by the zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the site. However, the total number of dwelling units and the resulting density allowed in a P.A.D. shall be consistent with the land use plan of the city's general plan. 
(2)  In determining the reasonableness of the densities in a P.A.D., the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider increased efficiency in the provision of public facilities and services based in part, upon: 
(a)  The location, amount and proposed use of common open space; 
(b)  The location, design and type of dwelling units; 
(c)  The physical characteristics of the site; and 
(d)  Particular distinctiveness and excellence in siting, design and landscaping. 
(E)  Building height and setback regulations. 
(1)  Building setbacks from all property lines which form the perimeter of the P.A.D. shall be no less than 20 feet, unless otherwise approved by City Council in the P.A.D. approval. 
(2)  Building heights, setbacks and separations shall be reviewed and approved based upon compatibility with adjacent land uses. Minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks for interior property lines shall be 25-foot front, four- and eight-foot side and 20-foot rear for single-family and multi-family residential uses, 20-foot front, 15-foot sides and 30-foot rear for commercial and industrial uses. A P.A.D. may provide alternate setbacks if approved by the City Council in P.A.D., and if the alternative setbacks are found to further specific purposes of the P.A.D. District and if it is found that such alternative setbacks will not be detrimental to surrounding properties. 
(F)  More than one building per lot. More than one building may be placed on one platted or recorded lot in any P.A.D. Areas for single-family detached dwellings or other housing types providing privately-owned lots must comply with the city's subdivision regulations in all respects. 
(G)  One housing type not inconsistent with intent. A P.A.D. which only involves one housing type such as all detached or all attached units shall not be considered inconsistent with the stated purposes and objectives of this section and shall not be the sole basis for denial or approval. 
(H)  Architectural style, appearance. Architectural style of buildings shall not solely be a basis for denial or approval of a plan. However, the overall appearance and compatibility of individual buildings to site elements or to surrounding development will be primary a consideration during P.A.D. review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council. 
(I)  Phasing of development. 
(1)  Any P.A.D. plan proposed to be constructed in phases shall include full details relating thereto and the City Council may approve or modify, where necessary, any proposals. 
(2)  The phasing shall include the time for beginning and completion of each phase. The timing may be modified by the City on the showing of good cause by the developer. 
(3)  The land owner or developer shall make such easements, covenants, and other arrangements and shall furnish such financial or other guarantees as may be determined by the city to be reasonably required to assure performance in accordance with the plan and to protect the public. 
(J)  Street utilities, services and public facilities. The uniqueness of each proposal for a P.A.D. may allow specifications and standards for streets, utilities and services to be subject to minor modifications of the specifications and standards established in this and other city ordinances. The plans and profiles of all streets, utilities and services shall be reviewed by the City Engineer prior to final approval of the P.A.D. 
(K)  Open space provision. 
(1)  (a) There shall be a minimum amount of land area dedicated or reserved as useable open space in each planned area development as set forth in the following table. 
Land Use Minimum Amount of Useable Open Space Required Residential-single family 
 Lots less than 10,000 sf 11% Residential-single family 
 Lots 10,000 to 18,000 sf 9% Residential-single family 
 Lots in excess of 18,000 sf 7% Residential-multi-family 7% Non-residential uses 0%  
(b)  If a planned area development includes a mixture of land uses, the percentage of useable open space required shall be the average based on the percentage of each land use as to the total acreage. 
(2)  Useable open space shall clearly designated on the preliminary and final development plans as to the use and improvements and may include the following: 
(a)  Dedicated park sites; 
(b)  A dedicated separate right-of-way for bike paths, equestrian and hiking trails; 
(c)  Private park and recreation areas; 
(d)  Floodway areas; and 
(e)  Retention basins required to comply with the 100-year, two-hour storm standards, that meet the landscape requirements of §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102 shall be counted as useable open space when improved with multi-use trials, picnic areas, game courts, play equipment or other passive and active recreation improvements. 
(3)  Useable open space shall not include any of the following: 
(a)  Dedicated streets, alleys and other public rights-of-ways; 
(b)  Vehicular drives, parking, loading and storage areas; 
(c)  Required setback areas at the perimeter boundaries of the planned area development, except open space shall include perimeter landscaping for a motor vehicle dealership; 
(d)  Golf courses; 
(e)  Reservation of park and school sites for which the city or school district shall be required to purchase; 
(f)  Areas reserved exclusively for the uses or benefit of an individual owner or tenant; and 
(g)  Concrete or rock lined areas designed primarily as a drainage channel. 
(4)  Adequate guarantees must be provided by the applicant to insure permanent retention of the useable open space resulting from the application of these regulations, either by private reservation for the use of the resident within the development or by dedication to public or a combination thereof. 
(5)  The City Council may require the formation of a homeowner association or a maintenance improvement district. The city will not be responsible for the maintenance of part or all of the useable open space unless the useable open space is dedicated and accepted for public use by the City Council. 
(6)  In considering a proposed P.A.D. project, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may specify a modification or waiver of any or part of the exclusions set forth in division (K)(3) above, upon showing that the modification or waiver will not modify the intent of the division. 
(L)  Operating and maintenance requirements for planned area development. In the event that certain land areas or structures are provided within the P.A.D. for private recreational use or as service facilities, the owner of the land and buildings shall establish an arrangement to assure a continued standard of maintenance consistent with the conditions of P.A.D. approval. 
(M)  Landscaping. Fencing and/or landscaping in accordance with the provisions of §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102 shall be provided according to a plan approved by the city. 
(N)  Parking. Parking provided in a P.A.D. shall meet the requirements of §§ 12-4-115 through 12-4-119, unless any deviations therefore further the goals of the P.A.D. District and are approved by the City Council on approval of the P.A.D. 
(O)  Utilities. All electric utility lines less than 69kv shall be installed underground. 
(P)  Additional standards. Development within a P.A.D. shall conform to all conditions and standards agreed upon by applicant and the city at time of P.A.D. approval. 
(Q)  Placement of certain facilities. Each P.A.D. standards and guidelines submittal consistent with the definitions and standards in this code shall address the placement of community residential setting facilities, group homes and group care facilities in a manner consistent with state law and the Federal Fair Housing Act amendments of 1988. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 415 A, N.S., passed 9-28-2004; Am. Ord. 536, N.S. , passed 12-10-2013) 
§ 12-4-83 - APPLICATION. 
(A)  The applicant is encouraged to meet with appropriate city staff prior to making application for P.A.D. approval to discuss the development concept, the review and approval process and the submittal requirements. 
(B)  The applicant shall obtain the necessary application forms from the Planning and Zoning Director. Application forms properly completed and accompanied by the required fee shall be submitted to the City Manager. Concept plan exhibits shall accompany the application. The concept plans shall be submitted at least 15 days prior to meeting with city staff. 
(C)  The concept plan shall indicate proposed land uses, general circulation patterns, and property boundaries, existing land uses on adjacent properties, special site conditions or problems. A computation table showing proposed land use allocations in acres and percent of total site area shall be included on the concept plan. Following review of the concept plan, city staff will provide overall comments and guidance for preparation of the preliminary development plan. 
(D)  Preliminary development plan: 
(1)  Submittal requirements. Based on comments received regarding the concept plan, the applicant shall prepare a preliminary development plan. A preliminary development plan shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, at which it will first be heard. The following information shall be submitted to the City Manager (unless waived by the City Manager): 
(a)  Legal description of property and indication of gross area; 
(b)  Nature of the applicant's interest in the land to be developed; 
(c)  All persons owning or having interest therein, including easements, tenants, licenses, lien holders or other interest; and 
(d)  A generalized location map showing surrounding land use, zoning and traffic circulation patterns. 
(2)  Site condition. An analysis of the existing site conditions which indicates at a minimum: 
(a)  Topographic contours with intervals of no more than two feet, to a distance of 100 feet beyond property boundary; 
(b)  Location and extent of major vegetative cover (if any); 
(c)  Location and extent of perennial or intermittent streams and water ponding areas; 
(d)  Existing drainage and irrigation patterns; and 
(e)  Other information considered relevant by the applicant or city staff. 
(3)  Proposed allocations of land use expressed as a percentage of total area, as well as in acres. Uses indicated include: 
(a)  Arterial streets; 
(b)  Open space (public); 
(c)  Open space (private); 
(d)  Residential (if appropriate); 
(e)  A stratification of residential uses in terms of single family detached units, patio homes, townhouses, garden apartments and the like; 
(f)  Commercial (if appropriate); and 
(g)  Industrial (if appropriate). 
(4)  Land use plan. A land use plan at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, indicating land uses, acres and development densities of each land use and the most nearly equivalent zoning categories; all arterial and collector street circulation elements, pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation elements, exact perimeter locations of any/all arterial streets and major collector streets, open spaces and recreational areas. 
(5)  Waterlines and the like. Plans indicating the approximate alignment and sizing of waterlines, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers (if any), as well as easements for all utilities, if necessary. Also indicated should be proposed surface drainage patterns. 
(6)  Architectural renderings. Conceptual architectural renderings indicating the elevations and exterior wall finishes of proposed building types. 
(7)  Landscaping plans. Conceptional landscaping plans in accordance with the provisions of §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102. 
(8)  Traffic analysis report. A traffic analysis report, if deemed necessary by the city. 
(9)  Phasing plan. Phasing plan, if development is to take more than two years. 
(E)  Final development plan. Final P.A.D. development plan approval and the issuance of a building permit for any portion of a P.A.D. shall occur only when: 
(1)  A reproducible copy of the approved preliminary development plan with appropriate signatures has been submitted by the developer; 
(2)  The design and construction plans for all utilities, grading and street improvements have been approved by the City Engineer; 
(3)  A site plan, subject to the requirements of § 12-4-169 for the specific portion of the P.A.D. in question has been submitted and has been approved, as in conformance with the preliminary development plan. (Upon approval of the site plan, a reproducible copy shall be submitted.) 
(4)  Appeal from a decision on the final development plan may be filed in accordance with procedures set forth in § 12-4-169 Site Plan Review and Building Permits. 
(5)  Architectural elevations of the buildings, with materials lists, are submitted and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to the Design Review Ordinance. 
(6)  A landscaping plan prepared in accordance to §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102 and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(7)  A performance bond, cash escrow agreement or other acceptable instrument has been deposited with the city in an amount as set by the City Council based upon the Engineer's recommendation. The performance guarantee shall be in a form acceptable to the City Manager and City Attorney. This financial guarantee shall be used to ensure the full completion, as specified of: 
(a)  Public and private streets and utilities; 
(b)  Landscaping; 
(c)  Privately-owned and maintained recreational facilities; and 
(d)  Other items as agreed upon between the city and developer. 
(8)  Any land dedication agreements made as part of the preliminary development plan approval are fulfilled. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 415 A, N.S., passed 9-28-2004) 
§ 12-4-84 - AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. 
(A)  General. Amendments to an approved P.A.D. Final development plan may be requested by the applicant or its successor. 
(B)  Applicability. Amendments to the approved final development plan may be limited to one or more "development units" and any proposed change will not affect development units not included in the proposed amendment. 
(C)  Major or minor amendments. Amendments to the approved final development plan shall be delineated as a major or minor amendments. Upon receipt of an amendment application to the Planning Division, the City Manager shall determine if the proposed amendment constitutes a major or minor amendment. Major amendments shall be subject to the same process as an original P.A.D. application, including any filing and administrative fees charged by the city for original P.A.D. applications. 
(D)  Major amendments. If the City Manager determines the amendment to be a major amendment, the amendment request shall be processed in the manner set forth in division (B) above. An amendment shall be deemed major if it involves any one of the following: 
(1)  A change in the overall P.A.D. district boundary; 
(2)  An increase in the total number of approved dwelling units or gross leasable area (GLA) for the overall P.A.D. District; 
(3)  A significant change to the approximate boundary of one or more development units from that approved in the P.A.D. District, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. A change to an individual development unit generally shall be deemed to be significant if it represents a 10% increase to the approximate gross area of the development unit as approved for the P.A.D.; 
(4)  An increase of 10% or more of the approved number of projected dwelling units or gross leasable area (GLA) for an individual development unit; 
(5)  Any change in land use or density that is likely to negatively impact or burden public facilities and utilities infrastructure as determined by the City Engineer; 
(6)  Any change in land use or density that is likely to negatively impact or burden circulation adjacent to the P.A.D. or to the overall major street system as determined by the City Engineer; and 
(7)  Any other proposed change to the final development plan that substantively alters one or more components of the P.A.D. as determined by the City Manager. 
(E)  Minor amendments. Amendments not meeting one or more of the criteria listed above in division (D) above shall be considered minor. If the City Manager determines the amendment to be minor, the City Manager may administratively act on the amendment and attach stipulations or conditions of approval of approval thereto, to protect the public, health, safety and welfare. 
(1)  Notice. 
(a)  Map. If the amendment proposes a change to the map for the final development plan, notice of the proposed minor amendment shall be mailed to each owner of the property as last disclosed by the County Assessor records, situated wholly or partly within 300 feet of the affected development unit(s) to which the amendment relates. For purposes of giving mailed notice, the City Manager shall require the applicant to finish the names and addresses and stamped/addressed envelopes of all affected property owners as determined above. 
(b)  Other. If the amendment proposes any other change to the final development plan, including but not limited to, text changes or changes to the development standards, notice of the minor amendment shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(2)  Protest. 
(a)  Protest received. If written protest to any minor amendment is received from any notified property owner within ten days of the notification mailing date in the case of mailed notice, or within ten days of the final date of advertising in the case of published notification, and such protest cannot be resolved, then the Minor Amendment shall be reclassified as a Major Amendment. No additional application shall be required; however, all provisions governing Major Amendments shall then apply. 
(b)  Protest not received. If written protest is not received as described above, the City Manager shall render a decision on the minor amendment request. The Planning Division decision shall be final unless appealed under division (F), "Appeals," set forth below. The City Manager or assigned designee shall send copies of the decision to the applicant, interested parties of record, and members of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(F)  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeal of Planning Division decision to Planning and Zoning Commission. An action or decision by the Planning Division on minor amendments may be appealed by the applicant within seven days from the date of the Manager's decision. 
(a)  Appeals shall be in writing on a form provided by the Planning Division and shall include only the specific items being appealed. 
(b)  The Planning Division will submit a report and any background material regarding the appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its next scheduled meeting. Any person associated with the action being appealed shall be informed by the Planning Division of the date, time and location of the appeal hearing. 
(c)  The Planning and Zoning Commission's decision on the appeal will be sent out, in writing, to the applicant. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission will be final, unless the applicant initiates an appeal to the City Council. 
(2)  Appeal of the Planning and Zoning Commission decision to Council. An action or decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission on minor amendments may be appealed by the applicant within seven calendar days after the date of the Commission decision. 
(a)  Appeals shall be in writing on a form provided by the Planning Division and shall include the specific items being appealed and the nature upon which the decision was in error. 
(b)  The Planning Division shall transmit to the City Council a transcript, with exhibits, of the Planning and Zoning Commission's hearing. The City Council shall review the transcript and exhibits and may, at its discretion, hear further oral or written comments. 
(c)  The City Council may affirm the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission; or remand the matter for further proceedings before the Planning and Zoning Commission; or reverse or modify the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 415 A, N.S., passed 9-28-2004) 
DOWNTOWN TOLLESON COMMERCIAL OFFICE RESIDENTIAL ENTERTAINMENT (CORE) DISTRICT 

§ 12-4-90 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
    The Downtown Tolleson Commercial, Office, Residential, and Entertainment (CORE) Zoning District was created to implement the city's vision for a pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use environment that encourages a range of compatible uses in downtown Tolleson. The purpose of the CORE District is to facilitate revitalization of downtown Tolleson by increasing the number and variety of retail, office and entertainment establishments, increasing the number of housing units and residents within the downtown area, stimulating development on vacant infill and under-utilized properties, and improving public infrastructure, facilities, and services to support new development. 
    The CORE District is intended to complete the city's vision by prescribing building forms, site design and development standards that permit increased development intensity and density through greater allowed floor area and an increased number of residential units per parcel than other zoning districts. These components will encourage an increase in the mix of uses and level of activity in the area while providing for development that maintains a sense of human scale and pedestrian-oriented character, consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan. 
    The CORE District is intended to: 
  Promote an active and lively mixed-use district through the permissive allowance of compatible uses and creative, forward-thinking design and development standards; 
  Promote a healthy community by encouraging development and redevelopment of pedestrian-focused businesses; 
  Reduce the dominance of the automobile by encouraging the use of shared parking areas, such as on-street parking, public surface lots, and public parking structures, and by providing a pedestrian and bicycle-friendly environment and encouraging use of mass transit; 
  Create a destination for unique retail, restaurant, entertainment and service uses that increase revenues and strengthen the city's tax base, drawing local, regional and national visitors; 
  Increase the number of residents in downtown Tolleson; 
  Provide adequate public open spaces; and 
  Preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the city. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013) 
§ 12-4-91 - APPLICABILITY. 
    The Downtown Tolleson CORE District covers the area generally known as downtown Tolleson. 
    The location and boundaries of the CORE District are established as shown on the map entitled "Downtown CORE Zoning District" as amended, a copy of which is on file in the offices of the City Clerk and the City Engineer. 
(A)  Transition provisions. 
(1)  Except with respect to properties for which a waiver has been granted in accordance with subsection (2) of this section, (i) the CORE District shall be the zoning designation for all property within the CORE District and (ii) all development of property in the CORE District must proceed in compliance with CORE District regulations. Prior zoning on properties within the CORE District shall have effect only if, and to the extent that, a waiver is granted in accordance with subsection (2). 
(2)  Exemption from CORE District regulations. 
(a)  During the transition period, the owner of a parcel within the CORE District may file an application to request the CORE District regulations be waived for the parcel in question. The waiver request shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on a form prescribed by the city. As part of the application, the owner shall acknowledge that, if a waiver is granted, development of the property is allowed "as of right" but further development shall not include any requests for discretionary land use approval. 
(b)  If the Zoning Administrator grants a waiver pursuant to this subsection, any further development on the parcel must proceed in accordance with the zoning designation that applied to the parcel immediately prior to the effective date of the CORE District. 
(3)  Property 207 Waiver. 
(a)  Waiver by the owner of potential claim under A.R.S. § 12-1134. During the transition period, the owner must, as a condition precedent to any request for a discretionary land use approval, execute a waiver on a form prescribed by the city. The property owner will waive all potential claims under A.R.S. § 12-1134(I) for diminution in value arising from application of the CORE District regulations. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the city's rights and options under Arizona law. 
(B)  Conflicting provisions. 
(1)  Within the area designated on the zoning district map as the CORE District, the regulations of this section shall apply in addition to any other applicable section of this title. To the extent that a specific standard or requirement set forth in this section establishes a standard or requirement which conflicts with a standard or requirement set forth in any other section of the Tolleson Zoning Ordinance, the specific requirement of this section shall control, to the extent permitted by state statute or federal law. 
(C)  New development. 
(1)  Except as provided in § 12-4-91(E) below, upon the effective date of the CORE District or any subsequent amendment, any new building or other structure or any use of land must be constructed or developed in accordance with all applicable provisions of the CORE District. 
(2)  No excavation or filling of land or construction of any public or private improvements may take place or commence except in conformity with the CORE District. 
(D)  Existing development. 
(1)  Except as provided in § 12-4-91(E) below, any existing use, lot, building or other structure legally established prior to the effective date of the CORE District that does not comply with any provision of the CORE District is subject to the provisions of § 12-4-151, Non-Conforming Uses and Buildings. 
(2)  Except as provided in § 12-4-91(E) below, any existing use, lot, building or other structure not legally established prior to the effective date of the CORE District shall be deemed illegal and subject to the enforcement of the code. 
(3)  Every individual parcel of land existing within the CORE District on the effective date of the adoption of the district shall be deemed to be its own, one lot and shall be subject to all property development standards of the CORE District. 
(4)  No lot or parcel of land existing on the effective date of the adoption of the CORE District may be reduced in any manner below the minimum standards for lot area established for the CORE District. 
(5)  No lot area may be reduced or diminished so that the yard areas or other open spaces will be less than that prescribed by this CORE District. 
(6)  The occupancy of a lot or parcel of land may not be increased in any manner except in conformance with the regulations prescribed by this CORE District. 
(E)  Previously issued permits, pending applications. 
(1)  Any building permit issued before the effective date of the CORE District or subsequent amendment remains in effect. 
(2)  The provisions of the CORE District do not apply to zoning and subdivision applications that are complete and pending at the effective date of this code. 
(3)  Pending applications will be processed in accordance with and decided pursuant to the law existing on the date the application was filed. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 5, passed 12-8-2015) 
§ 12-4-92 - DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  Accessory building means a building, part of building or structure which is subordinate to the use of the main building, structure or use on the same lot. 
(B)  Accessory use means a use that is incidental, to the main use of the lot or building. 
(C)  Alley means a public access way at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to a public street or abutting property. 
(D)  Awning refers to either a fabric covered appendage or a temporary collapsible shelter of noncombustible materials supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building. 
(E)  Building shall mean a structure built for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, property or substances of any kind, excluding fences. Each portion of a building separated by dividing wall or walls without openings may be deemed a separate building for the purpose of issuing building permits. 
(F)  Building height shall mean the vertical distance measured from the average top of curb grade of the street or streets adjacent to the property to the highest point on the roof surface. 
(G)  Community garden is a private or public facility for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants by more than one person. 
(H)  Encroachment shall mean any building-mounted and freestanding mechanical equipment, or architectural feature, structure or structural element, such as a gallery, fence, dooryard, garden wall, porch, stoop, balcony, awning, bay window, terrace or deck, that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit extending into any setback, public frontage, or above a height limit. 
(I)  FAR (floor area ratio) is the ratio of the total floor area of buildings of a certain location to the size of the land at that location (i.e., total building floor area square footage/net lot area square footage). 
(J)  Farmer's market shall mean a market held in an open area or in a structure where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, locally produced arts and crafts items (but not to include second-hand goods). 
(K)  Floor area shall mean the area of a building floor, measured from the exterior walls or from the center lines of common walls separating two buildings outside walls of a building (or portion thereof) including habitable tenant houses and attic space, and basements, but not including equipment spaces, mechanical rooms, vent shafts, courts or similar uninhabitable areas below ground level or in attics. 
(L)  Grade (ground level) means the average of the finished grade surface elevation measured at the highest and lowest exterior corners of a structure. 
(M)  Lot coverage means the percentage of the total lot area available for bulk or buildings covered by the floor area of the first floor of the building(s). 
(N)  Non-chartered financial institution shall mean a business other than a state or federally chartered bank, credit union, mortgage lender or savings and loan association that offers check cashing services and loans for payment of a percentage fee. Specifically included are check-cashing businesses that charge a percentage fee for cashing a check or negotiable instrument, "payday loan" businesses that make loans upon assignments of wages to be received, businesses that provide loans secured by title of a vehicle unless the loan is made for the purpose of purchasing the vehicle, and businesses that function as deferred presentment business. A deferred presentment business is a business that makes transactions pursuant to a written agreement in which the licensee accepts a check and agrees to hold the check for at least three days before presentment for a payment or deposit. 
(O)  Outdoor storage shall mean merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or in shipping containers, overnight outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting repair, RVs and boats, garden supplies, building supplies, plants, fleet vehicles and other similar merchandise, material, vehicles, or equipment. 
(P)  Public floor area shall mean for the purpose of determining parking requirements, all areas of a building that are used by the public excluding public rest rooms. 
(Q)  Shared parking. Any parking spaces assigned to more than one use, where persons utilizing the spaces are unlikely to need the spaces at the same time of day. 
(R)  Sign. Sign shall mean: 
(1)  Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge or insignia of any local, state or United States governmental agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar organization. 
(2)  The term "sign" shall mean and include any display of any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, picture, outline, character, spectacle, delineation, announcement or anything in part or in combination by any means whereby the same are made visible to the eye and for the purpose of attracting attention outdoors to make anything known, whether such display be made on, attached to or as a part of a structure erected for the purpose, or on, attached to or as a part of any other structure, surface or thing, including but not limited to, the ground or any rock, tree or other natural object, which display is visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel of property on or over which the same is made. 
(S)  Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location from the ground above grade, but does not include poles, lines, cables, or other transmission or other distribution facilities of public utilities. 
(T)  Transition period means the three-year period following the effective date of the CORE District regulations. 
(U)  Vending kiosk means a free-standing structure in a public space which is no more than ten feet to the eaves; no greater than 150 square feet in area; and constructed predominantly of materials such as glass, wood, plastic, metal or fabric. Any area occupied by a kiosk shall not be used in the calculation of floor area ratio. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013) 
§ 12-4-93 - LAND USE. 
(A)  Matrix. The land use matrix identifies the uses allowed by right, uses permitted with conditions, the uses requiring a use permit and uses that are not allowed. Determination over specific uses that are not referenced in the matrix below shall be made by the Zoning Administrator based on fulfillment of meeting the District's intent and professional judgment. An interpretation of the Zoning Administrator's decision may be filed in accordance with § 12-4-3 of this ordinance. 
P = Permitted 
C = Permitted with Conditions 
U = Use Permit 
A = Permitted as an Accessory Use 
X = Prohibited Use 
Land Use CORE Relevant Sections Adult uses X Antique and collectible shops P Art galleries P Art schools (art, craft and photography studios, including retail sales) P Artist studios P Auto dealer X Auto repair X Automobile rental agencies X Automobile service station X Bakeries/panaderia C 12-4-93(C)(1) Banks and financial institutions, excluding drive-through facilities P Banquet hall X Barber or beauty shops P Bar, lounge or tavern C 12-4-93(C)(2) Bed and breakfast inns C 12-4-93(C)(3) Cigar bars and hookah lounges P Clubs and lodges X Coffee shops P Community gardens C 12-4-93(C)(4) Consignment shops X Convalescent, nursing or rest home X Convention and conference facilities, privately owned and operated U 12-4-93(B)(1) Dance hall X Day care center/facility X Dealer of precious metals X Dry cleaning, excluding drive-thru C 12-4-93(C)(1) Dwelling units on upper stories of buildings P Equipment and truck rental X Exercise or health facilities X Farmers markets, indoor or outdoor P Flea market/swap meet X Florist P Funeral homes X Game/video arcades (and game rooms) X Gas or fueling stations, with or without convenience stores X General retail P Grocery store/carniceria (neighborhood) C 12-4-93(C)(5) Group home X Hotels and motels P Juice bars P Laundromats X Liquor stores X Mailbox services, retail C 12-4-93(C)(1) Manufacturing X Massage or day spas C 12-4-93(C)(1) Medical, dental and optometrist clinics and labs, excluding, counseling services, public and/or nonprofit social and behavioral health facilities, plasma centers and medical marijuana uses. C 12-4-93(C)(1) Medical marijuana X Multifamily dwellings P Museums, libraries and cultural centers P Music and dance studios P Nail salons C 12-4-93(C)(1) Non-chartered financial institutions X Offices, professional P Outdoor/patio dining C 12-4-93(C)(6) Outdoor sales and display C 12-4-93(C)(7) Outdoor storage X Party equipment and rentals X Pawnshop, junk and secondhand dealers X Pet grooming X Pharmacy/yerberia (hierberia) C 12-4-93(C)(1) Photocopy shops X Public parking facilities, including parking structures, surface lots and park-and-rides U 12-4-93(B)(2) Public/charter schools P Public uses, including utility buildings, structures, uses, facilities, equipment and emergency communication towers P Reception centers X Religious institutions and worship facilities P Residential living quarters, occupied by owner or employee of a permitted business P Restaurants, without drive-through P Seasonal holiday sales C 12-4-93(C)(8) Service stations X Shoe repair shops X Sidewalk cafes C 12-4-93(C)(9) Sidewalk vendors X Single family attached dwelling X Single family detached dwelling X Smoke and tobacco shop X Social/private club X Social services, homeless shelters and/or food pantries X Specialty retail shops, excluding liquor sales P Street vendors X Tailors, clothing alteration, or custom dressmaking C 12-4-93(C)(1) Take-out and fast food restaurants X Theaters (movie and performing arts theaters, indoor) P Ticket, travel, and recreational activity agencies C 12-4-93(C)(1) Uses customary and incidental to principal permitted use A Vending kiosk C 12-4-93(C)(11)  
(B)  Uses subject to use permit. The following uses may be permitted subject the approval of a use permit pursuant to §§ 12-4-168 through 12-4-170. 
(1)  Convention and conference facilities, privately owned and operated: 
(a)  Facilities, exhibit booths and/or non-permanent staging shall comply with all applicable ADA guidelines with regard to both seeing and mobility impaired persons; and 
(b)  Such facilities shall be required to file a use permit and site plan, in accordance with §§ 12-4-168 and 12-4-169, respectively, of this Zoning Code. 
(2)  Public parking facilities may be permitted provided that: 
(a)  Such facilities shall be required to file a use permit and site plan, in accordance with §§ 12-4-168 and 12-4-169, respectively, of this Zoning Code. 
(C)  Uses permitted with conditions. The following land uses are listed in the CORE land use matrix as permitted with conditions. These uses are permitted by right only if the conditions listed below for the individual uses are met. Based on site plan and/or tenant improvement plan review, additional conditions of approval deemed necessary to protect the health, safety, and public welfare may be added. 
(1)  Bakeries/panaderia; dry cleaning; mailbox service; massage and day spas; medical, dental and optometrist clinics or health offices and labs; nail salons; pharmacy/hieberia; tailor, clothing alteration or custom dressmaking; ticket, travel and recreational activity agencies provided that: 
(a)  The business shall not be open to customers between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  The floor area devoted to the business shall not exceed 3,000 square feet. 
(c)  The business shall not receive more than three commercial deliveries in a 24-hour period. 
(d)  Outdoor storage or display shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Bar, lounge or tavern. A bar, lounge or tavern is permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Music or entertainment is limited to recorded music or one entertainer. Other live entertainment shall be permitted only upon securing a use permit in accordance with § 12-4-168 respectively, of this Zoning Code. 
(b)  Patron dancing within the hours of state-regulated liquor sales shall be permitted as a right within a building or suite in which the bar, lounge or tavern is located. Patron dancing beyond those hours shall be permitted only upon securing a use permit in accordance with § 12-4-168 respectively, of this Zoning Code. 
(c)  Outdoor recreation uses, outdoor alcoholic beverage consumption and associated lighting shall be permitted of right as accessory uses if the closing time of the outdoor uses does not extend past the closing time of the bar. If the closing time standard cannot be satisfied, the outdoor uses shall be permitted only upon securing a use permit in accordance with § 12-4-168 respectively, of this Zoning Code. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast inns are allowed provided that: 
(a)  The bed and breakfast inn shall be owner-occupied. The guest rooms shall be part of the primary residence. 
(b)  The bed and breakfast inn shall not have more than three commercial deliveries or outside service in a 24-hour period. 
(c)  Meals shall only be served to overnight guests and residents. 
(d)  The bed and breakfast inn shall not be used for the hosting of receptions, private parties or similar events. 
(e)  A fire escape plan shall be developed and graphically displayed in each guest room. Such plan shall be filed with and approved by the City of Tolleson Fire Department. 
(4)  Community gardens. 
(a)  It is recommended that community gardens grow fruits and vegetables that are organically produced, using no synthetic fertilizers or pesticides. These methods pose the least risk to personal and environmental health. The use of pesticides is governed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Arizona Department of Agriculture. 
(b)  All fences for community gardens are optional, but shall following the guidelines below: 
i.  Fences within the front yard setback are limited to 40 inches in height. 
ii.  Fences behind the required front yard setback line are limited to six feet unless a use permit is granted. 
(c)  Fence materials: 
i.  For safety reasons, it is recommended that the portion of fence visible from a street be constructed of a material that provides visibility of the garden from the street. 
ii.  Chain link fence is not permitted. 
(d)  Security lighting: 
i.  All lighting must be shielded so that all lighting is focused down on the subject site and shielded so that it is not directly visible from adjacent properties. No illumination in excess of one-foot candle is permitted across the boundary of any residential property, public street or alley. 
ii.  Low-profile solar lighting that does not connect to an electrical circuit/junction box is permitted without a building/electrical permit. 
(e)  Structures: Accessory structures are prohibited. 
(f)  Temporary portable toilets are prohibited. 
(g)  Raising of animals is prohibited. 
(h)  On-site storage is prohibited. 
(i)  Storage of hazardous materials is prohibited. 
(j)  Composting on site is prohibited. 
(k)  Maintenance of site. Property shall be maintained free of high grass, weeds, or other debris. Trash and debris should be removed at least once a week or anytime necessary to keep the property looking well maintained and in compliance with applicable codes and regulations. 
(l)  Drainage. The site must be designed and maintained to prevent water from irrigation, storm water and/or other activities and/or fertilizer from draining onto adjacent property or right-of-way, such as berming around the edges of the property. The site will be designed and maintained to prevent the ponding of water that could contribute to the breeding of mosquitoes. 
(m)  Sale of products on-site. 
i.  Sale of produce grown on-site is allowed within ten days of harvesting on the garden site as long as it will not hamper traffic flow or negatively impact the neighbors. 
ii.  Sale of value-added products (i.e. salsa made from vegetables) not permitted. 
iii.  Sale days and hours of operation will be specified and limited as part of the application review and approval process. 
iv.  Additional parking may be required as part of the application review and approval process. 
v.  Sales of produce from gardens owned by the same nonprofit entity are permissible. 
(n)  Parking: No off-street parking required. 
(5)  Grocery store/carniceria (neighborhood). 
(a)  Minimum gross floor area of at least 6,000 square feet and a maximum of 30,000 square feet. 
(b)  The store's selling area must be used for a general line of food and other grocery products, such as bakery, dairy, canned and frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, fresh and prepared meats, fish and poultry, and non-food products, all intended for home preparation, consumption and use. 
(c)  At least 50 percent of that selling area must be used for the sale of a general line of food products. 
(d)  At least 30 percent of such selling area must be set aside for the sale of perishable goods, such as fresh produce, bakery, dairy and frozen foods (which may include fresh meats, poultry and fish), of which at least 500 square feet must be used for the sale of fresh meat, fruits and vegetables. 
(e)  Security gates on the store front are required to be at least 75 percent transparent. 
(6)  Outdoor dining is allowed as an accessory to a restaurant provided that: 
(a)  The outdoor dining area shall only be allowed if located on the same property as the restaurant; or if located adjacent to and connected to the same property as a restaurant within Van Buren Street public right-of-way as an encroachment. 
(b)  The outdoor dining area shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or 25 percent of the restaurant gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Music or entertainment is limited to recorded music or one entertainer. Other live entertainment shall be permitted only upon securing a use permit and site plan approval in accordance with §§ 12-4-168 and 12-4-169, respectively, of this Zoning Code. 
(d)  Patron dancing shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Outdoor dining areas should be placed away from off-site uses that are sensitive to noise and night-time activity. Restaurant seating in the pedestrian portion of the public right-of-way is encouraged and may be conditionally permitted. Where space allows, outdoor dining areas should be used to help synergize plazas, courtyards, and street frontages. 
(7)  Outdoor sales and display shall mean the outdoor display of products actively available for sale, such as, but not limited to the placement of propane gas storage racks, ice storage bins, and soft drink or similar vending machines. 
(a)  Visible outdoor storage of merchandise or business inventory in boxes, crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers, inoperable and/or unlicensed vehicles, automobile parts, loose rubbish, garbage, junk, or building materials on the lot is prohibited (see outdoor storage definition in § 12-4-92). 
(b)  Outdoor sales and displays shall feature products sold and displayed in the primary business conducted in the adjacent permanent building and shall be subordinate to the indoor sales occurring in the adjacent permanent building. 
(c)  Displays shall not impede pedestrian access ways, handicapped access ways, fire lanes, parking spaces, driveways, entryways, street intersections or landscape areas, and shall not interfere with traffic visibility. 
(d)  Outdoor display is permitted adjacent to the primary façade with the principal customer entrance, but cannot extend more than eight feet from the façade and occupy no more than 30 percent of the horizontal length of the façade. 
(e)  Outdoor display must be removed and placed inside a fully-enclosed building at the end of each business day, except ice storage bins, soft drink or similar vending machines may remain outside overnight. 
(8)  Seasonal holiday sales events are permitted subject to the following: 
(a)  Except as to a fireworks stand, which shall be specifically excluded from the provisions of this section, the operation, maintenance and location of which having been fully addressed in the Tolleson City Code, the following events shall qualify as a seasonal outdoor sales event: 
i.  Christmas tree sales; 
ii.  Garden sales; 
iii.  Produce stands; 
iv.  Pumpkin sales; and 
v.  Ice cream/frozen treat stands. 
(b)  Seasonal outdoor sales events shall not occur within required parking spaces. Events held within a parking lot area may only occur on those properties having an excess of parking spaces, and the sales area may only utilize the excess parking area. 
(c)  No temporary seasonal sales shall occupy any part of a public right-of-way. 
(d)  Any signs utilized for the seasonal outdoor sales event shall comply with § 12-4-98 and the following restrictions: 
i.  If a temporary building is utilized up to two wall signs are permitted on the building. 
ii.  Only one temporary event sign is permitted for the business. The temporary event sign shall not be placed or located to be visible for display or advertising when the business is not open. 
iii.  The temporary event sign is not limited to the 30-day time limitation placed on temporary signs. 
(e)  No recreational vehicle, trailer, or similar vehicle shall be utilized, stored, or parked as part of the seasonal outdoor sales event. A temporary building or structure such as a shed, canopy or tent may be utilized. 
(f)  There shall be no commercial trash receptacle placed at or near the seasonal outdoor sales event. One residential receptacle may be placed at or near the event location. 
(g)  No portable toilet facility shall be placed at or near the seasonal outdoor sales event location. 
(h)  No storage containers, crates, boxes, or similar containers for products to be sold or displayed shall be placed or stored at or near the seasonal outdoor sales event location. 
(i)  Any water or electrical connections that are made shall be inspected and must be approved by the Tolleson Building Official prior to commencing business. 
(j)  Written authorization of the property owner to conduct the seasonal outdoor sales event on the property shall be obtained and shall be submitted to the city prior to commencement of the sales event. 
(k)  Temporary structures, equipment, and all inventory in connection with temporary seasonal sales shall be removed from the premises within ten days after the cessation of sales. 
(9)  Sidewalk cafés are allowed in the CORE provided that: 
(a)  Sidewalk cafés shall comply with the conditions listed in § 12-4-93(C)(5) above, and be located directly adjacent to and abutting an indoor restaurant. 
(b)  A sidewalk café shall be allowed only where the sidewalk or porch is wide enough to adequately accommodate both pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed café. There shall be a minimum of 48 inches of clear distance free of all obstructions in order to allow adequate pedestrian movement. 
(c)  Overhead architectural shade coverage or retractable awning that is affixed to the building wall is encouraged. 
(d)  All outdoor dining furniture, including tables, chairs, umbrellas and planters, shall be moveable. Umbrellas must be secured with a minimum base of not less than 60 pounds. All furniture used in the operation of the café, including any barriers required as a condition of a liquor license must be removed from the sidewalk and stored indoors whenever the restaurant is closed, unless part of a permanent barrier allowed by a use permit. 
(e)  There shall be no railing, structure or other form of barrier, unless determined necessary by the City Building Official or authorized designee, for public safety. The designs must reflect the architecture of the restaurant building façade. The barrier must be removed from the sidewalk and stored indoors whenever the restaurant is closed, unless part of a permanent barrier allowed by a use permit. 
(f)  A sidewalk café shall only serve food and beverages prepared or stocked for sale at the adjoining indoor restaurant, provided that an extension of premises for the service of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption has been authorized by the City of Tolleson and the State of Arizona. 
(g)  Hours of operation for a sidewalk café shall be the same as those of the adjoining indoor restaurant, or less, but in no event shall the sidewalk café be open when the main restaurant is not. 
(h)  The city shall have the right to prohibit the operation of the sidewalk café at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the public sidewalk. Such problems and conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events, parades, repairs to the street or sidewalk or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the business will be given prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the sidewalk café will be prohibited by the city. 
(i)  The sidewalk café shall not require the provision of additional parking. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Vending kiosks: The purpose of this subsection is to provide for flexible, site-specific, opportunities to encourage and enliven pedestrian activity within the streetscape and provide for an eclectic mix of small businesses and community information in the CORE District. 


a.  The placement of kiosks should promote public use and enjoyment of the open area and should complement permitted uses in the surrounding area. 
b.  City-owned and city placed kiosks may be leased by the city to businesses, if applicants can demonstrate compliance with all operational standards as set forth within the lease agreement. 
c.  Kiosk use: Kiosks may be occupied by uses such as news or magazine stands, takeout food stands, candy stands, flower stands, information booths, ticket sales or other similar uses as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013; Am. Ord. 556, N.S. , passed 8-25-2015) 
§ 12-4-94 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
    The downtown CORE zoning district is seen as a perfect opportunity to encourage a live/work environment and to promote reduced automobile dependence by encouraging people to walk short distances to work, shop or recreate. 
(A)  General development standards. The combination of the private and public frontage, travel and pedestrian ways, and the associated edging elements, defines the character of the street. Applicants should describe how proposed development within the CORE District satisfies the intent and desired character of the community. In particular, careful attention should be paid to the following development standards: 

(1)  Public frontage is area located between the face of curb and the property line. The city will be improving the public frontage such as increasing pedestrian walkways and installing amenities along Van Buren Street as part of the downtown improvements project. New development and redevelopment of existing sites should address how the proposal compliments the character and are compatible with adjacent improvements. 
(2)  Private frontage regulates both form and use. It is the front portion of a site that extends from the property line up to a depth of 30 feet, parallel to the property line. The character of the private frontage is defined by the architectural treatment and use of the ground floor, dimensional depth of the visible yard and the combination of the frontage edging elements. Applicants should adequately describe how the proposed architectural treatment of the new development or redevelopment is addressed within the public frontage area. 
(3)  Edging elements are those structures or walls along the edges of public spaces and the public area that define and enclose the public realm. Applicants are encouraged to activate the surrounding street adjacent to the development and carefully select only those edging elements that contribute to character and objectives of the district. 
(4)  Travel and pedestrian ways: A travel way is the portion of the street between the curbs that is available for use by vehicles, and bicycles. Pedestrian ways are the outdoor pedestrian walkways providing access between buildings, streets, civic spaces, and parking areas. Applications for new development and redevelopment of a site should describe which principles and methods are utilized to keep pedestrian and travel ways separate, while promoting a pedestrian and bike-friendly environment. 
(5)  Significant corner: Corner lots on located on Van Buren Street and a secondary street shall have its primary building façade and primary entrance on Van Buren Street. 
(6)  Storefronts: Storefronts are primarily for retail use and shall occupy the full depth of the private frontage and when located on corner sites shall wrap the corner for a minimum of 30 feet. 
(7)  Parking areas: Refer to §§ 12-4-94 and 12-4-97 or parking area requirements. 
(B)  Building standards. The development standards set forth in the CORE District are intended to provide site design flexibility and a mix of uses. The standards listed below are intended to regulate building placement, height, floor area ratio, lot size, residential density, setbacks, parking and lot frontage requirements within the CORE District. 


Notes: 
1.  Lot size: There are no minimum lot size requirements for property being used exclusively for businesses, work/live units, or mixed use residential activity in the CORE District. 
2.  Front setback: There is no minimum front building setback within the CORE District, except that the building face shall be set back as needed to achieve a minimum 15.5 feet sidewalk width to face of curb (where required). 
3.  Building maximum: Building height shall be measured as defined by § 12-4-92. 
4.  Residential intensity: Residential intensity shall be based on the total number of dwelling units per net acre of land. Net acreage excludes federally patented easements and public right-of-way. 
5.  Non-residential intensity: Mixed use development shall allow a combination of the maximum FAR for non-residential development and the maximum density for residential development. Floor area ratio (FAR) as defined in § 12-4-92 shall apply to non-residential development only. Residential development intensity shall be based on residential density standards. 
6.  Parking setback: Parking areas are encouraged to be located behind a building and/or screened by landscaping to reduce visibility from Van Buren Street, to the fullest extent possible. Where parking areas cannot be located behind a building, the minimum ten-foot front parking setback is intended to promote parking areas to be located on the side or rear of the buildings, as close to the rear of the property as possible. The three-foot side and rear parking setback may be waived by the City Engineer or designee if located adjacent to shared parking on adjoining lots. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013) 
§ 12-4-95 - ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE DESIGN GUIDELINES. 
(A)  General. The architectural design guidelines have been developed to ensure high standards of design are maintained in development and construction within the CORE District. Generally, these guidelines apply to both residential and non-residential projects, unless an individual guideline specifies a more narrow scope of application. Goals in this area are to provide a more human-scaled and pedestrian environment; to give more attention to details such as size, bulk and scale of buildings as well as the use of exterior site elements such as paseos and courtyards to provide more interest and feeling while encouraging mixed-use development to accommodate the mix of uses already existing in the area. 

(B)  Review and approval. Architectural and site design within the CORE District shall be subject to site plan approval in accordance with § 12-4-169 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(C)  Design character. The architectural theme to be followed within the CORE District is a Santa Barbara-based Mission Revival style that blends the architecture of the Mediterranean, Italian, and Spanish traditions, with the architecture of the California Missions. This design emphasizes a handmade quality in its overall design and details, resulting in simple forms articulated by design orientation relative to strong sunlight. The buildings exhibit broad expanses of stucco surfaces, deep reveals, porches, and arcades. Buildings also have weather protecting colonnades and wall extensions to enclose garden spaces. 
(D)  Materials and colors. Prominent features of the style included red clay tile roofs, use of balconies, smooth-stuccoed exterior walls usually painted white or off-white with arched openings, colorful accents such as tile work and landscaping. 
(1)  Building materials generally consist of: adobe, stone, smooth stucco exterior wall surfaces, terra-cotta floor and roof tiles, and a limited use of milled lumber. Color selection for exposed wood trim should be dark stain. 
(2)  Other features include low-key traditional colors, exposed stone and woodwork, Spanish/Mediterranean inspired ironwork, canvas, benches, fountains, arbors, signage, lighting, and traditional paving and landscaping. 

(E)  Site and surrounding area. 
(1)  Site planning is often characterized by enclosed patios and interior courtyards with somewhat formal planting. Pools, ponds, and fountains of traditional plan and form often have axial relationships to the structures and/or the fenestration of the building. The design of parking lots and various utilitarian structures (including trash enclosures) should reflect the Spanish tradition. 
(2)  Relation to site. Where possible, buildings and additions should be designed to relate to the site's existing structures and to present an integrated appearance. 
(3)  Area compatibility. In areas which possess examples of distinctive architecture, structures and additions should present a harmonious character to not clash or exhibit discord with the particular surrounding area in which they are placed. Structure elements should be consistent with the best elements that distinguish the particular area in which they are proposed. These elements include, but are not limited to: volume, size, massing, proportion, scale, bulk, rooflines, colors, textures and materials. 

(F)  Roofs and walls. 
(1)  Parapet walls and Spanish tile roofs are both acceptable. In any case, roof mounted equipment shall be screened on all four sides. 
(2)  Walls are important to articulate building form. When no building setback is utilized from the property line, the wall plane adjacent to the property line shall provide visual interest. This may be accomplished by the use of arcades and niches. Niches can have either planters or seating. Seating with overhead pergola or vine can create pedestrian space. 
(3)  Openings in walls for doors and windows should be deeply recessed and can be framed with plaster moldings and/or tile. 

(G)  Architectural details. 
(1)  Traditional details such as, but not limited to, decorative moldings, iron work, balconies and light fixtures are important to provide contrast to the wall surface. 
(2)  Tile, brick and other similar accents can add additional pedestrian scale accents to building and site wall elevations. 
(3)  Green screens/trellis may be permitted on private property if regularly maintained and repaired. 

(H)  Paving. 
(1)  Hard surface material may be masonry, brick, tile or concrete that is divided into smaller units. Decomposed granite or natural colored gravel are acceptable alternatives with banding and trim. Concrete unit pavers are acceptable if utilized in a scheme that compliments the aesthetic character. 
(I)  Private art. Private art may be permitted, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Use permit and site plan approval in accordance with §§ 12-4-168 and 12-4-169, respectively, of this Zoning Code. 
(2)  Artwork should complement the architectural design character and theme of the CORE District. 
(3)  Property owners shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of the artwork in a timely manner. 

(J)  Painted displays. Painted displays or murals are not permitted. 
(K)  Trash and refuse collection areas. 
(1)  Trash and refuse collection, trash compaction, and recycling collection areas shall be screened so as to not be visible from a public street or parking area. 
(2)  Latching gates shall be provided to screen refuse from street and/or public parking areas. 
(3)  Openings should be oriented away from public right-of-way, where possible. 
(4)  The gate and adjoining walls must be maintained in good working order and must remain closed except when trash pick-ups occur. 
(5)  Service areas that are fully integrated into a building must be screened with a roll down door or other opaque screen. 
(6)  Solid waste and recycling areas shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites and located so as to reasonably equalize the distance from the building spaces they serve. 
(7)  Storage areas shall be located so that the trucks and equipment used by the City of Tolleson have sufficient maneuvering areas. 
(L)  Roof-mounted equipment. 
(1)  Roof-mounted equipment must be screened from ground level view from adjacent property or adjacent public street right-of-way (not including an alley). 
(2)  New buildings must provide a parapet wall or other architectural element that screens roof-mounted equipment from ground level view. 
(3)  Existing buildings with no or low parapet walls must provide an opaque screen that screens roof-mounted equipment from ground level. 
(M)  Wall-mounted equipment. 
(1)  Wall-mounted equipment cannot be located on any surface that directly faces a public right-of-way (not including an alley). 
(2)  Wall-mounted equipment located on any surface that is visible from a public right-of-way (not including an alley) must be fully screened by landscaping or an opaque screen. 
(N)  Ground-mounted equipment. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment that is visible from a public right-of-way (not including an alley) must be fully screened by landscaping or an opaque screen. 
(O)  Outdoor sales and display. Outdoor sales and display should enhance the pedestrian environment through the creative use of outdoor spaces by providing businesses the opportunity to display a sample of their products and to sell food and beverages in a manner that enhances the public space by creating an interesting and comfortable shopping and dining experience. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013) 
§ 12-4-96 - LANDSCAPE, WALLS AND FENCES. 
(A)  General applicability. Except as provided herein and within § 12-4-97, landscape, walls and fences shall comply with the following requirements as outlined below. 
(B)  Landscape. 
(1)  Plant materials shall be consistent with the plant materials for the downtown redevelopment project, a copy of which is on file in the offices of the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  The required front yard and street side-yard setbacks shall be entirely landscaped, except for driveway access areas. 
(3)  In the front yard and street side-yard setback areas, at least one tree of 15-gallon minimum size, and three shrubs of five-gallon minimum size shall be installed for every 30 feet of street frontage along front and street side yards. 
(4)  In a required side yard and rear yard setbacks, at least one tree of 15-gallon minimum size and one shrub of five-gallon minimum size shall be installed 20 feet on-center along adjacent residential property lines. 
(5)  Any areas not landscaped with trees and shrubs shall be landscaped with ground cover or other approved landscape materials. 
(6)  The property owner and/or lessee shall install and maintain all landscaped materials in accordance with the above standards, including the installation of an irrigation system to all landscaping areas containing living plant and vegetative material, unless otherwise approved. 
(7)  The installation of drought tolerant, low-water consuming plants and vegetation, as designated by the Department of Water Resources and the following, is strongly encouraged. 
(8)  Landscape materials and amenities shall be installed prior to issuance of any occupancy permits. 
(9)  Lack of maintenance of any landscaped areas and materials shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Code. 
(C)  Walls. 
(1)  Walls must be constructed of high quality materials including one or a combination of the following: decorative blocks; brick; stone; caststone; split-faced block; stucco over standard concrete masonry blocks; glass block; or similar materials approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  No walls containing more than 50% exposed standard concrete masonry blocks are allowed, whether painted or not. 
(3)  No wall can be located within any required drainage or utility easement. 
(D)  Fences. 
(1)  Fences must be closed and be constructed of high quality materials including one or a combination of the following: wood, composite fencing, PVC vinyl, or other material approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  The finished face of any fence must be located towards the adjacent property. 
(3)  No fence can be located within any required drainage or utility easement. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013) 
§ 12-4-97 - PARKING REGULATIONS. 
    To minimize the aesthetic and transportation related impacts of parking in downtown, the CORE District allows alternatives that reduce off-street and surface parking requirements. These alternatives ensure that parking facilities minimally affect the pedestrian environment. The intent of these parking regulations is to encourage a balance between compact, multi-modal pedestrian-oriented development and necessary car storage. The goal is to construct neither more nor less parking than is needed. 
(A)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. 
(a)  No permit for reconstruction or repair of any building, or structure may be issued until parking has been provided by a combination of on-site parking, on-street parking, approved parking reduction by the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy may be issued for any new construction, alteration, extension, or use of land, or any part thereof until parking has been provided by a combination of on-site parking, on-street parking, approved parking reduction by the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Additions. 
(a)  A building or site may be renovated or repaired without providing additional parking, provided there is no increase in floor area or improved site area. 
(b)  When a building, use or site is increased in floor area or improved site area, parking is required for the additional floor or site area only. 
(c)  When the floor area or improved site area is increased by more than 50% cumulatively, both the existing use and the additional floor or site area must conform to the parking requirements of this Code. 
(3)  Change in use. 
(a)  A change in use must comply with the parking requirements unless the use has the same or a lesser parking demand than the previous use. 
(b)  Where required parking spaces for the new use exceed the required parking spaces for the existing use, additional parking is only required for the difference between the current parking spaces required and the parking spaces required for the new use. 
(B)  Vehicle parking ratios. The following minimum parking spaces are required unless an alternative rate is approved by the Zoning Administrator: 
Use Parking Standard  Residential 0-2 bedroom 1 space per unit  Residential 3+ bedroom 2 spaces per unit  Hotel, motel 1 space for every 2 guest rooms  Restaurants and bars 1 space per 100 square feet of public floor area   All other permitted or conditional uses
within the Land Use Matrix 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area Note: Kiosks and outdoor dining areas are exempt from the calculation of required vehicle parking spaces.  
(C)  Uses not specified. The parking requirements for any permitted or conditional use not listed in §§ 12-4-93 and 12-4-97(B) shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based upon the requirements for the most similar comparable use, the particular characteristics of the proposed use, and any other relevant data regarding parking demand. In order to make this determination, the Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to submit a parking demand study or other information, at the applicant's cost. 
(D)  Location of parking. Parking for each land use shall be provided by a combination of on-site parking, and off-site parking based on the following: 
(1)  The Zoning Administrator, or designee may permit all or a portion of the required off-street parking spaces to be located on a remote and separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located, subject to the standards of this section. 
(a)  No off-site parking space may be located more than 300 feet from the principal use, measured from the edge of property to the closest perimeter of the surface parking or parking structure. This distance may be waived by the Zoning Administrator if adequate assurances are offered that van or shuttle service will be operated between the off-site parking areas and the principal use. 
(b)  An agreement providing for the use of off-site parking, executed by the parties involved, must be filed with the Zoning Administrator in an approved form. Off-site parking privileges will continue in effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. The agreement(s) must guarantee long-term availability of the parking, commensurate with the use served by the parking, and shall be recorded with the County Recorder's Office. Should the off-site parking agreement(s) lapse or no longer be valid, then parking must be provided as otherwise required by this section. 
(2)  On-street parking spaces located immediately adjacent to the frontage of the property may be counted towards required off-street parking for non-residential uses. One on-street space may be substituted for each required off-site space. This provision shall only apply to street frontages where on-street parking is allowed and provided. The parking space credit shall be determined at the time of site plan approval. 
(3)  No parking spaces are required for accessory structures that are 500 square feet or less. 
(4)  Shared drives are encouraged between adjacent lots to minimize curb cuts along the street. 
(5)  Vehicles parked off-site may not encroach on a sidewalk. 
(6)  Parking, loading and maneuvering areas shall not be within the front yard setback, but may be permitted in the street side-yard by the Zoning Administrator. 
(E)  Accessible parking. 
(1)  Accessible parking for non-residential developments shall be provided in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Arizonans with Disabilities Act (AZDA) and International Building Code (IBC), as amended. 
(2)  Accessible parking for multiple-family residential developments shall be provided in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act (FFHAA) and International Building Code (IBC), as amended. 
(F)  Parking reductions. The city may allow a variation from the required number of parking spaces if supported by a parking demand analysis, completed in conformance with the procedures as outlined below: 
(1)  Application, review, and approval process. 
(a)  For new developments where the number of parking spaces being proposed does not meet the city's minimum requirements, a parking demand analysis shall be submitted as part of the applicant's building permit submittal. 
(b)  For existing developments where a change in the use of a building or site would result in fewer parking spaces being provided than the minimum requirement allows, a parking demand analysis is required to be submitted concurrently with tenant improvement plans. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator may approve a request to modify the required number of parking spaces in accordance with the process outlined in this section. 
(2)  The parking demand analysis shall be prepared by a qualified parking or traffic consultant, a licensed architect, or a civil engineer. 
(3)  The parking demand analysis as approved by the Zoning Administrator or designee, shall analyze the needs of every proposed use in the project, using the vehicle parking ratios within § 12-4-97(B). 
(4)  The parking demand analysis shall provide a quantitative analysis justifying any proposed reduction in parking. Decreases in the number of parking spaces may be granted when any of the following applies: 
(a)  A business currently employs more people per square foot (or less people per square foot) than the accepted industry standard for that use, and is able to demonstrate this variation from the mean through a statistical comparison. 
(b)  Lowered parking demand can be predicted as a result of sharing parking between intermittent uses, occurring on the same property, with non-conflicting parking demands (e.g. a nightclub and a bank). 
(c)  A development is designed to take advantage of adjacent public transit opportunities. 
(5)  The amount of required parking may be reduced by up to 30% where it can be determined that the peak requirements of the several occupancies occur at different times and where a shared parking operations plan, approved by the Zoning Administrator or designee, shows that this reduction in parking will not cause conflicts among nearby uses. Such a shared parking analysis may be based on: 
(a)  Intermittent non-conflicting uses. When required parking reductions are predicted as a result of sharing between intermittent uses with non-conflicting parking demands (e.g. a nightclub and a bank), then the reduction can be considered. 
(b)  Parking occupancy rates. When the parking reduction has been shown to be feasible by using the demand calculations as determined by an analysis of typical local parking demand. 
(6)  Existing parking surveys. When a study of existing parking shows parking occupancy rates of morning, afternoon and evening peaks on all seven days of the week. The seven days of observation may take place over the span of two consecutive, typical weeks. A combination of similar circumstances may be necessary to cover all the proposed land uses. The approximate square footages of the various land uses of the specimen projects shall be compared to the proposed project to allow the ratios of uses to be rated accordingly. 
(G)  Approval criteria. 
(1)  Requests for parking reductions. In order to approve any request to reduce parking below minimum requirements, all of the following criteria must be met: 
(a)  The reduction in parking will not cause fewer off-street parking spaces to be provided for the proposed use than the number of such spaces necessary to accommodate all vehicles attributable to such use under the normal and reasonably foreseeable conditions of operation of such use. 
(b)  The reduction in parking will not increase the demand for parking spaces upon the public streets and adjacent property in the immediate vicinity of the proposed use. 
(H)  Parking lot landscaping. 
(1)  Applicability. 
(a)  This section applies to all on-site surface parking lots with more than ten spaces created after the effective date of this Code, except as provided under paragraph (b) below. For purposes of this section, multiple platted lots contained on a single site plan and any separate parking areas connected with drive aisles are considered a single parking area. 
(b)  An existing parking lot may be renovated or repaired without providing additional landscaping, provided there is no increase in the size of the parking lot. 
(c)  When an existing parking lot is increased landscaping is required for the additional parking area only. 
(d)  When an existing parking lot is increased by more than 10% cumulatively, landscaping is required for both the existing parking lot and the new parking area. 
(2)  Perimeter screening. All surface parking lots with frontage on any portion of a street right-of-way (not including an alley) must be screened with the following: 
(a)  A minimum eight-foot-wide, landscaped area with a continuous row of shrubs must be provided between the street and parking lot. 
(b)  Shrubs must be a minimum of 18 inches in height when planted and must reach a minimum size of 36 inches in height within three years of planting. 
(c)  A 36-inch wall in a minimum five-foot planting strip may be substituted for the continuous row of shrubs. The wall shall be in character with the building at the right-of-way (ROW). 
(d)  Breaks for pedestrian and vehicle access are allowed. 
(3)  Median islands. 
(a)  A landscaped median island must be provided every ten parking spaces and shall include one 24-inch box tree per required island. Median islands must be distributed evenly throughout the parking area, and shall be same size as adjacent parking spaces. Stormwater harvesting in planting zones is encouraged. 

(b)  An interior or terminal median island must be a minimum of five feet in width and 300 square feet in area. 
(c)  All rows of parking must terminate with a landscaped terminal island. No more than 30 parking spaces may be located between drive aisles. 
(d)  Median islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded in order to preserve existing trees. 
(e)  Median islands must be installed at-grade of the parking lot surface to allow for stormwater harvesting. 
(f)  A median island may also serve as the location for a sidewalk. In such case, the sidewalk must be a minimum of four feet wide, and the remaining planting area must be no less than six feet wide on either side of sidewalk. 

(4)  Tree coverage. 
(a)  Each median island (and terminal interior island) must include at least one 24-inch box shade tree per row of parking as shown in § 12-4-97(H)(3)(a). 
(b)  In no case can there be less than one tree for every 3,000 square feet of parking area. 
(I)  Surfaces. 
(1)  Impervious materials. Where on-site facilities are provided for parking or any other vehicular use areas, they must be surfaced with asphalt bituminous, concrete or other type of dustless material approved by the City Engineer and maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition. 
(2)  Pervious materials. Pervious or semi-pervious parking area surfacing materials may be approved by the City Engineer. Permitted materials may include but are not limited to grass, "grasscrete," ring and grid systems used in porous or grid pavers, or recycled materials such as glass, rubber, used asphalt, brick, unit pavers, block, concrete, or roller-compacted or stabilized decomposed granite. Stormwater harvesting in landscape areas is encouraged. 
(3)  Curbs and drainage. 
(a)  All surface parking areas must be graded and drained to collect, retain, and infiltrate surface water accumulation on-site to the greatest extent practicable. 
(b)  Curbs or parking blocks are required at the edges of perimeter and interior landscaped areas. Curbing must have openings to allow drainage to enter and percolate through the landscaped area. 
(J)  Vehicle loading areas. 
(1)  Loading not required. If determined necessary by the City Engineer, adequate space must be made available on-site for the unloading and loading of goods, materials, items or stock for delivery and shipping. 
(2)  Location. If a loading area is provided, it must meet the following standards: 
(a)  The loading area must be located on the same lot occupied by the use served and must be accessible from a public street or alley. 
(b)  The loading area must be located to the side or rear of buildings. Loading areas may not be placed between the street and the associated building. 
(c)  With the exception of areas specifically designated by the city, loading and unloading activities are not permitted in the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Loading and unloading activities may not encroach on or interfere with the use of sidewalks, drive aisles, queuing areas and parking areas by vehicles or pedestrians. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013) 
§ 12-4-98 - SIGNAGE REGULATIONS. 
(A)  Applicability. No sign may be erected, altered, refurbished or otherwise modified after the effective date of this Code except in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(B)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  An existing sign may change the face or panel of the sign that does not meet the area or height standards within this section. However, in no instance must there be an increase in the degree of nonconformity. All new panels shall conform to all current illumination standards. 
(2)  A sign must be brought into compliance with the provisions of this section if at any time the sign is altered, repaired, restored or rebuilt to the extent that the cost exceeds 50% of the estimated replacement cost of the sign (in current dollar value). All sign permits within any six consecutive calendar months will be aggregated for purposes of measuring the 50% standard. 
(3)  If the repair is caused by involuntary damage or casualty, the sign may be repaired to any extent. 
(C)  Common sign plan. A common sign plan must be filed with the Zoning Administrator for all sites occupied by more than one tenant or requesting digital signage. After the filing of a common sign plan, all tenant signs must meet the requirements of the common sign plan. The applicant must indicate the standards of consistency of all signs on the subject property with regard to: 
(1)  Lighting; 
(2)  Colors; 
(3)  Letter/graphics style; 
(4)  Location of each sign; 
(5)  Materials used in sign construction; and 
(6)  Maximum dimensions and proportion. 
(D)  Sign types. 
(1)  Signs types allowed in the CORE District are shown below. Specific sign requirements for each type are provided in subsequent sections. Additional types may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator if they are deemed to meet the District's intent and code requirements. 
(a)  Wall sign. 
(b)  Awning sign. 
(c)  Canopy sign. 
(d)  Projecting sign. 
(e)  Shingle sign. 
(f)  Window sign. 
(g)  Monument sign. 
(h)  Bracket sign. 
(i)  Sidewalk sign. 
(2)  Digital signs may be permitted by the City Council through the approval of a use permit application if deemed appropriate to the character and intent of the District. A common sign plan depicting all digital and non-digital signage for the property shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and meet the requirements of § 12-4-98(C). 
(3)  Temporary signs are permitted as provided below: 
(a)  Includes, but not limited to, grand opening or special event banners, flags, tents, canopies or other similar displays. 
(b)  Temporary signs, except human directional (billboards) and sign spinners, may be permitted subject to the approval of a use permit pursuant to §§ 12-4-168 through 12-4-170 for a maximum of 30 days, which may be used consecutively, within a six-month period. One administrative extension may be granted, within the same semi-annual period, after written request by the applicant to the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Temporary displays shall consist of durable materials and of a quality in keeping with the intent of the CORE District. Frayed or worn materials or displays shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Tents, canopies and similar structures shall be reviewed and approved by the Fire Department. 
(4)  Inflatable signs, sign walkers, human directional (billboards) and sign spinners are prohibited within the CORE District. 
(E)  Allocation of sign area. The maximum allowed sign area that may be utilized with any combination and any number of signs within each category is provided below: 
(1)  Building signs: 
(a)  For wall signs, awnings, canopies and projecting signs, the maximum sign area is one square foot per one linear foot of street-facing building façade. 
(b)  Shingle sign maximum sign area is nine square feet. 
(c)  Window sign maximum sign area is 30 percent of window area. 
(2)  Ground signs: 
(a)  Bracket sign maximum sign area is nine square feet. 
(b)  Sidewalk sign maximum sign area is six square feet. 
(F)  Wall sign. Wall sign is building sign placed against a building and attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall, extending no more than 12 inches, so that the display surface is parallel to the plane of the wall. Signs painted on an exterior of a wall are considered wall signs. 
(1)  No portion of a wall sign may extend above the roof line or above a parapet wall of a building with a flat roof. 
(2)  No portion of a wall sign may extend above the lower eave line of a building with a pitched roof. 
(3)  A wall sign cannot cover windows or architectural details. 
(4)  A wall sign can be externally or internally illuminated in accordance with § 12-4-98(O), Sign Illumination. 
(5)  Refer to § 12-4-98(E) for maximum sign area allocation. 
(6)  Maximum projection shall be 12 inches. 

(G)  Awning sign. Awning sign is a building sign where graphics or symbols are painted, sewn, or otherwise adhered to the awning material as an integrated part of the awning itself. 
(1)  An awning sign cannot extend outside the awning. 
(2)  Only awnings on ground floor doors or windows may contain signs. 
(3)  A maximum of one sign is allowed per awning face. 
(4)  An awning sign may only be externally illuminated in accordance with § 12-4-98(O), Sign Illumination. 
(5)  Refer to § 12-4-98(E) for maximum sign area allocation. 
(6)  Maximum width or percentage of awning width to depth ratio is 75%. 
(7)  Maximum height of text and graphics on valance is two feet. 
(8)  Maximum area of sloping plane covered by sign is 25%. 

(H)  Canopy sign. Canopy sign is a building sign placed on a canopy so that the display surface is parallel to the plane of the wall. 
(1)  A canopy sign cannot extend outside the overall length or width of the canopy. However, a canopy sign may extend above or below the canopy provided the sign meets the standards below. 
(2)  A maximum of one sign is allowed per canopy face. 
(3)  Raceways are permitted for signs extending below or above the canopy. Otherwise, raceways are not permitted and the sign must be flush with the canopy face. 
(4)  A canopy sign can be externally or internally illuminated in accordance with § 12-4-98(O), Sign Illumination. 
(5)  Refer to § 12-4-98(E) for maximum sign area allocation. 
(6)  Maximum percentage of canopy width is 75%. 
(7)  Maximum height of text and graphics is two feet. 
(8)  Minimum clear height above sidewalk is ten feet. 

(I)  Projecting sign. Projecting sign is a building sign attached to the building façade at a 90-degree angle, extending more than 12 inches. A projecting sign may be two- or three-dimensional. 
(1)  A projecting sign must be located at least 25 feet from any other projecting sign. 
(2)  A projecting sign may be erected on a building corner when the building corner adjoins the intersection of two streets. Allocation of sign area from both streets may be used; however, in no case can the sign exceed the maximum height and width standards. 
(3)  The top of a projecting sign can be no higher than the top of the building. However, on one story buildings, the top of a projecting sign may have a maximum of 20% of the sign height above the top of the building. 
(4)  A projecting sign can be externally or internally illuminated in accordance with § 12-4-98(O), Sign Illumination. 
(5)  Refer to § 12-4-98(E) for maximum sign area allocation. 
(6)  Maximum sign area height is ten feet for a one story building, and 14 feet for a two-story building. 
(7)  Minimum spacing from building façade is one foot. 
(8)  Maximum projection width is six feet. 
(9)  Maximum depth is one foot. 
(10)  Minimum clear height above sidewalk is ten feet. 


(J)  Shingle sign. Shingle sign is a small projecting sign that hangs from a bracket or support and is located over or near a building entrance. 
(1)  A shingle sign must be located within five feet of an accessible building entrance. 
(2)  The hanging bracket must be an integral part of the sign design. 
(3)  A shingle sign must be located below the window sills of the second story on a multi-story building or below the roof line on a single-story building. 
(4)  A shingle sign cannot be illuminated. 
(5)  Maximum sign area per sign is nine square feet. 
(6)  Maximum sign area height is three feet. 
(7)  Minimum spacing from building façade is six inches. 
(8)  Maximum projection width is three and one-half feet. 
(9)  Maximum depth is six feet. 
(10)  Minimum clear height above sidewalk is ten feet. 

(K)  Window sign. Window sign is a building sign affixed to the inside of a window or door, or a sign placed within a building so as to be plainly visible and legible through a window or door. 
(1)  Window signs are only allowed on ground floor windows. 
(2)  A window sign can only be internally illuminated in accordance with § 12-4-98(O), Sign Illumination. 
(3)  The maximum area of all ground floor windows covered by signs is 30%. 

(L)  Monument sign. Monument sign is a freestanding sign attached along its entire length to a continuous pedestal that is no higher than six feet. A monument sign is horizontally oriented or is square. 
(1)  One monument sign is allowed per street frontage, except that one additional monument sign is allowed for properties with 200 feet or more of street frontage. Where more than one monument sign is permitted, signs along the same street frontage must be spaced a minimum of 150 feet apart. 
(2)  A monument sign must be set back at least five feet from the front property line and ten feet from a side property line. 
(3)  A sign erected on a retaining wall is required to meet the standards for a monument sign. The height of the wall is included in the overall height calculation. 
(4)  A monument sign can be externally or internally illuminated in accordance with § 12-4-98(O), Sign Illumination. 
(5)  Maximum sign area per sign is 36 square feet. 
(6)  Maximum sign area height is six feet. 
(7)  Maximum depth is 18 feet. 

(M)  Bracket sign. Bracket sign is a freestanding sign attached to the ground by one or more support structures that is not higher than five feet and hangs from a bracket or support. 
(1)  Only one bracket sign is allowed per building. 
(2)  A bracket sign must be located at least 25 feet from any other bracket sign. 
(3)  The hanging bracket must be an integral part of the sign design. 
(4)  A bracket sign can only be externally illuminated in accordance with § 12-4-98(O), Sign Illumination. 
(5)  Maximum sign area per sign is nine square feet. 
(6)  Maximum sign structure height is five feet. 
(7)  Maximum sign area height is three feet. 
(8)  Maximum width is three feet. 
(9)  Maximum structure to area depth is six feet. 

(N)  Sidewalk sign. Sidewalk sign is a moveable freestanding sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located and is subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator. 
(1)  Sidewalk signs should be designed to attract pedestrians, not passing motorists. 
(2)  Each ground floor tenant can have one sidewalk sign that must be located adjacent to the business that it advertises. 
(3)  Sidewalk signs must be removed and placed indoors at the close of business each day. 
(4)  Sidewalk signs cannot obstruct vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic. A minimum three feet access way, or larger as required by ADA regulations must be maintained. 
(5)  Sign materials shall be sturdy and not subject to fading or damage from weather. The use of paper or cloth is not permitted unless located within a glass or plastic enclosure. 
(6)  A sidewalk sign cannot be illuminated. 
(7)  Maximum sign area per sign is six square feet. 
(8)  Maximum height is three feet. 
(9)  Maximum width is two feet. 


(O)  Sign illumination. Illumination of signs must be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  External illumination. 
(a)  External light sources must be placed close to, and directed onto, the sign and shielded to minimize glare into the street, sidewalks or onto adjacent properties. 
(b)  Projecting light fixtures used for externally illuminated signs shall be simple and unobtrusive in appearance. They should not obscure the sign. 
(2)  Internal illumination. 
(a)  Channel letters may be internally lit or back-lit. 
(b)  For cabinet signs, the background must be opaque or a darker color than the message of the sign. 
(c)  Exposed neon may be used for lettering or as an accent. 
(3)  Prohibited light sources. The following light sources are not allowed: 
(a)  Blinking, flashing and chasing; and 
(b)  Bare bulb illumination, excludes decorative or festoon lighting. 
(4)  Raceways and transformers. 
(a)  If a raceway is necessary, it cannot extend in width or height beyond the area of the sign. 
(b)  A raceway must be finished to match the background wall or canopy, or integrated into the overall design of the sign. 
(c)  Visible transformers are not allowed. 
(P)  All signs located in the CORE District shall be subject to the maintenance requirements of § 12-4-134 and prohibited signs under § 12-4-135. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 6, passed 12-8-2015) 
§ 12-4-99 - SITE LIGHTING REGULATIONS. 
(A)  Applicability. 
(1)  No permit for the construction, reconstruction, extension, repair, or alteration of any building, structure, or use of land, and no building or land, or any part of any building or land, may be occupied or used until lighting has been provided in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  The installation of site lighting, replacement of site lighting, and changes to existing light fixture wattage, type of fixture, mounting, or fixture location must be made in compliance with this Code. Routine maintenance, including changing the lamp, ballast, starter, photo control, fixture housing, lens and other required components, is allowed for all existing fixtures. 
(3)  This section does not apply to lighting installed in the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Additions: 
(a)  When a building or site is renovated or repaired, any new or replaced outdoor light or lighting fixture must conform to the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  When the gross floor area or improved site area is increased, the additional floor or site area must conform to the lighting requirements of this Code. 
(c)  When the gross floor area or improved site area is increased by more than 50% cumulatively, both the existing use and the additional floor or site area must conform to the lighting requirements of this Code. 
(5)  Change in use. A change in use does not trigger application of this section except when there is a specific use standard requiring lighting for a new use. 
(6)  Light level measuring: 
(a)  Light levels are specified, calculated and measured in footcandles. All footcandle values are maintained footcandles. 
(b)  Measurements are to be made at ground level, with the light-registering portion of the meter held parallel to the ground pointing up. 
(7)  Prohibited sources. The following light fixtures and sources cannot be used: 
(a)  Cobra-head-type fixtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors; 
(b)  Temporary searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures; and 
(c)  Light sources that lack color correction or do not allow for uniform site lighting. 
(8)  Design and installation requirements: 
(a)  The maximum light level of any light fixture cannot exceed one-half footcandles measured at the property line of any protected district and two footcandles measured at the right-of-way line of a street. 
(b)  Lighting must not be oriented onto adjacent properties, streets or sidewalks. 
(c)  Service connections for all freestanding lighting fixtures must be installed underground. 
(d)  Energy-efficient LED lighting is highly encouraged for parking and pedestrian areas. 
(9)  Parking and pedestrian areas: 
(a)  Light fixtures within parking areas may be no higher than 30 feet. 
(b)  Light fixtures within pedestrian areas may be no higher than 15 feet. 
(c)  Light fixtures located within 50 feet of the property line of a protected district may be no higher than 15 feet. 
(d)  All light fixtures must be full cutoff. 
(10)  Flood lights and flood lamps: 
(a)  Flood light fixtures must either be aimed down at least 45 degrees from horizontal, or the front of the fixture shielded so that no portion of the light bulb extends below the bottom edge of the shield. 
(b)  Any flood light fixture located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way must be mounted and aimed perpendicular to the right-of-way, with a side-to-side horizontal aiming tolerance not to exceed 15 degrees. 
( Ord. 531, N.S. , passed 10-22-2013) 
LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING REGULATIONS 

§ 12-4-100 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  The landscape and screening regulations are intended to provide standards for installation of landscape materials, including trees, shrubs, and ground covers to promote the general welfare of the city by creating an attractive appearance, facilitated control of erosion, reduce glare and dust and provide shade. 
(B)  The landscape and screening regulations are intended to provide standards for the erecting of screening devices, including walls, fences and other structures to allow for the separation of incongruous uses, effectuation of privacy and the screening of unattractive uses. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-101 - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS. 
(A)  The landscape standards of this section apply to all new buildings and uses and expansions of buildings and uses in all zoning use districts. Single family residences not being developed as a P.A.D. are excepted from these regulations. 
(B)  Landscaping shall be designed and installed in compliance with the following standards. 
(1)  Portions of street right-of-way not used for pavement, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be entirely landscaped with trees, shrubs or gardens, except for driveway access, in addition to minimum on-site landscape requirements. 
(2)  The required front yard and street side-yard setbacks shall be entirely landscaped, except for driveway access areas. Parking, loading and maneuvering areas shall not be within the front yard or street side-yard setbacks. 
(a)  In the front yard and street side-yard setback areas, at least one tree of 15 gallon minimum size, and three shrubs of five-gallon minimum size shall be installed for every 30 feet of street frontage along front and street side yards. 
(b)  Any areas not landscaped with trees and shrubs shall be landscaped with ground cover or other approved landscape materials. 
(3)  The required interior side-yard and rear yard setbacks of any lot being developed for multi-family, mobile home park, recreational vehicle park, commercial or industrial uses shall be entirely landscaped when adjacent to or separated only by an alley from a residential use district or residential use. 
(a)  In a required side yard and rear yard setbacks, at least one tree of 15-gallon minimum size and one shrub of five-gallon minimum size shall be installed 20 feet on-center along adjacent residential property lines. 
(b)  Any areas not landscaped with trees and shrubs shall be landscaped with ground cover or other approved landscape materials. 
(4)  In all residential developments, other than single family, interior, common open-space areas, excluding required yard setbacks, shall be landscaped and amenities installed, including at least one shade tree and two shrubs per dwelling unit. 
(5)  In any common parking area, at least one shade tree and one shrub shall be installed for every ten parking spaces provided within the interior of the parking area. 
(C)  The property owner and/or lessee shall install and maintain all landscaped materials in accordance with the above standards, including the installation of an irrigation system to all landscaping areas containing living plant and vegetative material, unless otherwise approved. 
(D)  The installation of drought tolerant, low-water consuming plants and vegetation, as designated by the Department of Water Resources and the following, is strongly encouraged. 
(1)  The use of cactus and/or other succulents indigenous to arid regions may be substituted for up to 50% of the required shrubs. 
(2)  Cactus and other arid region plants with a minimum height of six feet at installation may be substituted for up to 50% of the required trees, except for those required abutting residential uses and districts along the side and rear lot lines. 
(3)  Irrigation systems may be deleted where cactus, succulents, and other indigenous arid-region plants and vegetation are used, if alternate watering plans for the establishment of the plants is approved. 
(E)  Landscape materials and amenities shall be installed prior to issuance of any occupancy permits. 
(F)  Lack of maintenance of any landscaped areas and materials shall constitute a violation of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-102 - SCREENING REGULATIONS. 
(A)  The screening standards of this section apply to all new buildings and uses and to expansions of buildings and uses in all zoning districts and the P.A.D. District. Single-family residences not being developed as a P.A.D. are excepted from these requirements unless hereinafter specified. 
(B)  Screening devices and structures shall be installed in compliance with the following standards for all residential uses including single family residences. 
(1)  In all residential districts or residential developments, the maximum height of any opaque or wall constructed in any portion of the required front-yard setback shall not exceed three feet six inches. 
(2)  In all residential districts and residential developments, the maximum height of fences and walls in required side and rear yard setbacks shall not exceed six feet. 
(3)  No fence, wall, hedge or shrub planting which obstructs lines of visibility at elevations between three feet and six feet above the street grade shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the street property lines extended, nor on any lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and the side boundaries of any driveway and a line connecting them at a point ten feet from the intersection of a street property line with the edge of a driveway. No tree shall be permitted to remain within the distances or the intersections unless the foliage line is maintained at sufficient height to prevent obstruction of the lines of visibility. 
(4)  In those residential districts which permit the keeping of livestock, fences shall be constructed of metal rail or wood rail and be limited to a maximum height of five feet. 
(5)  Fences or walls shall be constructed around swimming pools having a minimum height of five feet and maximum height of six feet to provide inaccessibility to small children; the fences or walls, if constructed of open-type materials, shall have no more than four-inch apertures between structural elements in any vertical or horizontal direction from the ground to the top of the structure, and shall have self-closing gates with self-latching latches located at minimum 54 inches above the ground. Also see Tolleson Swimming Pool Procedures and Standards. 
(C)  In residential, commercial and industrial developments, excluding single family not part of a P.A.D., the following is required. 
(1)  All outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, mechanical equipment, vehicles or other similar items shall be screened from view by a minimum six-foot high wall constructed of or finished with materials to match the main building of the site. 
(2)  Parking areas shall be screened from street view to a minimum height of three feet above the highest finished grade of the parking area. 
(a)  Industrial lots not adjacent to an arterial street shall be screened by the use of walls, berms, landscaping or any combination of the three. 
(b)  All other areas shall be screened by the use of walls, berms or combination of the two. The screening may be supplemented by up to 25% intermittent landscaping. 
(3)  All loading, delivery and service bays shall be screened from street view by a wood, brick, slump block, masonry wall with stucco or mortar wash, or compatible alternatives approved by the Zoning Administrator and the screen shall be six feet in height. See Masonry Wall or division (5)(c) below. 
(4)  Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapet walls or other screening devices to be no lower in height than six inches below the height of the mechanical equipment on side, front or rear walls, whichever is adjacent to public streets or residential districts. 
(5)  A brick, slump block or masonry wall with stucco or mortar wash finish, or compatible alternative approved by the Zoning Administrator (collectively, the "Wall") shall be constructed as follows. (See Ord. 380, N.S., passed 3-23-1999) 
(a)  To a height of six feet on a lot used for commercial, mobile home park or multi-family use along any lot line abutting against, in common with, or separated only by an alley from, a residence or residential district. (See Ord. 380, N.S., passed 3-23-1999) 
(b)  To a height of six feet on a lot used for industrial use along all lot lines other than those lot lines abutting against or in common with the public rights-of-way that the property use for ingress and egress (the "Frontage Lot Lines"). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may require a wall to be constructed to a height not to exceed six feet along all or part of the frontage lot line as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to shield the property's activities from the public. (See Ord. 380, N.S., passed 3-23-1999) 
(c)  Definition. MASONRY WALL. The "Wall" shall be constructed of standard eight inches by eight inches by 16 inches and shall be in conformance with ASTM C90 for load bearing concrete masonry unit. See Ordinance 380 N.S. for the "Wall." 
(6)  All outdoor lighting shall be directed down and screened away from adjacent properties and streets. 
(7)  In Commercial and I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts, the walls may be constructed to a maximum of eight feet around the boundary of the uses unless the wall(s) are also exterior building walls in which case the wall height is subject to the building height limitation for the zoning district. (See Ord. 380, N.S., passed 3-23-1999) 
(8)  No hazardous materials may be used or located on the top of a required or permitted wall in any district. (See Ord. 380, N.S., passed 3-23-1999) 
(9)  In all districts, fences constructed of chain link wire, wire mesh, multiple strands of wire and the like are prohibited unless the fence is completely screened from public view, from any public rights-of-way or any adjacent property by landscaped berms, masonry walls, or compatible opaque alternatives approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(10)  In Commercial and Industrial Districts, wrought iron or tubular steel fences which are visible from either public rights-of-way or adjacent property are allowed in lieu of screening materials otherwise required by this section, only if approved by the City Council in conjunction with a new or amended site plan application. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 380, passed 3-23-1999; Am. Ord. 558, N.S. , § 1, passed 12-8-2015) 
PARKING REGULATIONS 

§ 12-4-115 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
    The parking regulations are intended to provide minimum standards for adequate parking and loading space for various uses permitted in this zoning code. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-116 - PARKING STANDARDS. 
(A)  Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for all new buildings and uses and the expansion or addition of existing buildings and uses. 
(B)  All off-street parking spaces shall be located in the lot upon which the use is located or upon another lot within 300 feet. 
(C)  Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be located within the required front-yard and street-side yard setbacks in any use district. 
(D)  All required off-street parking spaces shall be paved, striped, and properly drained and be constructed to a minimum size of eight and one-half feet by 18 feet, exclusive of driveway aisles and maneuvering area. 
(E)  All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be connected to a street or alley by a paved driveway. 
(F)  Parking areas shall be landscaped, screened and lighted in accordance with §§ 12-4-100 through 12-4-102. 
(G)  Parking and loading spaces and driveways shall be so arranged as to permit ingress and egress from the lot to a street or alley by forward motion of the vehicle only. 
(H)  All off-street parking spaces shall be arranged with adequate maneuvering areas as specified in the following diagram and table: 

Angle of
Parking Stall Depth Curb Length Interior Driveway Width Total Inside One-Way Two-Way 0 degrees 8 feet 6 inches 22 feet 0 inches 0 feet 12 feet 0 inches 18 feet 0 inches 30 degrees 16 feet 6 inches 32 feet 6 inches 17 feet 12 feet 0 inches 18 feet 0 inches 45 degrees 18 feet 0 inches 25 feet 0 inches 12 feet 13 feet 0 inches 18 feet 0 inches 60 degrees 20 feet 0 inches 19 feet 0 inches 10 feet 17 feet 0 inches 18 feet 0 inches 90 degrees 18 feet 0 inches 8 feet 6 inches 8 feet 6 inches 23 feet 0 inches 23 feet 0 inches  
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-117 - OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENT SCHEDULE. 
    Off-street parking spaces are required in accordance with the parking schedule below, determined by uses and their usable floor areas. Usable floor area is the space devoted to the specified use and does not include areas such as kitchens, rest rooms, fitting and dressing rooms, hallways, employee lounges, and areas used principally for storage, incidental repair, processing or packaging of merchandise or areas occupied by fixtures and equipment for display purposes. 
Required Parking Schedule Use Spaces 1. Residential Use One or two-family dwellings and mobile homes 2 per dwelling unit or mobile home Multiple-family dwellings Efficiency units 1-1/3 per dwelling unit One and two bedroom units 1-1/2 per dwelling unit Three or more bedroom units 2 per dwelling unit Rooming houses, fraternities, sororities, resident clubs, lodges 1 per sleeping room or 1 per bed, whichever is greater Mobile home parks 2 per mobile home site plus 1 visitor per 5 mobile home spaces Recreational vehicle parks 1 per trailer, recreational vehicle or tent site plus 1 per employee 2. Commercial Sales and Services On-site food and beverage establishments 1 per 50 sf of usable floor Drive-in food and beverage establishment with on-site consumption 1 per 50 sf of usable floor area, plus 150 feet of queuing space per drive-in window Self-service laundries and dry cleaners 1 per 2 machines Sales of new and used cars, motorized and non-motorized vehicles, mobile homes, and heavy machinery 1 per each 300 sf of office and covered sales area plus 2 for first 10,000 sf, plus 1 per additional 10,000 sf of outdoor sales area, plus 1 per 3 employees Automobile service stations 1 per 2 gasoline pumps, plus 2 per service bay Carwash 1 per employee, plus reserve spaces equal to 5 times the wash line capacity Drive-in theaters 1 per viewing stall plus 2 times the stall lengths for queuing space to admission station Drive-in banking 150 feet queuing for first bay plus 100 feet queuing per additional bay Barber shops, beauty shops 2 per service chair Furniture and appliance stores and large household equipment 1 per 400 sf usable floor area Supermarkets, drug stores 1 per 200 sf of usable floor area Child and elderly day care centers 1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per 5 children or elderly accommodated General retailing and services 1 per 300 sf usable floor area Medical and dental offices and clinics 1 per 200 sf usable floor area 3. Other Commercial Uses Hotels, motels 1 per guest room or suite plus 1 per 2 employees Bus depots 1 per 150 sf of waiting room space Billiard parlors 1 per billiard table, plus 1 per 2 employees Swimming pools, commercial 1 per 1,000 sf usable site area plus 1 per 2 employees Tennis or handball clubs 3 per court Golf courses 5 per hole plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per 2 tees in driving range Batting range 1 per batting machine, plus 1 per employee 4. Public Assembly Uses Auditoriums, exhibition halls, theaters, convention facilities, meeting rooms, stadiums, gymnasiums, skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys, clubs, lodges, amusement parks, fairgrounds, race tracks, and funeral homes 1 per 4 fixed seats*, plus 1 per 60 sf of usable area not used for seating, plus 1 per 2 employees Churches or other place of worship 1 space per 5 seats*, plus 1 space per 90 sf of usable area not used for seating *where individual seats are not provided, the term "seat" means 24 inches of bench seating. 5. Schools and Institutions Elementary and intermediate schools 1 per 3 employees High schools, junior colleges, colleges, universities, trade schools, business colleges 1 per 5 students, plus 1 per 3 employees Hospitals 1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per resident employees, plus 1 per non-resident employees Sanitariums, children's homes, homes for aged, asylums, nursing and convalescent homes 1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per 2 non-resident employees Public utility facilities, not having business offices on premises 1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per company vehicle Government libraries and other similar buildings 1 per 200 sf usable floor area, plus 1 per 3 employees 6. Wholesaling and Warehousing Uses 1 per 1,700 sf of usable floor area, or 1 per 3 employees, whichever is greater, plus 1 per company vehicle 7. Manufacturing and Industrial Uses 1 per 500 sf of gross floor area, or 1 per 3 employees, whichever is greater, plus 1 per company vehicle 8. Mixed Uses In the event of mixed uses, the total requirement for off-site parking spaces is the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 9. Unlisted Uses Parking requirements for a specific use not listed in this section shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.  
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-118 - NON-RESIDENT PARKING ON STREETS. 
(A)  The Police Chief may designate, subject to City Council approval, a residential area including streets or portions of streets on which parking of motor vehicles may be restricted in whole or in part to motor vehicles owned or operated by residents of the area so designated, where the Police Chief finds that parking in the area is significantly impacted by the parking of motor vehicles owned by nonresidents of the designated area. 
(B)  Following City Council approval of a residential parking area, the Police Chief shall direct the erection of parking signs in the area. The signs shall indicate the time and conditions under which parking shall be "Residential Parking Only." 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a resident with a vehicle or trailer registered to that address or proximity, to park any motor vehicle or trailer, upon a street designated as "Residential Parking Only." 
(D)  This section exempts service and delivery vehicles parked for the purpose of providing a service or delivery in the residential parking permit area. The vehicle must be clearly identified with company name or logo. 
(E)  It shall be a defense if a person parking the vehicle is visiting the resident, or has a bona fide service call or delivery to a resident in the area. 
(F)  Any person violating this section shall be liable for a civil sanction not to exceed $50. 
(G)  The registered owner(s) of any vehicle which has been parked in violation of the provisions of this section shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and subject to penalty therefore. 
(H)  Whenever a vehicle without a driver is found parked in violation of the provisions of this section, any police officer or employee of the city designated to give the notices as a part of their official duties shall take the vehicle's registration number, and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously attach to the vehicle a notice of parking violation on a form supplied by the Police Department. The notice of parking violation shall include the date, time and location of the violation, the vehicle registration number, reference to the city code provisions violated, and a warning that failure either to pay the fine indicated on the notice or to appear at the location indicated on the notice of parking violation and otherwise dispose of the charge within seven calendar days from the date on which the notice was issued may result in a judgment by default being entered against the registered owner of the vehicle, and that the vehicle may thereafter be subject to immobilization by the installation of a wheel clamp and to towing and impoundment. The notice of parking violations attached to the vehicle pursuant to this section shall be deemed constructive notice to the registered owner that the vehicle may be immobilized and impounded. 
(I)  All funds generated from payment of civil sanctions for violations of this section shall be dedicated to defraying the costs of creating and enforcing the "Residential Parking Only" areas created under this section. 
(Ord. 410, N.S., passed 10-14-2003) 
§ 12-4-119 - LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS SCHEDULE. 
    In any zoning district which allows commercial or industrial uses which receive or distribute materials or merchandise by motor vehicle, loading spaces, in addition to required parking spaces, are to be paved and in the rear yard or in a side yard which abuts an alley, in accordance with the following table. 
Total Floor Area
of Building Min. Number of
Loading Spaces Required Minimum Size* Minimum Clearance 25,000 sf to 40,000 sf 1 10 feet × 30 feet 14 feet 40,001 sf to 100,000 sf 2 10 feet × 30 feet 14 feet 100,001 sf to 200,000 sf 3 10 feet × 30 feet 14 feet For each 100,000 add'l. sf 1 additional 10 feet × 30 feet 14 feet (*Exclusive of maneuvering space and access aisles)  
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
SIGN REGULATIONS 

§ 12-4-130 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  The sign regulations are intended to provide standards which will promote the effectiveness of signs by preventing over-concentration, improper placement and excessive size. 
(B)  The sign regulations are intended to provide an improved visual appearance along street frontages while providing equitable sign standards for the various uses permitted in the zoning code. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-131 - GENERAL REGULATIONS. 
(A)  This section shall not apply to the display of flags of any nations or political subdivisions or of any religious institution, school or other public and quasi-public agency, nor to non-illuminated, temporary signs, under six square feet in area, for the purpose of sale or lease of the property upon which it is located, nor to signs not visible beyond the boundary of the property upon which located. 
(B)  All permitted signs shall identify the premises and activity upon which it is displayed; signs shall not be used for the selling of commodities on or off premises. 
(C)  All structural alterations to existing signs and the erection of new signs shall comply with the regulations of this section. 
(1)  Whenever the name of a business changes, the signs on the premises shall be modified to bring them into conformance with these regulations, even though the intended change is a change of sign copy only. 
(2)  Whenever a vacant parcel develops, all existing signs and billboards shall be removed prior to issuance of a building permit; only signs identifying the new development in compliance with this article are permitted. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-132 - SIGN AREA, HEIGHT, ILLUMINATION AND LOCATION. 
(A)  Sign areas. Sign areas are measured by drawing the smallest rectangle, square, circle or triangle around the words and work which convey the sign's message: 
(1)  The area of individually-mounted letter signs is measured by including the lettering and the vertical and horizontal spacings between letters and including other design elements of the sign copy and mounting surface. 
(2)  The area of internally illuminated and painted signs is measured by including the entire illuminated or painted surface which contains the sign copy. 
(3)  The area of a two-faced sign with parallel faces or "V"-type signs having an interior angle of less than 45 degrees is considered a single face area including other multi-faced or paneled signs. (See diagram on Exhibit A). 
(4)  The area of a parallel faces or "V"-type signs having an interior angle of more than 45 degrees including multi-face or paneled signs shall be measured as a cumulative total of all the faces and panels. (See diagram on Exhibit B). 
(Am. Ord 425, N.S., passed 4-26-2005; Am. Ord. 440, N.S., passed 7-11-2006) 
(B)  Free-standing signs. All identification signs which are erected of or mounted upon their own self-supporting permanent structure, detached from the supporting elements of the main building which they identify, shall be permitted in conformance with the following and other provisions of this article: 
(1)  The signs shall have a maximum height of 12 feet, as measured from the grade of roadway or curb to top of any sign structure, and shall have a maximum area of 36 square feet, or as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  The signs shall have a landscaped area located at the base of the signs provided at a minimum ratio of three square feet of landscaping for each square foot of sign area. 
(3)  Corner parcels, with more than 100 feet of street frontage on both adjacent street, may have a single sign with a maximum height of 16 feet, as measured from the grade of the roadway or curb to the top of the sign structure, and a maximum area of 48 square feet. 
(C)  Center identification signs. Free-standing signs identifying a commercial or industrial center, as defined in this article, shall be permitted in conformance with the following and other provisions of this article: 
(1)  The signs shall identify the name of the center only, except as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  The signs, identifying industrial subdivision parks may also identify up to four individual businesses in addition to the industrial center identification when the signs are located on a monument-type structure. 
(3)  All center identification signs shall comply with the area, height and landscape requirements as specified above. 
(D)  Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs may be internally light, in commercial and industrial districts. The source of illumination of any sign is to be shielded so that it is not visible from or causes glare or reflection onto adjacent properties and streets. 
(E)  Sign locations. Sign locations are to be within the property which contains the activity or business which the sign is identifying, except as provided in division (H) below. 
(1)  Signs may be freestanding or mounted on walls, fascias, mansards, parapets or canopies, or mounted projecting from walls, but shall not be roof mounted or extend above the roof line of the building upon which it is mounted. 
(2)  No part of any sign or sign structure is to be located in or overhanging a roadway, driveway, right-of-way line or property line. 
(3)  No part of any freestanding or projecting sign or sign structure is to be located closer than ten feet to an abutting lot, except that canopy signs may be attached to the face of a building which exceeds this limitation by other provisions of this article. 
(4)  Signs may not be located where they would obstruct doors, windows, fire escapes or where they would create a safety hazard. 
(F)  Freeway monument signs. A freeway monument is a free standing single user or multi-tenant sign identifying an on-premise use, on property abutting or part of a complex/center abutting a free right-of-way, oriented to and intended to be read from the freeway right-of way. 
(1)  General requirements. 
(a)  Freeway monument signs shall only be allowed on the properties zoned for commercial or industrial uses. 
(b)  For every 1,000 linear feet of freeway frontage, one freeway monument sign shall be allowed per site, development, project or center with a maximum of three freeway monument sign per site, development project or center. The signs shall not be located off-premises. Except that a multi-tenant complex/center located on separate parcels. 
(c)  Buildings in excess of three stories shall identified only by a freeway monument sign or a building mounted wall sign and shall not be eligible for the construction of or inclusion of both signs. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the height of all freeway monument signs shall be measured as the vertical distance from the finished grade of the site to the highest point of the sign structure. 
(e)  Freeway monument signs shall not be counted as a portion of the total sign area allowed hereunder. 
(f)  All freeway monument signs shall provide an architecturally enhanced treatment for the sign base, pole cover and supports compatible with the individual business or the complex/center. Pole covers and sign base shall be a minimum of 35% of the full sign width. 
(g)  All freeway monument signs shall require a landscaped area equal to three square feet of the landscaping for each square foot of sign area and shall be located around the base of the sign. 
(h)  For the purpose of this section, a freeway monument sign shall only identify the name of the business, the center/complex, or the place for which the sign is intended. The sign shall not include any advertising copy. 
(i)  The sign may be illuminated by externally illuminated indirect or internal lighting. 
(j)  Freeway monument signs shall not be allowed within a natural or manmade watercourse. 
(k)  Freeway monument signs shall be subject to all applicable Arizona Department of Transportation sign regulation standards. 
(2)  Single tenant signs. In addition to division (F)(1) above, the following additional requirements shall apply to freeway monument signs that identify a single tenant or business on the site, complex or center: 
(a)  The sign shall not exceed 60 feet in height and 200 square feet in sign area: 
(b)  All signs shall maintain a minimum of 200-foot spacing from any other freeway monument sign: 
(c)  All freeway monument signs shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any non-freeway lot line and a minimum of 100 feet from any residential zoned property. 
(d)  All signs shall be allowed an extra three feet in height for architectural embellishments where architectural embellishment are defined as elements of a sign incorporating architectural features of the associated building or development. Embellishments shall not include any feature, figure or emblem conveying a commercial message and may not constitute more than 20% of sign area. 
(3)  Multi-tenant signs. In addition to division (F)(1) above, the following additional requirements shall apply to freeway monument signs that identify more than one tenant or business on the site, complex or center. 
(a)  Freeway monument sign shall not exceed 70 feet in height and 400 square feet in total sign area. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, multi-tenant freeway monument signs shall be allowed an extra 20% of sign area for the identification of the center/complex. 
(c)  All multi-tenant signs shall maintain a minimum of 200-foot spacing from any other freeway monument sign. 
(d)  All multi-tenant freeway monument signs shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any non-freeway lot line and minimum of 200 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
(e)  All multi-tenant freeway monument signs shall be allowed an extra three feet in height for architectural embellishments where architecture embellishments are defined as elements of a sign incorporating architectural features of the associated building or development. Embellishments shall not include any feature, figure or emblem conveying a commercial message and may not constitute more than 20% of the sign area. 
(G)  Building-mounted wall sign. A building-mounted wall sign is a permanent sign attached to, painted on or erected against the wall or fascia of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel with the face of the wall of fascia. 
(1)  Building-mounted wall signs shall be placed only in the top 33% of the wall to which it is attached and shall not project above the roofline. 
(2)  Signs are permitted on three sides of a four or more sided building. The sign area allowed for each sign shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of business wall elevation along the street frontage on which the sign is displayed. The total area of one sign identifying an individual business shall not exceed 250 square feet. 
(3)  The signs may identify the individual business, building or building complex only by name, logo or by name and principle service where the name does not identify the principle services offered. 
(4)  Buildings in excess of three stories shall only be identified by the building name or the name or logo of the business or company occupying the building. 
(5)  Advertising copy shall be permitted only to describe the general nature of the business. In no case shall there be more than six words, symbols or characters used as advertising copy. 
(6)  The signs shall not project more than 14 inches from the wall or fascia. 
(7)  The sign may be erected on a parapet wall or fascia that is on three sides of a four or more sided building. The signs shall be erected on the buildings with one parapet wall only if the building exists above the top of the parapet or fascia. 
(8)  The signs may be illuminated only by internal or externally indirect lighting. 
(9)  The average height of all sign characters shall not exceed six feet with no individual characters exceeding eight feet in height. 
(H)  Digital billboards. 
(1)  A digital billboard shall only be permitted via the approval of a use permit, and compliance with the requirements set forth in this zoning ordinance and this division (H). 
(2)  All digital billboard use permit applications shall include: 
(a)  A vicinity map showing the locations and measurements to any existing digital billboards, freeway monument signs, and residential zoning districts and uses. 
(b)  A detailed rendered elevation of the proposed digital billboard, including proposed height and sign dimensions. 
(c)  Documentation certifying NIT measurements and settings of the proposed digital billboard. 
(d)  The deed, lease, or other agreement by which the applicant has the right to erect, use or maintain the proposed sign at the stated location. 
(3)  Location requirements: 
(a)  Digital billboards are only allowed to be approved in locations within 100 feet of Interstate 10, including frontage roads thereto. 
(b)  Digital billboards may not be located closer than 2,000 linear feet to any other digital billboard. 
(c)  Digital billboards may not be located closer than 500 feet to any freeway monument sign. 
(d)  Digital billboards may not be located closer than 200 feet to any residential zoning district or residential use. 
(4)  General requirements: 
(a)  Digital billboards shall not be counted as a portion of the total sign area for a property allowed under § 12-4-133 of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Digital billboards shall not be erected upon the roof of any building, nor shall any digital billboard be partially or totally supported by the roof or roof structure of any building. 
(c)  Digital billboards shall be subject to all applicable Arizona Department of Transportation sign regulation standards. 
(d)  Following approval of a use permit for a digital billboard, structural plans shall be submitted to the Building Department for review for compliance with the Tolleson City Code. 
(e)  Digital billboards shall be programmed so that the message or image on the sign changes no more often than once every eight seconds. 
(f)  There shall be no video, effects of movement, blinking, animation, scrolling, flashing, or similar effects in the individual static digital images on a digital billboard. 
(g)  Changes of image shall be instantaneous as seen by the human eye, and shall not use blinking, fading, rolling, shading, dissolving, or similar effects as part of the change. 
(h)  Digital billboards shall use automatic level controls to reduce light levels at night and under cloudy and other darkened conditions, in accordance with the following: 
1.  Digital billboards shall have installed ambient light monitors, and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the brightness level of the sign based on ambient light conditions. 
2.  Maximum brightness levels for digital billboards shall not exceed 6000 nits when measured from the signs face at its maximum brightness, during daylight hours. 
3.  Maximum brightness levels for digital billboards shall not exceed 500 nits when measured from the sign's face at its maximum brightness, between sunset and sunrise, as those times are determined by the National Weather Service. 
4.  Written certification from the sign manufacturer must be provided at the time of application for a building permit certifying that the light intensity of the sign has been preset not to exceed the illumination levels established by this section, and that the preset intensity level is protected from end user manipulation by password protected software or other approved method. 
(i)  Digital billboards shall contain a default design that will freeze the device and message in one position with no more than a maximum illumination of 500 nits if a malfunction occurs. 
(j)  Any digital billboard that malfunctions, fails or ceases to operate in its usual or normal programmed manner, causing motion, movement, flashing or any similar effects shall have the motion, movement, flashing or similar effects corrected, and repair to the sign begun within 24 hours of the malfunction. 
(5)  Design requirements: 
(a)  A digital billboard, including all structural elements, shall be no taller than 65 feet. The height of all digital billboards shall be measured as the vertical distance from the finished grade of the site at the base of the sign structure to the highest point of the sign structure. 
(b)  Digital billboards shall include no more than two faces, which are not permitted to be vertically stacked. Digital billboards may have a double-face or "V" shape, which shall be considered a single structure. 
(c)  The sign faces of all digital billboards shall face Interstate 10, either directly or at an angle appropriate for the visibility of Interstate 10 vehicle traffic in the case of "V" shaped signs. 
(d)  Total sign area of a digital billboard will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis through the use permit process. However, in no instance shall the maximum area of a digital billboard sign face exceed 672 square feet. 
(e)  Access ladders to maintenance platforms shall be constructed or maintained in such a position as not to project beyond a visual envelope established by structural elements or projections of the sign face and trim to the ground as viewed from a plane parallel to the face of the sign. 
(f)  Some form of City of Tolleson identification is required on all digital billboards. This can be achieved by the use of city branding elements (i.e. colors, logo) on the digital billboard structure and/or providing regular rotating digital panels for city use. The appropriate application and amount of city identification is subject to city approval via the use permit process. 
(6)  If a use permit for digital billboard is approved, such approval is subject to a monthly "Off-Premise Sign Advertising Permit Fee" in the amount of $3,000 per month, payable to the City of Tolleson. Failure to pay the monthly fee shall be a violation of the zoning ordinance and the city may take action to revoke the use permit. 
(7)  Notwithstanding any other applicable requirement related to digital billboards, the maximum number of digital billboards that are allowed to be permitted in the City of Tolleson shall be three. 
(I)  Political signs. Political signs are permitted in all zones, subject to the limitations in § 12-4-133 and provided the sign is not placed in a location that is hazardous to public safety, obstructs clear vision in the area or interferes with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 United States Code sections 12101 through 12213 and 47 United States Code sections 225 and 611). 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 417, N.S., passed 10-12-2004; Am. Ord. 425, N.S., passed 4-26-2005; Am. Ord. 425, N.S., passed 4-26-2005; Am. Ord. 440, N.S., passed 7-11-2006; Am. Ord. 477., N.S., passed 11-18-2008; Am. Ord. 485, N.S., passed 4-14-2009; Am. Ord. 530, N.S. , 10-23-2012; Am. Ord. 559, N.S. , § 1, passed 12-8-2015; Am. Ord. 568, N.S. , passed 2-28-2017) 
§ 12-4-133 - SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED SIGNS. 
(A)  Signs are permitted in accordance with the zoning use district and type of activity which the sign identifies, as specified, in the following chart: 
Use Signs Max. #
of Signs Maximum Sign Area Type Building
Mounted Free Standing Illumination Permitted Per Sign Per Site Single-family residence Address X - No 1 1 sf 1 sf Home occupation Identification X No 1 4 sf 4 sf Public/ community buildings; schools; religious institutions Building X No 1 24 sf 24 sf Identification X or X No 1 24 sf 24 sf Multi-family dwellings; dwelling groups, mobile home parks; recreation vehicle parks Development X No 2 24 sf 24 sf Identification X or X No 2 24 sf 24 sf Clubs; lodges; nursery school; day care centers Building X No 1 24 sf 24 sf Identification or X No 1 24 sf 24 sf Office and commercial uses Business X Yes See §§ 12-4-132(B) and (G) Identification X Yes Warehousing and industrial uses Business X Yes 1 or more 50 sf 100 sf Identification X Yes 1 36 sf Commercial or industrial centers Center X Yes See §§ 12-4-132(B) and (G) Identification X Yes Directional Information X or X No 1 p/entry 3 sf - Subdivision Identification X or X No 1 p/entry 24 sf - Advertising X or X No 1 32 sf - Construction/ development Development advertising X or X No 1 32 sf 32 sf Contractor 
advertising X or X No 1 per 
contractor 24 sf - Grand opening; pennants; flags and the like Advertising X or X No - - 100 sf Sale/lease Commercial, 
industrial, 
advertising X or X No - 32 sf 32 sf Residential 
advertising X or X No - 6 sft 6 sf Political Campaign 
identification X or X No Commercial/ Industrial/ Other Zone: 
32 sf 
Residential: 
16 sf -  
(B)  Temporary signs are limited to the following time periods: 
1.  Subdivision advertising signs: sell out of subdivision or maximum of two years. 
2.  Construction/development signs: completion of development plus 30 days. 
3.  Grand opening signs/pennants: 30 days. One time permit for this 30 day event. 
4.  Political signs: shall not be displayed more than 60 days before a primary election and shall be removed within 15 days after election. 
5.  Sandwich or portable signs - permit required - $15 for a maximum 3 days per week, maximum 3 square feet, and signs must be removed at the end of that day. Failure to remove the sign shall result in citation by enforcement officer of the Code Enforcement Department. 
6.  Yard sale signs - permit required - $5 for 2 signs for a 2-day yard sale, maximum 2 square feet, signs shall be removed at the end of that day. Failure to remove shall result in citation by enforcement officer of the Code Enforcement Department. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 417, N.S., passed 10-12-2004; Am. Ord. 530, N.S. , 10-23-2012) 
§ 12-4-134 - SIGN MAINTENANCE. 
(A)  Signs are to be maintained in good order and repair. 
(B)  If any sign becomes a hazard to the public or becomes deteriorated or abandoned, the property owner or sign-owner will be notified to remove or repair the sign; non-compliance within ten days will result in the Zoning Administrator having the sign removed and the cost assessed to the property owner. 
(C)  Once a sign has been removed, it cannot be relocated or reconstructed unless it complies with all provisions of the Tolleson zoning code and building code. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-135 - PROHIBITED SIGNS. 
(A)  Electronic message display (EMD) or digital signs unless permitted by the City Council through the approval of a use permit application. EMD signs are not allowed in residential districts or with residential uses within any district. 
(B)  Signs with audible devices. 
(C)  Signs which interfere with or confuse traffic or present a traffic hazard. 
(D)  "Sandwich" or portable signs (this section will be removed). 
(E)  Signs mounted on roofs or projected above the highest point of a building. 
(F)  Signs attached, mounted or painted on motorized or non-motorized vehicles when used for advertising at or near a business or activity, other than for identification of a business. 
(G)  Signs projecting more than 30 inches from the perpendicular wall to which they are attached, except projecting signs which are entirely under an awning, canopy or roof overhang. 
(H)  Signs announcing the proposed development of property prior to issuance of a building permit or after issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 559, N.S. , § 2, passed 12-8-2015) 
ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS 

§ 12-4-150 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  It is the intent of this section to make clear that nothing in this zoning ordinance is intended to be in conflict with other codes and accepted standards listed in this section; and, it is intended that this section hereby notifies the general public and the residents of Tolleson that all new buildings, uses and developments shall comply with the following additional codes and regulations and others adopted by the City of Tolleson and the State of Arizona in the future: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
(2)  International Mechanical Code; 
(3)  International Plumbing Code; 
(4)  National Electrical Code; 
(5)  International Fire Code; 
(6)  Maricopa Association of Governments Specifications, the latest version as it is published; 
(7)  Arizona Department of Water Resources Conservation Regulations; 
(8)  Flood plain Regulations as adopted by Maricopa County and the City of Tolleson, including Ord. 128; 
(9)  Subdivision regulations of the State of Arizona and the City of Tolleson Ord. 210, N.S.; 
(10)  City Code of Tolleson, 2008 Edition; and 
(11)  Implementation Guide for City of Tolleson Land Use Plan, 2005. 
(B)  It is the intent of this section to provide specific regulations for special considerations, including non-conforming uses and buildings, exceptions to building height and lot area limitations and encroachments into required yard setbacks. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-151 - NON-CONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS. 
(A)  Any building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this article, or its time of effect on newly annexed territory to the city, or any amendment thereto, shall be declared to be non-conforming and the use shall be permitted to continue, even though the building, structure or use does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
(B)  No structural alteration shall be made to non-conforming buildings, except those required by law or ordinance; normal maintenance and repair are excepted. 
(C)  No extension or expansion shall be made of buildings, structures or uses unless the extension shall conform to the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. However, a non-conforming use may be extended throughout those parts of an existing building or structure which were manifestly arranged or designed for the use prior to the time of the enactment of this article. 
(D)  Any non-conforming building or structure which has been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war or riot may be restored if completed within 12 months of the calamity if the area restored does not exceed the square foot area as it existed at the time of the calamity. 
(E)  No building, structure or land in or on which a non-conforming use is abandoned or ceases to be carried on for a period exceeding six months shall again be used for any use other than those which comply with the regulations of the use district in which the building, structure or land is located as designated in this article. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-152 - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. 
(A)  Lots. 
(1)  All lots, premises, buildings and structures shall be used, constructed, altered, repaired, improved, moved, removed, erected, demolished or materially altered in conformity with these provisions and the provision of the zone in which it is located. 
(2)  A lot or parcel may not be divided to create a lot that is not in conformance with all regulations of this article; no space needed to meet the minimum width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements of this article for a lot, building or use may be sold, leased or encroached upon. 
(3)  Any parcel of land having an area less than that required by the provisions of this zoning code for a lot in the use district in which the parcel is situated and which parcel was legally established at the time it came under the provisions of this zoning code, shall be deemed to be a lot and may be used as a building site; provided, however, that, all other regulations for the use district shall be complied with. 
(B)  Reconstruction. Any building damaged by fire or other causes to over 50% of its reproductive value will not be repaired or rebuilt unless its repair and rebuilding is in complete conformity with all regulations of this article. 
(C)  Yard encroachments. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed, except as follows: 
(1)  Ordinary architectural details such as canopies, cornices, eaves, chimneys, sills, leaders, belt courses and other similar features and including window or wall-mounted refrigeration, cooling or heating devices may project three feet over any required yard, provided that they are not closer than three feet to any lot line. 
(2)  Awnings, unenclosed balconies, terraces, decks, stairs and landings and other similar features may project up to six feet into any required yard, provided that they are not closer than three feet to any lot line. 
(3)  Detached accessory buildings and swimming pools may encroach into required side yards and rear yards, provided they are at least five feet from the main structure and at least five feet from the rear and interior side lot lines and provided they maintain the same required side-yard setback from the street side-lot line as the main building. 
(a)  Detached accessory buildings may not occupy more than 25% of a rear or side yard area. See §§ 12-4-20(E) and 12-4-21(E); building lot coverage. 
(b)  Attached accessory buildings are considered an integral part of the main building for purposes of determining yard, lot and area requirements and lot coverage. 
(c)  Solar heating and cooling units, greenhouses and associated apparatus may be located in a rear or side yard provided the units and apparatus do not occupy more than 25% of the side or rear yard and are not closer than three feet from a lot line. 
(D)  Height exemptions. All buildings and structures shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered in conformance with the height regulations designated for the zone in which the building or structure is located, except as follows: 
(1)  Attached church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes and penthouses not for human occupancy and flagpoles, clock towers, chimneys, bulk heads, monuments, crosses, sculptures and ornamentation, water tanks, skylights, ventilators, heating and cooling and other mechanical equipment and antennas and other similar attached features may exceed the height limitations for the zone in which they are located; provided, however, that if the structure should collapse, its reclining length would still be contained on the property on which it was constructed. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial antennas and broadcasting devices, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, grain elevators or similar structures may exceed the height limitations of the zone in which it is located; provided, however, that, if the structure should collapse, its reclining length would still be contained on the property on which it was constructed. 
(3)  Freestanding windmills, antennas, solar heating or cooling apparatus may exceed the height limitations of the zone in which it is located with the approval of plans by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-153 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; LOCATION. 
(A)  Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(1)  The following regulations apply to all zoning districts in the City of Tolleson. 
(a)  A sexually oriented business is prohibited from being established, located, operated, or licensed in any City of Tolleson zoning district other than the General Industrial District (I-2), as defined and described in §§ 12-4-60 through 12-4-64, and as indicated on the City of Tolleson zoning map, subject to the following location requirements. 
(b)  1. A sexually oriented business is prohibited from being established, operating, caused to be operated, located or licensed for business within 1,000 feet of: 
a.  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
b.  A public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
c.  A boundary of a residential zoning district as defined in the Tolleson zoning ordinance; 
d.  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city; 
e.  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the Tolleson zoning ordinance; 
f.  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; 
g.  A business having an Arizona spirituous liquor license with any of the following classifications: Bar (Series 06); Beer and Wine Bar (Series 07); or the equivalent of those licenses; and 
h.  Another sexually oriented business. 
2.  The 1,000 feet minimum distance requirement herein replaces the minimum distance requirements set forth previously. 
(B)  Penalty. 
(1)  In addition to the civil fines that may be enforced by the City of Tolleson for violations of the zoning ordinance under the Tolleson Code and Arizona law, a person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates, causes to be operated, causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within a zoning district other than the General Industrial District (I-2) or within 1,000 feet of those uses set forth in division (A)(1)(b). 
(2)  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(C)  Measurement. For the purpose of divisions (A)(1)(b) and (h) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in division (A)(1)(b). Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
(D)  Legal non-conforming use. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating as of the effective date of this division that is in violation of divisions (A) through (D) of this section shall be deemed a legal non-conforming use. The legal non-conforming use is permitted to continue, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. These non-conforming uses shall not be substantially enlarged, extended, or more than reasonably repaired or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. 
(E)  Operating as a conforming use. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in division (A)(1)(b) of this section within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been revoked. 
(F)  Minimum setback. Sexually oriented businesses are subject to the setback requirements under the I-1 Zoning District. 
(G)  Variances. No variance may be granted from the 1,000 foot minimum distance requirement set forth in this section. 
(H)  Remedies. 
(1)  A person who causes, operates or causes the establishment of a sexually oriented business without a valid license, or in violation of this section, is subject to a suit for an injunction, civil penalties and prosecution for criminal violations. 
(2)  Violations shall be punishable by a fine of a minimum of $100 up to $1,000 or 20 days imprisonment, for each offense. 
(3)  Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. 432, N.S., passed 9-27-2005) 
Cross reference- For licensing of sexually oriented businesses, see Sexually Oriented Businesses, Article 5-6 
§ 12-4-154 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA USES. 
    The following minimum requirements shall apply to all medical marijuana dispensary and medical marijuana cultivation location uses permitted under A.R.S. § 36-2801 et seq. (the "Act") and § 12-4-61: 
(A)  In addition to any other application requirements, an applicant for any medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location use shall provide the following: 
(1)  A notarized authorization, executed by the property owner, acknowledging and consenting to the proposed use of the property as a medical marijuana dispensary or a medical marijuana cultivation location. 
(2)  The legal name of the medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location. 
(3)  If the application is for a medical marijuana cultivation location, the name and location of the medical marijuana dispensary with which it is associated, and, in addition, in the case of designated caregivers or qualifying patients, the names of qualifying patients for which the medical marijuana is being cultivated. 
(4)  The name, address and birth date of each officer and board member of the nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent. 
(5)  The name, address, birth date and valid registry identification card number of: 
(a)  Each medical marijuana dispensary agent if the application is related to a medical marijuana dispensary or a related medical marijuana cultivation location; and 
(b)  Each designated caregiver and qualifying patient if the application is related to a medical marijuana cultivation location associated with such qualifying patient and designated caregiver. 
(6)  A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(l)(c). 
(7)  A notarized certification that none of the medical marijuana dispensary officers or board members has been convicted of any of the following offenses: 
(a)  A violent crime, as defined in A.R.S. § 13-901.03(B), that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted. 
(b)  A violation of state or federal controlled substance law that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted except an offense for which the sentence, including any term of probation, incarceration or supervised release, was completed ten or more years earlier or an offense involving conduct that would be immune from arrest, prosecution or penalty under A.R.S. § 36-2811 except that the conduct occurred before the effective date of that statute or was prosecuted by an authority other than the state of Arizona. 
(8)  A notarized certification that none of the medical marijuana dispensary officers or board members has served as an officer or board member for a medical marijuana dispensary that has had its registration certificate revoked. 
(9)  A floor plan showing the location, dimensions and type of security measures demonstrating that the medial marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location will be secured, enclosed and locked as required by law. 
(10)  A scale drawing depicting the property lines and the separations from the nearest property boundary of the parcel containing the medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location to the property boundary of the parcel containing any existing uses listed in § 12-4-154(C) below. If any of the uses are located within 50 feet of the minimum separation, the drawing, showing actual surveyed separations, shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(B)  A medical marijuana dispensary shall have operating hours not earlier that 7:00 a.m. and not later than 9:00 p.m. 
(C)  A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location shall meet the following minimum separation requirements, measured in a straight line from the closest boundary of the parcel containing the medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location to the closest property boundary of the parcel containing any existing uses listed below: 
(1)  One mile from any other medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location. 
(2)  1,000 feet from a residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other residential drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility. 
(3)  1,000 feet from a public, private, parochial, charter, dramatic, dancing or music school, a learning center, or other similar school or educational facility that caters to children. 
(4)  1,000 feet from any residential zoning district or residential use. 
(5)  1,000 feet from a childcare center. 
(6)  1,000 feet from a public library or public park. 
(7)  1,000 feet from a religious institution. 
(D)  Pursuant to the application requirements and provisions under A.R.S. §§ 36-2804 and 2806, and except as provided under the Act for qualifying patients and designated caregivers, a medical marijuana cultivation location may only cultivate, process, supply, sell or otherwise provide medical marijuana to medical marijuana dispensaries located in Arizona, and only one medical marijuana cultivation location shall be permitted for the single Arizona medical marijuana dispensary with which it is associated. 
(E)  The following size limitations shall apply to any medical marijuana dispensary: 
(1)  The total maximum floor area of a medical marijuana dispensary, inclusive of any secure storage area, shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  The secure storage area for the medical marijuana stored at the medical marijuana dispensary shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. 
(F)  Reserved. 
(G)  A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location shall: 
(1)  Be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other mobile vehicle. The facility shall include fire protection measures, including sprinklers, as required by the Tolleson Fire Code. 
(2)  Install lighting to illuminate the exterior and interior of the building and all entrances and exits to the facility. Exterior lighting shall be five foot candles, measured at ground level, and shall remain on during all hours between sunset and sunrise each day and the medical marijuana dispensary or cultivation location shall illuminate all areas of the premises, including adjacent public sidewalks so that the areas are readily visible by law enforcement personnel. Twenty-four hours each day, the medical marijuana dispensary or cultivation location shall illuminate the entire interior of the building, with particular emphasis on the locations of any counter, safe, storage area and any location where people are prone to congregate. The lighting must be of sufficient brightness to ensure that the interior is readily visible from the exterior of the building from a distance of 100 feet. 
(3)  Not have a drive-through service. 
(4)  Not emit dust, fumes, vapors or odors into the environment. 
(5)  Not provide offsite delivery of medical marijuana, except to a medical marijuana dispensary served by the medical marijuana cultivation location. 
(6)  Have no on-site sales of alcohol or tobacco, and no on-site consumption of food, alcohol, tobacco or medical marijuana. 
(7)  Not have outdoor seating areas. 
(8)  Display a current city business license, and a state tax identification letter. 
(9)  Provide law enforcement and all interested neighbors with the name and phone number of an on-site community relations staff person to notify if there are operational problems with the establishment. 
(10)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall be compatible with structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood, to ensure against blight, deterioration, or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values in the vicinity. 
(11)  City code enforcement officers, police officers or other agents or employees of the city requesting admission for the purpose of determining compliance with these standards shall be given unrestricted access. 
(12)  Comply with all other applicable property development and design standards of the city. 
(H)  In addition to the requirements set forth in division (G) above, and to ensure that the operations of medical marijuana dispensaries are in compliance with state law and to mitigate the adverse secondary effects from operations of dispensaries, medical marijuana dispensaries shall operate in compliance with the following additional standards: 
(1)  Security guards shall be provided during all hours of operation or detailed internal security measures will be identified and maintained after consultation with and approval by the Police Department. For the purposes of this section, SECURITY GUARD shall mean licensed and duly bonded security personnel registered pursuant to A.R.S. § 32-2601 et seq . Prior to opening for business, the medical marijuana dispensary shall provide all property owners with a 500 foot radius of the medical marijuana dispensary location with written notification via first class U.S. mail of the security company responsible for providing its security services. 
(2)  If determined necessary by the City Manager at any time, medical marijuana dispensaries shall provide a neighborhood security guard patrol for a two-block radius surrounding the medical marijuana dispensary during all or specified hours of operation. 
(3)  No doctor shall issue a written certification on-site for medical marijuana. 
(4)  Medical marijuana dispensaries shall only dispense medical marijuana to qualified patients and their designated caregivers as defined in the Act. 
(5)  Medical marijuana dispensaries shall notify patrons of the following verbally and through posting of a sign in a conspicuous location at the medical marijuana dispensary: 
(a)  Use of medical marijuana shall be limited to the patient identified on the doctor's written certification. Secondary sale, barter or distribution of medical marijuana is a crime and can lead to arrest. 
(b)  Patrons must immediately leave the site and not consume medical marijuana until at home or in an equivalent private location. Medical marijuana dispensary staff shall monitor the site and vicinity to ensure compliance. 
(6)  Medical marijuana dispensaries shall not provide marijuana to any individual in an amount not consistent with personal medical use, or in violation of state law and regulations related to medical marijuana use. 
(7)  Medical marijuana dispensaries shall not store more than $200 in cash overnight on the premises. 
(8)  Any qualifying patient under 18 years of age shall be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Except for such parent or legal guardian, no persons other than qualifying patients and designated caregivers shall be permitted within a medical marijuana dispensary premises. 
(9)  No signs, advertising, or any other advertising matter used in connection with the medical marijuana dispensary shall be of any offensive nature and shall in no way be contrary to the city code, or obstruct the view of the interior of the premises viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. 503, N.S., passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 564, N.S. , passed 7-12-2016; Am. Ord. 577, N.S. , § 2, passed 11-14-2017) 
§ 12-4-155 - PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  The site of a personal wireless safety facility ("PWSF") must provide paved access and at least one parking space designed to applicable city standards which parking space may be incorporated as part of the maneuvering areas and access drives. This requirement can be waived by the Zoning Administrator when hard surfaced adjacent or nearby parking already exists, or when the Zoning Administrator concludes that the goals of the city are better served by modifying the parking requirement. 
2.  Applicants shall be responsible for registering all qualifying PWSFs with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
3.  Signs warning against trespassing and climbing support structures shall be posted near all scalable PWSFs located outside of secured areas. Step pegs shall not be placed lower than 15 feet from grade. 
4.  If a PWSF ceases operation, the PWSF and related equipment shall be removed by the provider or the provider's representative within six months of the shut down date. 
5.  Associated ground equipment shall be completely screened by a masonry enclosure that meets the requirements of § 12-4-102 of this zoning ordinance. Equipment enclosures/cabinets which exceed four feet in height shall not be located within the required building setback area for the zoning district in which the facility is located. Setback and screening requirements may be waived by the Zoning Administrator in instances where ground equipment is placed inside an existing, walled electrical substation or similar facility which encroaches into a required setback. In no instance shall ground equipment be located within the public right-of-way. 
6.  To the extent possible and in addition to any specific requirements set forth below, all components of a PWSF shall be finished or painted so as to minimize the visual obtrusiveness of the structure and shall not be illuminated unless otherwise required by state or federal regulations. Arrays and associated cables shall be painted to match the PWSF to reduce visual impact. 
B.  Personal wireless service facilities. 
1.  Freestanding PWSFs. 
a.  Freestanding PWSFs under 35 feet in height are permitted in all zoning districts subject to administrative approval. Freestanding PWSFs 35 feet or greater in height are permitted in all zoning districts subject to conditional use permit approval. 
b.  Prior to approval, the applicant must demonstrate an inability, or technical rationale, for not co-locating the PWSF on an existing vertical element. The applicant must provide the following information for city review: 
1)  A comprehensive list of all existing vertical elements of within a 1/2 mile radius of the proposed site which are: (a) of sufficient height to be used for PWSF co-location and (b) eligible for co-location under city requirements. 
2)  A written narrative statement explaining why co-location on the existing vertical elements identified according to subsection 12-4-155(B)(1)(b)(1) above was not pursued, or is not a viable alternative to the proposed site. 
3)  Map exhibits displaying: (a) the existing gap in signal coverage the new PWSF will remediate and, (b) the projected signal coverage of the new PWSF. 
c.  Freestanding PWSFs shall be set back from all property lines a minimum distance of one foot for each one foot of the PWSF's height above finished grade except that freestanding PWSFs located within electrical substations, receiving stations, or government facilities shall be exempt from setback requirements. 
d.  Freestanding PWSFs shall be alternative structure designs, (otherwise referred to as "stealth designs") in character with the surrounding area (i.e. a flagpole at a public building, a palm tree in an area with mature palm trees, a pine tree in an area with mature evergreen trees or a saguaro cactus in an area with other, mature saguaro cactus); provided, however, that monopole, lattice tower or guyed tower designs may be permitted without alternative structure designs, if the applicant provides the Zoning Administrator with such information as necessary to determine that the PWSF will only be visible from permanently unoccupied areas or that the character of the proposed tower will blend in with the surrounding area (i.e. within the confines of an electrical substation containing other structures of similar height). 
2.  Building mounted PWSFs. 
a.  PWSFs mounted on buildings are permitted in all zoning districts subject to administrative approval. 
b.  PWSFs mounted on buildings shall be alternative structures integrated into the design of the building as an integral architectural element or roof mounted and completely screened by the height of the parapet. All wireless communications equipment, including associated ground equipment, shall be completely concealed from view. 
c.  Architectural features used to conceal PWSFs mounted on buildings shall not extend above the roof more than twice the height of the building. For example, a building with a height of 30 feet may incorporate a PWSF within a 30-foot bell tower (for a total height from finished grade of 60 feet) if all other conditions of this zoning ordinance are met. 
3.  Location of PWSFs on existing vertical elements. 
a.  PWSFs may be mounted on the following existing vertical elements subject to administrative approval: 
1)  Pre-existing or planned electrical "transmission line" poles (as defined by § 12-1-90) not subject to City of Tolleson undergrounding requirements. 
2)  Pre-existing monopoles, guyed towers or lattice towers. 
3)  Athletic field lighting towers. 
4)  Other existing vertical elements on which the mounting of antennas will not significantly alter the function and character of the structure as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
b.  PWSFs mounted on existing vertical elements shall not cause the height of the element to increase, except that PWSFs mounted on electrical transmission line poles may extend up to 15 feet above the existing height of the electrical transmission line pole. 
c.  PWSFs mounted on existing elements shall utilize the smallest antenna and array sizes technically and reasonably feasible. 
d.  To the extent possible, all visible components of a PWSF shall be finished or painted to match the existing vertical element, to minimize visual obtrusiveness, and shall not be illuminated unless otherwise required by state or federal regulations. 
( Ord. 550, N.S. , passed 1-13-2015) 
12-4-156 - Small wireless facilities 
(A)  Intent . It is the intent of this section to promote the use of appropriate wireless communication facilities while encouraging co-location and design techniques that minimize the impacts of the facilities on the community. The city encourages providers to explore all co-location options, locations on existing municipal facilities or locations on existing vertical structures prior to applying for a new facility. The city further encourages applicants to explore all camouflaging and screening options available to reduce the visual and environmental impacts of the facilities on the community. 
(B)  General provisions. 
(1)  Wireless communication facilities, as defined in this chapter, shall be a conditionally permitted use in all zones, and; small wireless communication facilities are classified as permitted use by right if collocated in a right-of-way in any zone. 
(2)  Wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the limitations contained in this section and as otherwise set forth in city codes. 
(C)  Definitions. The definitions set forth in A.R.S. § 9-591 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(D)  General requirements . All wireless communication facilities (hereinafter referred to as facility) shall meet the following general requirements. 
(1)  Inventory of existing sites . Each applicant for a facility shall provide to the city an inventory of its existing facilities or sites approved for facilities that are located either within the city or within any city zoning district. In addition to showing all existing and approved sites, inventories shall show all other wireless communication sites located within one mile of the proposed site, regardless of jurisdictional location. Each inventory shall include general information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share this information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the city; provided however, that the city is not, by sharing the information, in any way representing or warranting that the information is accurate, and that sites are available or suitable. 
(2)  State or federal requirements . All facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If the standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring the towers and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring facilities and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(3)  Building code safety standards . To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state and local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with the codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the tower into compliance with the standards. Failure to bring the tower into compliance within 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(4)  Measurement . For the purpose of determining separation distances, distances from property lines or districts, and setback distances, distance shall be measured from the closest portion of the pole or structure to the property line, district, pole, or structure in question. Tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city, irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. Minimum setbacks for equipment shall conform to the International Building Code. 
(5)  Franchises and licenses . Owners and/or operators of wireless facilities shall certify that all franchises or licenses required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises or licenses with the city. 
(6)  Pre-existing towers . Pre-existing towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (routine maintenance does not include replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) and construction related to the use of the pole or structure for the purposes of adding additional carriers shall be permitted on the pre-existing towers. New construction, including replacement of an existing tower, other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower, shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(7)  Rebuilding damaged or destroyed non-conforming towers or antennas . Notwithstanding this chapter, bona fide non-conforming towers or antennas that are damaged to the extent that repairs constitute 50% of the value of the undamaged tower or antennas or destroyed shall not be rebuilt without first obtaining a conditional use permit and meeting separation requirements specified in this section. The type, height, and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and of no greater intensity than the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then-applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained, or if the permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in this chapter. 
(8)  Abandonment of towers or facilities . A facility shall be deemed abandoned when the facility is not in use for a period of six consecutive months. The owner of the facility shall remove the facility within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of the abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within the 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until users cease using the tower. 
(9)  Federal, state, and local government exemption . Wireless communication facilities owned by the federal, state, or city government shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(10)  City Council approval . Any tower over 35 feet in height is required to go to City Council for approval after being presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(E)  Conditionally permitted use . A wireless communication facility shall be a conditionally permitted use and processed in accordance with § 12-4-155 of this chapter, except for small wireless facilities collocated in a right-of-way in any zone. All conditionally permitted wireless communication facility uses shall meet the following minimum development standards. 
(1)  The maximum height of the facility, except for rooftop or wall mounted facilities, facilities co-locating on an existing wireless communication facility, facilities locating on existing utility poles, or facilities located on existing vertical structures on school or municipal property, shall be 80 feet, provided, however, if the facility is located in any residential district or within 75 feet of the property line of residential use or district, the maximum height shall be 65 feet. 
(2)  An installation co-locating on an existing facility shall not increase the overall pole or tower height by more than 15 feet, and the antennas shall not exceed a maximum height of 95 feet or 65 feet in any residential district. Installations co-locating on existing utility poles may increase the height of the pole by not more than 15 feet. Installations locating on existing vertical structures on school or municipal property shall follow the non-residential height requirements. 
(3)  The facility replacing an existing pole on school or park grounds does not increase the original pole circumference by more than is necessary to accommodate the additional structural requirements. 
(4)  The pole or tower shall be set back from all adjacent residential zoning districts or residential land use property lines a minimum of 110% of the height of the tower or pole. The pole shall be set back from all non-residential zoning district or non-residential property lines a minimum of five feet and shall be set back from all street property lines equal to or greater than the building setback for the district in which the pole or tower is located. 
(5)  Facilities co-locating on utility poles, facilities within the right-of-way, or facilities located on school or city property shall not be required to meet the setback requirements set forth above. 
(6)  Tower and monopole facilities visible from off-site residential or business district view shall be camouflaged using an alternative design tower as defined in this chapter. 
(7)  A rooftop or wall mounted facility shall be hidden from off-site views and shall be camouflaged and screened to the extent possible by screen walls and/or the building parapet. 
(8)  A rooftop mounted facility shall be 15 feet or less in height as measured from the surrounding rooftop height to the top of all appurtenances. 
(9)  A wall-mounted facility shall be 12 feet or less in height. Wall-mounted facilities shall be mounted so as not to extend above the roofline of the building and shall not project more than 12 inches from the building face. 
(10)  The colors and texture of the facility shall be compatible with the surrounding environment as determined by the city, except as otherwise required by the FAA. 
(11)  No commercial advertising or signage shall be allowed on-site; however, each facility shall have an identification plaque no larger than 12 inches high by 24 inches wide permanently affixed which clearly identifies the name, address, and emergency phone number of the provider. 
(12)  A facility shall have at least one parking space designed to city standards. This requirement shall also include maneuvering areas and access drives. This requirement shall be waived when sufficient hard surface parking exists. 
(13)  The facility shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. 
(14)  A facility may not be allowed within 1,320 feet of a city or state designated historical site. 
(15)  The minimum separation between facilities, except for approved alternate tower structures, rooftop or wall mounted facilities, facilities located within the industrial zoning districts, and facilities located on existing vertical structures on school or municipal property, shall be 1,000 feet, unless otherwise approved by the City Council. 
(16)  Security fencing is required and shall not exceed eight feet in height. Fencing shall be effectively screened from view by the use of landscaping. 
(17)  Anti-climbing features shall be incorporated in the wireless communication facility, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass and injury. 
(18)  Co-location of city or other public safety agency wireless communication facilities shall be permitted at no cost to the public on private wireless communication facilities approved in accordance with this section. 
(F)  Design standards. Wireless communication facilities shall be designed and constructed in conformity with and/or architecturally integrated with surrounding building designs or natural settings to minimize the adverse visual impact and ensure the facility is compatible with the environment in which it is located. Methods of camouflage design include: 
(1)  Canister, facilities under 45 feet in height shall conceal antennas with a canister or approved equal. 
(2)  Monopine, facilities over 45 feet, less than 65 feet in height shall conceal the antennas with a monopine pole or approved equal. 
(3)  Monopalm, facilities over 65 feet in height shall conceal the antennas with a monopalm pole or approved equal. 
(4)  Screening, ground equipment shall be screened with landscaping plantings or a material approved by the City Engineer or designee. 
(5)  Color, facilities poles and ground equipment color shall match the surrounding existing poles or a color approved by the City Engineer or designee. 
(Ord. 580, N.S. , passed May 8, 2018) 
PROCEDURES 

§ 12-4-165 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  The "Procedures" subarticle of this article is intended to provide information of the various processes permitted for the following: 
(1)  Amendments to both this article and the zoning map of the City of Tolleson; 
(2)  Variances to the terms of this article; 
(3)  Use permits as specified in this article; 
(4)  Site plan submissions; and 
(5)  Appeals of the Zoning Administrator's decisions regarding interpretation and enforcement of this article. 
(B)  The documents and fees required for each of these various procedures is also provided in this subarticle. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-166 - AMENDMENTS AND THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
(A)  Changes in district boundaries and zoning ordinances. 
(1)  The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement, modify, or change by ordinance the boundaries of districts established on the zoning map or the regulations set forth in this article. 
(2)  Any proposed amendment or supplement or change shall first be transmitted to the Commission created hereinafter by this article for its recommendations and reports. 
(B)  Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Tolleson is hereby established, appointed by the City Council, and composed of five members, who shall be residents and taxpayers of the City of Tolleson serving without pay. Each appointed Commissioner shall serve a three-year term. In the event of death or resignation of a member, the vacancy may be filled for the unexpired term. The term of all members shall extend until their successors are qualified. The Tolleson City Council at their discretion may remove a member of the Commission by majority vote. 
(2)  Members of the Commission may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred by the Commission upon approval of the expenditures by the City Council. 
(3)  The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among its own members, who shall serve for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the usual rights and dues and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and to take evidence. The Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in the latter's absence or disability. Vacancies created by any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by a new election. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the Commission to formulate, create and administer any lawful plan duly adopted by the governing body for the present and future growth of the City of Tolleson pertaining to the use of land and buildings for any purpose, together with all incidental activities usually associated therewith and commonly known as "Planning and Zoning;" to make or cause to be made a continuous study of the best present and future use to which land and buildings shall be put within the City of Tolleson and in cooperation with adjacent areas; to recommend to the governing body revisions in the plans which, in the opinion of the Commission are for the best interest of the citizens of the City of Tolleson; to promulgate rules of procedure and to supervise the enforcement of rules so promulgated by the Commission and approved by the City Council. 
(5)  The Commission shall provide in its rules for regular meetings; provided, however, that special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or in his or her absence the Vice-Chairperson. In addition, any three members of the Commission may make written request of the Chairperson for a special meeting and in the event a meeting is not called, the members may call the special meetings. 
(6)  Three members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of three members shall be required for passage of any matter and recommendation before the Commission. A member may abstain from voting only upon a declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest, in which case the member shall take no part in the deliberations on the matter in question. 
(C)  Notice of hearings and actions. 
(1)  Before submitting its recommendations and reports to the City Council, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendments, supplement, or change. It shall give at least 15 days notice of the time and place of the hearing by publication at least one time in any official papers or newspaper of general circulation and by mailing notices to all governmental agencies and property owners who, in the opinion of the Commission may be affected by the amendment, supplement or change and in accordance with the rules or procedure as maybe established hereinafter. 
(2)  No amendment, supplement or change in any of the provisions of this article or in the boundaries of any of the districts established there under shall become effective until 30 days after a public hearing and approved by the City Council in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published in an official paper or a paper of general circulation. 
(3)  The Commission shall recommend and the City Council shall take final action by any of the following actions on any amendment request: 
(a)  Approve; 
(b)  Approve with conditions; 
(c)  Deny; or 
(d)  Table for further study or future action. 
(D)  Protest. 
(1)  In case of a protest filed in writing against a proposed amendment or change in the boundaries of a district signed by the owners of 20% or more of: 
(a)  The area of the lots included in the proposed changes. 
(b)  Those adjacent in the rear or side thereof and extending 150 feet there from. 
(c)  Those directly opposite thereto and extending 150 feet from the street frontage of the opposite lots. The amendment or change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three- fourths of all the members of the City Council. 
(2)  Petitions in opposition to the application shall be presented to the City Clerk at least 24 hours before the hearing on the matter. The applicant shall have a right to inspect and copy all petitions submitted in opposition to his or her application and to contact and confirm the opposition. 
(3)  The failure to notify an individual property owner or owners as hereinbefore provided shall not invalidate an ordinance; provided, the failure was not intentional, in the opinion of the Commission, and that the intention of this section is to provide a notice to persons substantially interested in the proposed change, that an ordinance is pending, proposed to be amended, supplemented, or changes to the boundaries of the districts established on the zoning map, were made so far as may be possible. 
(E)  Annexed territory. Territory to be annexed into the corporate limits of the City of Tolleson shall be annexed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-471 or subsequent statutes; the annexed territory shall be classified in zoning use districts which permit densities and uses no greater than those permitted by Maricopa County immediately before annexation. Subsequent changes in zoning use district classification of the annexed territory shall be made in accordance with the regulations of this section, previously specified. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987) 
§ 12-4-167 - VARIANCES, APPEALS AND BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. 
(A)  Variances and appeals. 
(1)  From time to time, variances from the terms of this zoning code may be applied for, because of special circumstances applicable to a property, including its size, shape, topography, location or surroundings in which case the strict application of this zoning code would deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by other property of the same classification in the same zoning use district. 
(a)  In connection with any variance, the conditions as may be deemed necessary in order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this article may be imposed. 
(b)  The variances as are granted shall be void, if the use is not commenced, or, if a building permit has not been obtained within 180 days of the granting or within the time stipulated by the granting. 
(2)  From time to time, appeals from the decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be taken when it is alleged that an error in an order, requirement or decision in the enforcement of the zoning code has been made. 
(a)  Appeals may be taken by persons aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator. To appeal a decision, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date of the decision of the Zoning Administrator and the Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Administrator shall immediately transmit all records pertaining to the action appealed to the Board of Adjustment. 
(b)  An appeal stays all proceedings in the matter appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board that, in his or her opinion by the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon the certification, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Appeals from the decisions of the Zoning Administrator and requests for variances referred without decision or recommendation by the Zoning Administrator to the Board of Adjustment shall be heard in a public hearing of the Tolleson Board of Adjustment as created in the following section of this article. 
(B)  Board of Adjustment. 
(1)  The Board of Adjustment is hereby created which shall be composed of five members who shall be residents and taxpayers of the city, and who shall serve without pay. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the City Council; the appointment to be for a period of three years each, except that, in the event of the death or resignation of a member, the vacancy may be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term. The Board shall elect the Chairperson from among its own members who shall have power to administer oaths and to take evidence. The City Council shall perform functions of the Board of Adjustment under this article until the time as the City Council determines it is appropriate to appoint and constitute the Board of Adjustment as a separate body per the terms of this division. 
(2)  Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member and record of its examinations and other official actions, shall be kept and filed in the office of the City Clerk as a public record. Written notice of every meeting or hearing of the Board shall be given to the City Manager at least five days prior to the date the meeting shall be held, which notice shall specify the matters to be considered at the meeting. No final action shall be taken on any matter not specified in the notice, nor in the required publication specified hereinafter. 
(3)  The Board shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this article for the conduct of its business and procedure. 
(4)  Three members shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of three of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order or decision of an administrative official; or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass or to affect any variation from the terms and conditions of this article. 
(C)  Notice of hearings and actions. 
(1)  The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal or request for variance and shall give notice of hearing by both publication in a newspaper or general circulation and posting the notice in conspicuous places close to the property affected, at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(2)  The Board shall perform the following: 
(a)  Hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in an order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of a zoning code adopted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Hear and decide appeals for variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance and approve variances if they meet the following four criteria. 
1.  There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or building on the property that do not apply to other similar properties in the same zoning district. These special circumstances can relate to the size, shape, topography, location or surrounding of the property. 
2.  The special circumstances or conditions described above were not created or self-imposed by the applicant or owner of the property. 
3.  The variance approval cannot constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is located. 
4.  The variance approval is necessary in order for the owner or applicant to enjoy the privileges of property rights enjoyed by the owners of other properties in the same zoning district. Any variance granted is subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not grant special privileges to the applicant or property owner who requests a variance from the terms of the zoning regulations in which the property is located. 
(c)  Reverse or affirm, whole or partly, or modify the order, requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator appealed from, and make the order, requirement, decision or determination as necessary. 
(3)  The Board may not perform any of the following: 
(a)  Make any changes in the uses permitted in the zoning classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of the zoning code provided the restriction in this division shall not affect the authority to grant variances pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the property are self-imposed by the property owner. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 409, N.S., passed 9-9-2003; Am. Ord. 442, N.S., passed 7-25-2006) 
§ 12-4-168 - USE PERMITS. 
(A)  Only specific uses designated as "Uses Permitted Subject to Use Permit" in each zoning use district may be permitted in the zoning use district, wherein it is designated, if approved by the City Council at a public hearing. 
(B)  The City Council shall notice and hear requests for use permits in conformance with the regulations prescribed, heretofore for amendments herein. 
(C)  The City Council may approve or deny the request for a use permit in its findings pertaining to the following and other aspects: 
(1)  Whether or not the use requested will substantially or permanently injure existing or proposed uses or values of nearby properties; 
(2)  Whether or not the use requested will substantially alter the essential character of the nearby area; 
(3)  Whether or not the use requested will weaken the purpose and intent of the zoning use district in which the property under request is located; and 
(4)  Whether or not physical aspects, such as increased traffic, noise, lighting and activity will negatively impact adjacent properties. 
(D)  The City Council may prescribe the conditions as deemed necessary in order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this article. 
(E)  The use permits are granted at the sole discretion of the City Council, no inherent rights of use are hereby granted for use permits by their designation in this article. 
(F)  Use permits granted by the City Council shall be void if the use is not commenced, or, if a building permit has not been obtained within 180 days of the granting or within the time stipulated by the City Council. 
(G)  Use permits granted by the City Council shall be void if the use is abandoned or ceased to be carried on for a period exceeding 180 calendar days. After the expiration of 180 days, the City Council, after notification by certified mail to the owner of the property, shall schedule a public hearing to take administrative action to void the use permit and cause the property to revert to its former zoning classification. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 441, N.S., passed 7-11-2006; Am. Ord. 562, N.S. , passed 3-22-2016) 
§ 12-4-169 - SITE PLAN REVIEW AND BUILDING PERMITS. 
(A)  Applicability. 
(1)  All development in the City of Tolleson, except detached or attached single-family units on individual lots, shall be subject to site plan review as provided in this article. 
(2)  All applications for rezoning, except those involving a detached or attached single-family units on individual lots, shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with this section; the site plans shall be submitted together with the rezoning application. 
(B)  Submittal requirements. The applicant is encouraged to meet with appropriate city staff prior to making application for site plan approval to discuss the development concept, the review and approval process, and the submittal requirements. An application for site plan review shall be submitted to the Building Department on an official form provided by the department together with the appropriate fees as set forth in § 12-4-170 and § 12-5-16. The application shall contain sufficient information for the city to determine whether the proposed development meets the requirements of the city. Said information shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Site plan, inclusive of the following, as applicable: 
(a)  Name of project. 
(b)  Legal description. 
(c)  Address or location. 
(d)  Assessor's parcel number(s). 
(e)  Zoning of subject property and adjacent properties. 
(f)  Vicinity map showing location of parcel. 
(g)  North arrow. 
(h)  Legend. 
(i)  Scale (of a standard engineering scale not less than 1" = 50'). 
(j)  Title block indicating the person(s) and/or firm(s) that prepared the plan, address, phone number, and email along with date of original preparation and date(s) of subsequent revision(s). 
(k)  Owner and developer information including contact person, address, email and phone number. 
(1)  Property dimensions and area. 
(m)  Required setbacks. 
(n)  Existing and proposed structures and land uses on-site and immediately adjacent to the site. 
(o)  Proposed density in units per acre and/or buildings per lot. 
(p)  Parking (required and proposed including ADA spaces) and circulation and fire lanes. 
(q)  Any other pertinent features proposed for the site such as monument or freestanding signs, screening or perimeter walls and fences, etc. 
(2)  Building elevations, colored and depicting each side of each building; 
(3)  Preliminary grading and drainage plan, inclusive of retention basin calculations and FEMA floodplains, as applicable; 
(4)  Preliminary utility plan; and 
(5)  Preliminary landscaping plan. 
(C)  Site plans review. 
(1)  The Building Department shall review all submitted site plan applications. If the Department determines that the proposed site plan: 
(a)  Is consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the community; and 
(b)  Is in harmony with the purposes and intent of this article, the general plan, the zoning code and any other applicable plan for the area, then the Department may recommend site plan approval to the City Council and may recommend the conditions and safeguards as the Department deems necessary to satisfy the provisions in this article, the general plan and zoning code. 
(2)  The Department may determine that the conditions required for approval do not exist and, thereupon, recommend site plan denial. 
(D)  City Council action. Upon recommendation from the Building Department, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed site plan. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided by mailing a notice of public hearing at least 15 days prior to the public hearing to each owner of property as last disclosed by Maricopa County real estate tax records, situated wholly or partially within 300 feet of the subject property. The applicant shall furnish to the Building Department with its application the names, addresses and stamped addressed envelopes for the property owners, and the Department shall mail the notices. The City Council may approve the site plan and may impose the conditions and stipulations as it deems necessary to satisfy the requirements of the general plan, zoning code and this article. If the City Council determines that the site plan does not meet the minimum requirements for approval, it may deny the site plan, or refer the plan back to the Building Department for review and amendment. 
(E)  Building permits based upon approved site plan. 
(1)  For all development subject to site plan review, an approved site plan and proper zoning are required prior to the commencement of any construction or development on the site. 
(2)  The applicant shall obtain the necessary building and/or construction permits within 180 days of the date of approval of the site plan. If a building permit is not obtained within the 180-day time frame, the applicant may, prior to the date of expiration, file a request for an extension, whereupon the Zoning Administrator may authorize a one-time, 180-day extension. If the time frame has expired, the applicant shall submit a new site plan, together with the applicable documents and fees as stipulated in the above provisions. 
(3)  All applications for a building permit shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by four copies of plans, as specified by the Building Department, with all commercial, industrial or multi-family developments on subdivision plans sealed by an Arizona registered architect or engineer, drawn to scale, showing the location and actual shape and dimension of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and locations on the lot of any existing buildings, the lines within which the proposed building shall be erected or altered, the intended use of new buildings and their total square footage. 
(F)  Amendments to approved site plans. Any change or modification to an approved site plan shall be considered an amendment to the site plan. For all site plan amendments, revised site plans incorporating the changes shall be submitted to the Building Department. Site plan amendments shall be classified as major or minor and processed accordingly. 
(1)  Criteria for major amendments. Any modification which, as determined by the Building Department, substantially changes the approved site plan, shall be considered a major site plan amendment. The Department shall consider all amendments that would increase project gross land area, building square footage, or residential densities by more than 10%; materially change project land use; or alter traffic or pedestrian circulation patterns, to be major site plan amendments. 
(2)  Criteria for minor amendments. Any modification which, as determined by the Building Department, does not substantially change the approved site plan, shall be considered a minor site plan amendment. The Department shall consider changes such as minor dimensional building configuration and landscape changes, as well as the addition of shade structures, to be minor site plan amendments. 
(3)  Approval of major amendments. If the Building Department determines that an application is for a major site plan amendment, a new application form together with the revised site plan, associated materials, and the application fee shall be submitted to the Building Department and shall be subject to the application and site plan review processes as herein set forth. 
(4)  Approval of minor amendments. If the Building Department determines that an application is for a minor site plan amendment, the Department shall approve or deny the application through the building permit process. 
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 441, N.S., passed 7-11-2006; Am. Ord. 552, N.S. , passed 2-24-2015; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 7, passed 12-8-2015) 
§ 12-4-170 - FILING PROCEDURE AND FEE SCHEDULE. 
(A)  In addition to the documents required for site plan review above, an applicant requesting a zoning amendment, use permit or variance shall file the appropriate application, provided by the Zoning Administrator, a legal description and a current title report of the property under request. 
(B)  (1) Each and every request for zoning amendments, variances, use permits and site plan review shall be accompanied by a non-returnable/non-refundable per application review fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City of Tolleson and a non-returnable/non-refundable application fee in the amount set forth below: (See Ord. 346, N.S., passed 5-28-1996) 
Zoning map amendments $1,500 P.A.D. zone $200, plus $5 per dwelling unit Zoning ordinance amendments $600 Use permit requests $300 Variance requests $250 Appeals $200 Site plan review:   Single-family residential districts $750   All other residential districts $1,200   Commercial and industrial districts $2,000  
(2)  The City of Tolleson zoning code requires that for every request for zoning amendments, variances, use permits and site plan review Fee be accompanied by, among other things, a non-returnable/non-refundable per page review fee. The following is the list of non-returnable/non-refundable per page review fees applicable hereto. (See Ord. 346, N.S., passed 5-28 -1996) 
Additional Type of Request Per Page Fee Zoning map amendments $350 per page Pad zone $400 per page Zoning ordinance amendments $300 per page Use permit requests $200 per page Variance requests $200 per page Appeals $200 per page Site plan reviews   Single-family residential districts $350 per page   All other residential districts $450 per page   Commercial and industrial districts $600 per page  
(Ord. 274, passed 7-28-1987; Am. Ord. 346, N.S., passed 5-28-1996; Am. Ord. 415 A, N.S., passed 9-28-2004; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 8, passed 12-8-2015) 
ARTICLE 12-5: - FEES 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 12-5-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
    The purpose of this article is to set forth various fees to be charged by the city in administering its municipal functions. Separate sections of the city code, the zoning code or the various building codes used by the city may have a fee schedule in conflict with this article in which case it is the intention of the Council that this article shall govern. If this article is silent and fees are set forth in other sections of the various city codes, the fees in those sections shall govern. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984) 
§ 12-5-2 - WAIVER. 
    The City Manager may, with the approval of the Council, waive or modify any of the fees charged under this article or any other codes of the city, if benefits to the city are to be provided by the applicant to offset the charges waived. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984) 
§ 12-5-3 - COLLECTION. 
    The fees provided by this article shall be collected by the City Manager or his or her designated representative. Separate bank accounts, when appropriate and required, shall be maintained by the city. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984) 
FEES 

§ 12-5-15 - UNIFORM CODE FEES. 
    Various fees and penalties as set forth in the international building codes adopted by the city in Chapter 12, Article 12-1, of this code shall be paid as prescribed by the code's latest edition. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984; Am. Ord. 449, passed 2-13-2007; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 9, passed 12-8-2015) 
§ 12-5-16 - SITE PLAN REVIEW AND DEVELOPMENT FEES. 
    The applicant for site plan review, as set forth in § 12-4-169, of this code, shall pay to the city for review in accordance with the following schedule: 
(A)  Single family units: a fee of $750 for each unit; 
(B)  Multi-family units: a fee of $1,200 for each unit in the multi-family complex; and 
(C)  Commercial or industrial: a fee of $2,000 per application. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984; Am. Ord. 560, N.S. , § 10, passed 12-8-2015) 
§ 12-5-17 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 547, N.S. , passed Oct. 14, 2014, repealed § 12-5-17 which pertained to development impact fees and derived from Ord. 235, N.S., passed Nov. 27, 1984; Am. Ord. 342, N.S., passed Nov. 28, 1995; Am. Ord. 374, N.S., passed Sept. 22, 1998; Am. Ord. 414, N.S., passed Feb. 24, 2004; and Am. Ord. 434, N.S., passed Jan. 10, 2006. 
§ 12-5-18 - ZONING FEES. 
    The following fees shall be charged for items relating to zoning to be paid at time of application: 
(A)  For a variance application: an amount of $250; 
(B)  For a use permit: an amount of $300; 
(C)  For an amendment to the zoning map: an amount of $1,500 plus $350/page; and 
(D)  For a planned area development: an amount of $200, plus $5 per unit. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984) 
§ 12-5-19 - ENVIRONMENTAL ENHANCEMENT FEES. 
(A)  The following fees shall be collected by the city for the enhancement of the environment in the city. These fees shall be used for purposes designated by the Council to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To provide parks and recreation facilities; 
(2)  To assist in improvement of the air quality; and 
(3)  To provide funds for legal fees and costs necessary for the maintenance and bettering of the quality of life in the city. 
(B)  The fees charged herein shall be collected at the time an application for zoning change is granted by the City Council or at the time building permits are issued if the fee had not been previously paid to the city at the time of the zoning change. 
(C)  Any landowner who may have contributed in 1984 to the legal fees in the case of Sunland Beef v. Tolleson shall be allowed a credit for any fees paid at that time. 
(D)  The fee schedule shall be: 
(1)  Per acre rezoned in the case of a zoning change: $100; 
(2)  Residential building permit unit: $100; and 
(3)  Commercial or industrial building permit unit: $200. 
(E)  The fees collected under this article shall be segregated from general fund accounts and placed in a separate interest-bearing account. Disbursements from this fund shall be primarily for the purposes set forth in division (A) above with the approval of the Council. 
(Ord. 235, N.S., passed 11-27-1984) 
§ 12-5-20 - FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION. 
(A)  The subdivider shall file with the Building Department the final plat and eight true copies thereof, with a letter of transmittal and recordation fee and a fee for final plat and construction plat review in accordance with the following schedules: 
(1)  Residential single and multi-family: 
Number of Lots or Dwelling Units in the Plat Fee 0-10 $840 11-25 965 26-50 1,135 51-100 1,260 101-200 1,425 201 and over 1,535  
(2)  In industrial development areas: the fees shall be double the above fees; 
(3)  In commercial development areas: the fees shall be double the above fees; and 
(4)  Maps of dedication process fee: $960. 
(B)  The final plat, together with the above fees, shall be filed at least 21 days prior to the Commission or Council meeting at which the case will be heard. 
(C)  Following final review procedures, the City Manager's office shall transmit to the City Clerk's office the final plat and a copy of the recording fee receipt. The developer shall be responsible for recording all plats with the Maricopa County Recorder's office. One copy shall be kept on file in the City Engineer's Department for public access. 
(D)  Fifteen copies of the preliminary plat and required engineering and other supporting data, prepared in accordance with requirements set by this code and the zoning code shall be filed with the City Manager. 
(E)  The submittal shall be checked by the city staff for completeness; if incomplete as to city requirements, the submittal shall be rejected and the subdivider notified. 
(F)  In commercial and industrial park districts including: the fee shall be $1,500 per plat. 
(G)  The filing fee for a revised preliminary plat is 40% of the original preliminary review fee. If a final review fee has been paid, the final plat fee after a revised preliminary plat shall also be 40% of the original final plat fee. If 12 months have expired from preliminary approval prior to application for final approval, the plat shall be resubmitted for preliminary approval as a new case, and the subdivider shall pay the required fee. 
(H)  Fee for time extension on preliminary report: $185 or 20% of original preliminary fee whichever is greater. 
(I)  The fees set forth above are in addition to those required by Ord. 235 or any other provision of this code or the zoning code. 
(Ord. 293, N.S., passed 10-11-1988) 
ZONING PARALLEL REFERENCES 
References to Arizona Revised Statutes 
References to Ordinances 
REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES 
  
A.R.S. Cites Code Section 9-462.02 12-1-23 9-471 12-4-166 9-500.05 12-2-1 12-1134 12-4-91 12-1134(I) 12-4-91 13-901.03(B) 12-4-154 32-2601 et seq. 12-4-154 36-2801 et seq. 12-4-9, 12-4-154 36-2801 12-4-9 36-2804 12-4-9, 12-4-154 36-2804(B)(1)(c) 12-4-154 36-2806 12-4-154 36-2806(E) 12-4-9 36-2811 12-4-154 48-571 et seq. 12-1-73 48-3613 12-3-5  
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES 
  
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section 235 11-27-1984 12-5-1 - 12-5-3, 12-5-15 - 12-5-19 269 3-10-1987 12-1-20 274 7-28-1987 12-4-1 - 12-4-9, 12-4-20 - 12-4-25, 12-4-40 - 12-4-48, 12-4-60 - 12-4-63, 12-4-80 - 12-4-84, 12-4-100 - 12-4-102, 12-4-115 - 12-4-117, 12-4-119, 12-4-130 - 12-4-135, 12-4-150 - 12-4-152, 12-4-165, 12-4-166 - 12-4-170 293 10-11-1988 12-5-20 328 4-26-1994 12-4-9, 12-4-61, 12-4-62 342 11-28-1995 12-5-17 346 5-28-1996 12-4-170 347 5-28-1996 12-4-41, 12-4-42 348 5-28-1996 12-1-2 349 5-28-1996 12-2-24 374 9-22-1998 12-5-17 380 3-23-1999 12-4-102 408 8-12-2003 12-1-90 - 12-1-96 409 9-9-2003 12-4-5, 12-4-167 406 10-14-2003 12-1-20 410 10-14-2003 12-4-118 414 2-24-2004 12-5-17 415 A, N.S. 9-28-2005 12-4-80 - 12-4-84 417 10-12-2004 12-4-132, 12-4-133 424, N.S. 3-8-2005 12-1-20 425, N.S. 4-26-2005 12-4-132 430 8-9-2005 12-3-1 - 12-3-5 431 9-13-2005 12-3-5 432 9-27-2005 12-4-9, 12-4-153 434 1-10-2006 12-5-17 440, N.S. 7-11-2006 12-4-132 441 7-11-2006 12-4-168, 12-4-169 442 7-25-2006 12-4-167 449 2-13-2007 12-5-15, 12-1-20, 12-1-22, 12-1-23 451 3-13-2007 12-4-44, 12-4-64 453, N.S. 3-27-2007 12-1-110 - 12-1-121 454 4-10-2007 12-1-1 463 10-23-2007 12-1-20 472 5-13-2008 12-4-41, 12-4-61 477, N.S. 11-18-2008 12-4-9, 12-4-42, 12-4-62, 12-4-132 484, N.S. 3-10-2009 12-4-61, 12-5-62, 12-4-64 485, N.S. 4-14-2009 Adopting Ordinance; 12-1-1, 12-1-3, 12-1-20, 12-1-23, 12-2-21, 12-2-22, 12-2-44, 12-2-76, 12-2-78, 12-2-91 - 12-2-94, 12-4-6, 12-4-64, 12-4-132, 12-4-133 502, N.S. 12-14-2010 12-2-1, 12-2-2, 12-2-23, 12-2-41 - 12-2-45, 12-2-62, 12-2-63, 12-2-76, 12-2-91 503, N.S. 2-22-2011 12-4-9, 12-4-61, 12-4-154 505, N.S. 2-22-2011 12-1-3 507. N.S. 4-12-2011 Added 12-1-130-12-1-135 2029(Res.) 4-12-2011 Added 12-1-130-12-1-135 526, N.S. 7-24-2012 12-4-41, 12-4-42, 12-4-62 2140(Res.) 7-23-2013 12-3-2 3-2-5(C) 530, N.S. 10-23-2012 Added 12-4-132(I) 12-4-133 531, N.S. 10-22-2013 Added 12-4-90-12-4-9 536, N.S. 12-10-2013 12-4-82(K)(1)(a) 547, N.S. 10-14-2014 Rpld 12-5-17 548, N.S. 12-9-2014 12-1-20 550, N.S. 1-13-2015 12-4-9 Added 12-4-155 552, N.S. 2-24-2015 12-4-169(B) 556, N.S. 8-25-2015 12-4-93(A) 
Rpld 12-4-93(C)(10) 557, N.S. 6-9-2015 12-4-40-12-4-48 12-4-61(A) 558, N.S. 12-8-2015 12-4-102(C) 559, N.S. 12-8-2015 12-4-132(E) 12-4-135(A) 560, N.S. 12-8-2015 12-4-41(A)(12) 12-4-43(F) 12-4-61(A) 12-4-62 12-4-91 12-4-98 12-4-169, 12-4-170 12-5-15 12-5-16(C) 561, N.S. 12-8-2015 Added 12-4-20(G) Added 12-4-21(G) 562, N.S.  3-22-2016 Added 12-4-168(G) 564, N.S.  7-12-2016 Added 12-4-61(A)(15) Rpld 12-4-61(B)(10), (11) Added 12-4-62(A)(11) Added 12-4-62(B)(10) 12-4-154 566, N.S.  9-27-2016 12-4-41 568, N.S.  2-28-2017 12-4-132(H) 577, N.S. 11-14-2017 12-4-41(B) 12-4-154 580, N.S.  5- 8-2018 Added 12-4-156 584, N.S. 11-13-2018 12-1-3  
