TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
1
2 Thatcher - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Rules of interpretation
10.07 Severability
10.08 Reference to chapters and sections
10.09 Reference to offices
10.10 Errors and omissions
10.11 Official time
10.12 Reasonable time; calculation of time
10.13 Ordinances repealed
10.14 Ordinances unaffected
10.15 Effective date of ordinances
10.16 Repeal or modification of ordinances
10.17 Conflicting provisions
10.18 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.19 Section histories; statutory references
10.99 General penalty
' 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be
designated AThe Code of the Town of Thatcher, Arizona,@ and may be so cited. The code
may also be cited as AThe Thatcher Town Code@ or Athis code.@
' 10.02 INTERPRETATION .
(A) The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in the
construction of this code and the ordinances of the town unless the construction would be
inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the Council or the context of this code or the
ordinances of the town.
3
4 Thatcher - General Provisions
(B) Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of
construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those
governing the interpretation of state law.
' 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances
hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically
provided.
' 10.04 CAPTIONS .
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers
are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any
section.
' 10.05 DEFINITIONS .
(A) General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to
the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be
construed and understood according to the peculiar and appropriate meaning.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOND. When a BOND is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY or TOWN. The Town of
Thatcher, Graham County, Arizona, except as otherwise provided. The words IN THE TOWN
or WITHIN THE TOWN shall mean and include all territory over which the town has
jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers as authorized by
statute.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
COUNCIL. The Council of the Town of Thatcher, Arizona.
COUNTY. Graham County, Arizona.
DAY. The period of time between any 12:00 midnight and the midnight following.
DAYTIME. The period of time between sunrise and sunset.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 5
DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE.
Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is referred to, it
shall mean a DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE
of the town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire, Police and Public Service
Departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of the state, county
or any political subdivisions thereof, and vehicles of public service corporations.
EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed to prevent or alleviate physical trauma or
property damage threatened or caused by an emergency, which has or may result in a
disruption of service, and which is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of
persons or property.
IN THE TOWN or WITHIN THE TOWN. All territory over which the town now has, or
shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory
powers.
JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a JOINT AUTHORITY to three or
more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
the officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving
the authority.
KEEPER, PROPRIETOR. Includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs
and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through an agent, servant or employee.
LAW. Applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state, the
ordinances of the town and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be
promulgated thereunder.
MAJORITY. When used in reference to the Town Council, means 51% of those
members in attendance; provided that a quorum of the Council is also present.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported upon a public highway, excepting aircraft and devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
MUST. The act referred to is mandatory.
NIGHTTIME. The period of time between sunset and sunrise.
OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and in these cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
6 Thatcher - General Provisions
OWNER. Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of the building or land.
PERSON. Shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations or voluntary
associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real property as
defined in this section.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. The words PRECEDING and FOLLOWING mean
next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any thoroughfare, park, open space or building not privately owned
or controlled.
REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SHALL. The action referred to is mandatory.
SHALL HAVE BEEN. Includes past and future cases.
SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the signer cannot write, the
signer=s or subscriber=s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her
own name near the signer=s or subscriber=s name; but a signature or subscription by mark
can be acknowledged or can serve as a SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION to a sworn
statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.
STATE. The State of Arizona.
STREET. Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places,
squares, curbs or other public ways in the town which have been or may hereafter be
dedicated and open to public use or other public property so designated in any law of the
state.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the
chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of
sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS .
TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the whole or part of the building or
land, either alone or with others.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 7
WEEK. A WEEK consists of seven consecutive days.
WRITING. Any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary
visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by
this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless expressly provided
otherwise.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or
otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
(1991 Code, ' 1-3-2)
Statutory reference:
Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. '' 1-211 through 1-215
' 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
The construction of all ordinances of the town shall be by the following rules, unless the
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the
same ordinance.
(A) And/or. AOr@ may be read Aand,@ and Aand@ may be read Aor,@ if the context
requires it.
(B) Acts by agents. When this code or an ordinance requires an act to be done which
may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all acts when done by an authorized agent.
(C) Gender; singular and plural; tenses.
(1) Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the singular
number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular.
(2) The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the
present.
(D) General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be
limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
' 10.07 SEVERABILITY .
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the titles, chapters,
subchapters, sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be severable and, if
any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.
8 Thatcher - General Provisions
' 10.08 REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS.
(A) All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this code
unless otherwise specified.
(B) Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference
shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised,
recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the
amendment or revision.
' 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or
employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the
provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the
functionary.
' 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission
of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of
a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words
were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if
any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
' 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time
within the town for the transaction of all municipal business.
' 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; CALCULATION OF TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or
requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall be deemed
to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the
notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or in any order
issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last; except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday,
it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday
or a holiday, from 12:00 midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 9
' 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general
nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the
effective date of this code, except as otherwise provided in ' 10.14. However, all rights, duties
and obligations created or imposed by the repealed ordinances shall continue and exist in all
respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.
' 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or, in any way,
to modify or affect:
(A) Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations, dedications
or zoning;
(B) Any ordinance making an appropriation;
(C) Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been
authorized;
(D) The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this code becomes
effective;
(E) The continued existence and operation of any department, agency, commission or
office heretofore legally established or held;
(F) Any bond of any public officer;
(G) Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed; and/or
(H) Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or accepting any compact
or contract with any other municipality, the state or any county or subdivision thereof, or with
the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
' 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from
and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not
requiring publication shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
10 Thatcher - General Provisions
' 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself
repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision
unless it shall be expressly so provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any
punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for any offense committed under the ordinance
repealed.
' 10.17 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
(A) Conflicting provisionsCdifferent chapters. If the provisions of different chapters of this
code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to
all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of the chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 1-4-3)
(B) Conflicting provisionsCsame chapter. If conflicting provisions are found in different
sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order
shall prevail unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of the chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 1-4-4)
' 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this
code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section,
containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section
shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the
chapter or section. In addition to the indication thereof as may appear in the text of the
proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
' 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the
original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code
section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25,
passed 1-1-1985)
(B) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the
section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example:
(A.R.S. ' 9-240)
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 11
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a Astatutory reference@ following the text of the
section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information.
Example:
' 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE .
This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records,
unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
Inspection of public records, see A.R.S. ' 39-121
(C) If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances of the city, the
prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by A(1991 Code, ' )@ or A(1991
Code, Art. _____)@.
' 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Any person found responsible for violating any provisions of this code, except as
otherwise provided in this code, shall be responsible for a civil code infraction, and upon the
finding of responsibility therefor may be punished by a civil sanction not to exceed $500. Each
day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein provided.
(1) In addition to any monetary civil sanction, the Civil Hearing Officer shall order the
defendant to abate the civil code infraction, unless it has been abated by the date of a finding
of responsibility therefor.
(2) The Civil Hearing Officer shall have the authority, within his or her discretion, to
suspend the payment of any civil sanction imposed.
(3) In any case involving a civil code infraction relating to the occupancy or use of
land, any monetary civil sanction imposed pursuant to this section upon a defendant who
holds an ownership interest in the land shall be recordable as a lien upon the land and shall
run with the land. The town, at its sole option, may record a notice of civil sanction and
abatement order with the County Recorder and thereby cause compliance by any person(s) or
entity thereafter acquiring the property. When the property is brought into compliance by the
owner or responsible party, a satisfaction of notice of civil sanction and abatement order shall
be filed at the request and expense of the owner or responsible party. It shall be the property
owner=s responsibility to secure the satisfaction of notice of civil sanction and abatement
order from the town.
(B) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this code which is classified as a
Class 1 misdemeanor, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine not to exceed
$2,500, by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, by a term of probation not to
exceed three years, or by any combination of the fine, imprisonment and probation.
(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person found to have violated
any provision of this code or amendments thereto, which pursuant to this section is classified
as a civil code
12 Thatcher - General Provisions
infraction, and who has been twice previously found to have violated the provision within the
preceding 24 months, shall, in addition to any penalty prescribed for the civil code infraction,
be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500, by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, by a term of probation not to exceed
three years or by any combination of the fine, imprisonment and probation.
(1991 Code, Art. 1-8B.)
Statutory reference:
Maximum penalty for civil traffic violations, see A.R.S. ' 28-1598
Misdemeanor penalty authorized, see A.R.S. ' 9-240(B)(28)(b)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. COUNCIL AND MAYOR
31. TOWN OFFICIALS
32. TOWN ORGANIZATIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
33. PURCHASING
34. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
35. TAXATION
36. MUNICIPAL COURT
37. TOWN POLICIES
1
2 Thatcher - Administration
CHAPTER 30: COUNCIL AND MAYOR
Section
Council
30.001 Elected officers
30.002 Corporate powers
30.003 Duties of office
30.004 Vacancies in Council
30.005 Compensation
30.006 Oath of office
30.007 Bond
30.008 Financial disclosure statement
Mayor
30.020 Selection of Mayor
30.021 Vice Mayor
30.022 Acting Mayor
30.023 Powers and duties of the Mayor
30.024 Absence of Mayor
30.025 Vacancy in Office of Mayor
30.026 Failure to sign documents
Elections
30.040 Filing of nomination petitions; primary election
30.041 Non-political ballot
30.042 General election nomination
30.043 Election to office
30.044 Candidate financial disclosure
Council Procedure
30.060 Regular meetings
30.061 Special meetings
30.062 Meetings to be public
30.063 Quorum
30.064 Agenda
3
4 Thatcher - Administration
30.065 Order of business
30.066 Committees and commissions
30.067 Voting
30.068 Suspension of rules
Ordinances, Resolutions and Contracts
30.080 Prior approval
30.081 Introduction
30.082 Reading of proposed ordinance
30.083 Requirements for an ordinance
30.084 Effective date of ordinances
30.085 Signatures required
30.086 Publishing required
30.087 Posting required
COUNCIL
' 30.001 ELECTED OFFICERS.
(A) The elected officers of the town shall be seven Councilmembers, one of whom shall
be designated as Mayor in accordance with ' 30.020. The Mayor and Councilmembers shall
constitute the Council and shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their
duly elected successors.
(B) The regular term of office for Councilmembers shall be four years.
(1991 Code, ' 2-1-1)
' 30.002 CORPORATE POWERS.
The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the Council and shall be exercised
only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the Council shall be exercised by
ordinance, resolution, order or motion.
(1991 Code, ' 2-1-2)
' 30.003 DUTIES OF OFFICE.
The Councilmembers shall assume the duties of office at the regularly scheduled Council
meeting next following the date of the general election at which, or effective as of the date of
which, the Councilmembers were elected.
(1991 Code, ' 2-1-3)
Council and Mayor 5
' 30.004 VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.
The Council shall fill by appointment for the unexpired term any vacancy that may occur
for whatever reason.
(1991 Code, ' 2-1-4)
' 30.005 COMPENSATION .
The compensation of elective officers of the town shall be fixed from time to time by
ordinance or resolution of the Council; provided that the compensation of any officer may not
be increased or decreased except in conformance with the provisions of the State
Constitution, Article IV, Part 2, ' 17.
(1991 Code, ' 2-1-5)
' 30.006 OATH OF OFFICE.
Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each Councilmember shall, in
public, take and subscribe to the oath of office.
(1991 Code, ' 2-1-6)
' 30.007 BOND .
Prior to taking office, each Councilmember shall execute and file an official bond,
enforceable against the principal and his or her sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful
performance of his or her official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and
benefit of the town or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or
default of the officer in his or her official capacity. A person so injured or aggrieved may bring
suit on the bond under provisions identical to those contained in A.R.S. ' 38-260. Bonds shall
be in a sum as shall be determined by the Council, and the premium for the bonds shall be
paid by the town.
(1991 Code, ' 2-1-7)
' 30.008 FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.
Each Councilmember shall file, on or before January 31 of each year, a financial
disclosure statement in a form and with the information as provided by resolution of the
Council and pursuant to state law.
(1991 Code, ' 2-1-8)
6 Thatcher - Administration
MAYOR
' 30.020 SELECTION OF MAYOR.
Within 20 days after election of the Council or at the first regular meeting after election,
whichever occurs first, the Councilmembers shall choose a Mayor from among their number.
(1991 Code, ' 2-2-1)
' 30.021 VICE MAYOR.
At the same meeting at which the Mayor is selected, the Council shall designate one of its
members as Vice Mayor, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Vice Mayor shall
perform the duties of the Mayor during his or her absence or disability.
(1991 Code, ' 2-2-2)
' 30.022 ACTING MAYOR.
In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Council may designate
another of its members to serve as acting Mayor who shall have all the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Mayor during the absence or disability.
(1991 Code, ' 2-2-3)
' 30.023 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:
(A) He or she shall be the chief executive officer of the town;
(B) He or she shall be the chairperson of the Council and preside over its meetings;
(C) He or she shall enforce the provisions of this code;
(D) He or she shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature those instruments as
the Council or any statutes, ordinances or this code shall require;
(E) He or she shall make any recommendations and suggestions to the Council as he or
she may consider proper;
(F) He or she may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due to fire,
conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing or any other natural or
human-made calamity or disaster,
Council and Mayor 7
or in the event of the threat or occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil
disobedience which endanger life or property within the town. After declaration of the
emergency, the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary regulations to
preserve the peace and order of the town, including but not limited to:
(1) Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the town;
(2) Ordering the closing of any business;
(3) Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place; and
(4) Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations
within or without the political subdivision for assistance.
(G) He or she is authorized and empowered to sign his or her name officially for and in
behalf of the town on all contracts, documents and papers to which the town is a party, and to
require that the conditions in any instrument are faithfully performed; and
(H) He or she shall perform those other duties required by state statute and this code as
well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 2-2-4)
' 30.024 ABSENCE OF MAYOR.
The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the town for a greater period than 15
consecutive days without the consent of the Council.
(1991 Code, ' 2-2-5)
' 30.025 VACANCY IN OFFICE OF MAYOR.
In case of death, disability or resignation of the Mayor, the Council shall elect a Mayor, by
a majority vote, to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the vacant term.
(1991 Code, ' 2-2-6)
' 30.026 FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.
If the Mayor is absent or refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract,
warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring his or her signature for five days
consecutively, then a majority of the members of the Council may, at any regular or special
meeting, authorize the Vice Mayor or, in his or her absence, a duly appointed acting Mayor to
sign the ordinance, resolution,
8 Thatcher - Administration
contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument which, when so signed, shall have
the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.
(1991 Code, ' 2-2-7)
ELECTIONS
' 30.040 FILING OF NOMINATION PETITIONS; PRIMARY ELECTION.
(A) A person desiring to become a candidate and to have his or her name printed on the
official ballot for municipal office shall file a nomination paper and other nomination materials
not less than 75 days nor more than 105 days before the primary election date. All these
nomination papers must be completed and filed with the Town Clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the last
day for filing the papers.
(B) Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of all the votes cast
shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he or she is a candidate effective as of
the date of the general election, and no further election shall be held as to that candidate;
provided that if more candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled, then
those equal in number to the offices to be filled receiving the highest number of votes shall be
declared elected.
(1991 Code, ' 2-3-1) (Ord. 35, passed 1-19-1976; Ord. 93-1995, passed 11-20-1995)
' 30.041 NON -POLITICAL BALLOT.
Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the source of the candidacy or
of the support of the candidate.
(1991 Code, ' 2-3-2) (Ord. 35, passed 1-19-1976)
' 30.042 GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.
(A) If at any primary election there is any office for which no candidate is elected, then as
to that office, the election shall be considered to be a primary election for nomination of
candidates for that office, and the second or general municipal election shall be held to vote
for candidates to fill the office.
(B) Candidates to be placed on the ballot at a second or general municipal election shall
be those not elected at the first election; shall be equal in number to twice the number to be
elected to any given office or less than that number if there is less than that number named on
the primary election ballot; and persons who receive the highest number of votes for the
respective offices at the first election shall be the only candidates at the second election.
Council and Mayor 9
(C) If there is any person who, under the provisions of this subchapter, would have been
entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other candidate
received an equal number of votes therefor, then all the persons receiving an equal number of
votes shall likewise become candidates for that office.
(1991 Code, ' 2-3-3) (Ord. 35, passed 1-19-1976)
' 30.043 ELECTION TO OFFICE.
The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the highest
number of votes shall be declared elected.
(1991 Code, ' 2-3-4) (Ord. 35, passed 1-19-1976)
' 30.044 CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
Each candidate for the Office of Councilmember shall file a financial disclosure statement
when the candidate files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain any information as
required by resolution.
(1991 Code, ' 2-3-5) (Ord. 35, passed 1-19-1976)
COUNCIL PROCEDURE
' 30.060 REGULAR MEETINGS.
(A) The Council shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday of each month at
7:00 p.m., provided that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a
day designated by law as a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the
next succeeding day not a holiday on a day and time designated by the Council.
(B) All regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Town Hall or any other place
as the Council may designate.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-1) (Ord. 95-1996, passed 7-15-1996)
Editor=s note:
Ordinance 1, passed October 25, 1918, contained an earlier version of the material
covered in this
subchapter, but which was updated in the prior codification except for ' 30.063.
10 Thatcher - Administration
' 30.061 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Mayor, or the Clerk upon the approval of four members of the Council, may convene
the Council at any time by notifying the members of the date, hour, place and purpose of the
special meeting. Notice of this meeting shall be made pursuant to state law.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-2)
Editor=s note:
A note in the prior codification read thus: Ordinance 1 allows only the Mayor to call special
meetings and does not include the reference to the open meeting law.
' 30.062 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except that, upon approval by a
majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a closed executive session in the
manner provided by state law.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-3)
' 30.063 QUORUM .
A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for transacting business. If less than a
quorum is present, no business shall be transacted.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-4) (Ord. 1, passed 10-25-1918)
' 30.064 AGENDA .
Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the Council for preparation
and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier, the Manager shall collect all written
reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents to be
submitted to the Council, prepare an agenda according to the order of business and furnish
each Councilmember, the Mayor and the Attorney with a copy.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-5)
' 30.065 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
The business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the
following order.
(A) Call to order. The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting and
shall call the Council to order. In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall call the
Council to order.
Council and Mayor 11
In the absence of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Clerk shall call the Council to order,
and an acting Mayor shall be selected to chair the meeting. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or
the Vice Mayor, the Vice Mayor or the acting Mayor shall immediately relinquish the chair
upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council. The Mayor shall
preserve order and decorum and decide all questions of order.
(B) Pledge of allegiance. Immediately following the call to order, the Council shall recite
the pledge of allegiance.
(C) Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the Clerk or his or her
deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those members present shall be
entered in the minutes. If a quorum is not present, the members present may adjourn
pursuant to ' 30.063.
(D) Consent agenda. When any item of business requires action by the Council, but is of
a routine and noncontroversial nature, the item may be presented as part of a consent
agenda.
(1) There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the Council regarding
any item on the consent agenda, beyond asking questions for simple clarification.
(2) Upon objection by any member of the Council to inclusion of any item on the
consent agenda, that item shall be removed from the consent agenda forthwith. The
objections may be recorded at any time prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve
the consent agenda. All these items shall be considered individually, in the order in which they
were objected to, immediately following consideration of the consent agenda.
(3) Approval of the motion to approve the consent agenda shall be fully equivalent to
approval, adoption or enactment of each motion, resolution, ordinance or other item of
business thereon, exactly as if each had been acted upon individually.
(E) Minutes. The Clerk or his or her deputy shall read or present the minutes of the
preceding Council meeting, which shall be approved if correct. Any errors noted shall be
corrected.
(F) Committee reports and demands. Any reports of committees or demands against the
town shall be presented. The demands shall be approved or disapproved by the Council.
(G) Call to the public. Petitions, remonstrances, communications and comment or
suggestions from citizens present shall be heard by the Council. All these remarks shall be
addressed to the Council as a whole, and not to any member thereof. The remarks shall be
limited to five minutes, unless additional time is granted by the Council. No person other than
the individual speaking shall enter into the discussion without the permission of the presiding
officer. No question shall be asked a Councilmember except through the presiding officer.
Members of the Council may not discuss, consider or make decisions on matters other than to
direct staff to investigate and respond to the petition or request the matter be scheduled for
consideration at a future meeting.
12 Thatcher - Administration
(H) Unfinished business. The Council shall consider any business that has been
previously considered and which is still unfinished.
(I) New business. The Council shall consider any business not heretofore considered,
including the introduction of ordinances and resolutions.
(J) Adjournment. The Council may, by a majority vote of those present, adjourn from time
to time to a specific date and hour. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided
without debate.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-6)
' 30.066 COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.
The Council may create any boards, committees and commissions, standing or special,
as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and shall perform any duties
as the Council may require and shall exist at the pleasure of the Council.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-7)
' 30.067 VOTING .
(A) The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.
(B) Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any question shall be
taken and entered in the minutes.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-8)
' 30.068 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
Any of the provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended in connection with
any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of three-fourths of the members present,
except that this section shall not be construed to permit any action that is contrary to state
statutes.
(1991 Code, ' 2-4-9)
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS
' 30.080 PRIOR APPROVAL.
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the
Council, have been reviewed as to form by the Attorney and shall, when there are substantive
matters of administration involved, be referred to the person who is charged with the
administration of the matters. The person
Council and Mayor 13
shall have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if any, prior to the passage of the
ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the contract.
(1991 Code, ' 2-5-1)
' 30.081 INTRODUCTION .
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the Council shall
be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council, except that the Attorney or the
Manager may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the Council,
and any member of the Council may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that the
ordinance, resolution, matter or subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered.
(1991 Code, ' 2-5-2)
' 30.082 READING OF PROPOSED ORDINANCE.
Ordinances shall be read at least once, prior to adoption, but may be read by title only if
the Council, in possession of printed copies of the ordinance, unanimously allows reading the
title only.
(1991 Code, ' 2-5-3)
' 30.083 REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE.
Each ordinance should have but one subject, the nature of which is clearly expressed in
the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced as an amendment to this
code or to an existing ordinance and, in that case, the title of the sections to be amended shall
be included in the ordinance.
(1991 Code, ' 2-5-4)
' 30.084 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
(A) No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative until 30 days after its
passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, except measures necessary for the
immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the town; but such an emergency
measure shall not become immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the
reason why it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is
approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the Council,
taken by ayes and nays.
(B) In addition to the provisions of division (A) of this section, the Clerk shall certify the
minutes of any Council meeting at which an ordinance, resolution or franchise, except an
emergency measure, is passed. The 30-day period specified in division (A) of this section
shall be calculated from the date of passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor.
(1991 Code, ' 2-5-5)
14 Thatcher - Administration
' 30.085 SIGNATURES REQUIRED.
Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes effective, be signed by
the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
(1991 Code, ' 2-5-6)
' 30.086 PUBLISHING REQUIRED.
Only those orders, ordinances, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the
Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly ordered by the
Council.
(1991 Code, ' 2-5-7)
' 30.087 POSTING REQUIRED.
Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment shall, after
passage, be posted by the Clerk in three or more public places within the town and an
affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the Clerk as
proof of posting.
(1991 Code, ' 2-5-8)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
Indemnification of Officers, Employees, Councilmembers and
Members of Committees, Commissions and Boards
31.01 Definitions
31.02 Persons to be indemnified
31.03 Action other than by or in the right of town
31.04 Criminal proceedings
31.05 No presumption created
31.06 Action by or in the right of town
31.07 Negligence and misconduct
31.08 Success on the merits
31.09 Determination by Council
31.10 Indemnification not exclusive remedy
Officers in General
31.25 Officers
31.26 Additional officers
31.27 Bond
31.28 Vacancies; holding more than one office
31.29 Additional powers and duties
Officers
31.40 Town Manager
31.41 Town Clerk
31.42 Police Chief
31.43 Town Engineer
31.44 Town Attorney
31.45 Town Magistrate
15
16 Thatcher - Administration
INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, COUNCILMEMBERS AND
MEMBERS OF COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
' 31.01 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PERSON. Town officers, employees, the Mayor, Councilmembers and members of
committees, commissions and boards of the town.
PROCEEDING. Any threatened, pending or contemplated action, suit or proceeding,
whether civil, criminal, administered or investigated.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-1)
' 31.02 PERSONS TO BE INDEMNIFIED.
Any person made a party or threatened to be made a party to any proceeding by reason
of the fact that the person is an officer, employee, Councilmember or member of a board or
commission of the town shall be indemnified as hereinafter set forth.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-2)
' 31.03 ACTION OTHER THAN BY OR IN THE RIGHT OF TOWN.
If the proceeding is one other than an action by or in the right of the town, the person shall
be indemnified against his or her expenses, including attorney=s fees, and including
judgments, fines, amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him or her
in connection with the proceeding.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-3)
' 31.04 CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS.
If the proceeding is a criminal proceeding, the person shall be indemnified if he or she had
no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct was unlawful.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-4)
Town Officials 17
' 31.05 NO PRESUMPTION CREATED.
With respect to indemnification under ' 31.03 or ' 31.04, a termination of the proceeding by
judgment, order, settlement, conviction, or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent,
shall not by itself create a presumption that the person acted, or failed to act, other than in
good faith and in a manner which he or she reasonably believed to be in, or not opposed to,
the best interest of the town; and with respect to any criminal proceeding, shall not by itself
create a presumption that the person had reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct
was unlawful.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-5)
' 31.06 ACTION BY OR IN THE RIGHT OF TOWN.
If the proceeding is one by or in the right of the town to procure a judgment in the town=s
favor, the person shall be indemnified against his or her expenses, including attorney=s fees,
but excluding judgments and fines and, except as hereinafter set forth, amounts paid in
settlement, actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with the defense or
settlement of the proceeding if he or she acted, or failed to act, in good faith and in a manner
he or she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-6)
' 31.07 NEGLIGENCE AND MISCONDUCT.
No indemnification under ' 31.06 shall be made in respect of any claim, issue or matter as
to which the person shall be adjudged to be liable for negligence or misconduct in the
performance of his or her duty to the town.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-7)
' 31.08 SUCCESS ON THE MERITS.
To the extent that a person covered by this subchapter has been successful on the merits
or otherwise in defense of any proceeding covered by this subchapter or in the defense of any
claim, issue or matter therein, he or she shall be indemnified against expenses, including
attorney=s fees, actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection therewith.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-8)
' 31.09 DETERMINATION BY COUNCIL.
(A) Any indemnification made pursuant to this subchapter shall be made by the town only
as authorized in the specific case upon a determination that indemnification of the officer,
employee or
18 Thatcher - Administration
Councilmember is proper in the circumstances because he or she has met the applicable
standard of conduct set forth in this subchapter.
(B) This determination shall be made by any of the following:
(1) By the Town Council by majority vote of a quorum consisting of Councilmembers
who were not party to the proceeding;
(2) If a quorum is not obtainable, then by a written opinion of independent legal
counsel acquired by majority of the disinterested Councilmembers for that purpose; or
(3) If there are not disinterested Councilmembers, then by a declaratory judgment
action brought in the Superior Court, declaring the rights of the officer, employee or
Councilmember to be indemnified pursuant to this subchapter.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-9)
' 31.10 INDEMNIFICATION NOT EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
The indemnification provided by this subchapter shall not be deemed exclusive of any
other rights to which those indemnified may be entitled. The indemnification provided by this
subchapter shall be supplemental to and excess to any valid and collectible insurance
coverage.
(1991 Code, ' 2-6-10)
OFFICERS IN GENERAL
' 31.25 OFFICERS .
There are hereby created the Offices of Town Manager, Town Clerk, Town Attorney,
Chief of Police and Fire Chief who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
Council. The Police Chief, Town Clerk and Town Attorney are supervised by the Town
Manager. There is further hereby created the Office of Town Engineer who shall be
appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Manager. In addition, there is hereby created
the Office of Town Magistrate who shall be appointed by and may be removed by the Town
Council in the manner provided in ' 36.15.
(1991 Code, ' 3-1-1) (Ord. 164-2011, passed 5-10-2011)
' 31.26 ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.
The Council may appoint and remove from time to time any other officers as may be
deemed necessary and that are not provided for in this code or state statute.
(1991 Code, ' 3-1-2)
Town Officials 19
' 31.27 BOND .
The Council may require each officer of the town to give bond for the due discharge of his
or her duties in sums and with security as it may direct and approve as determined by
resolution. The town shall pay the costs of this bond.
(1991 Code, ' 3-1-3)
' 31.28 VACANCIES ; HOLDING MORE THAN ONE OFFICE.
Any vacancy that shall occur in any town office, except the Town Council, shall be filled by
appointment, provided that one person may hold more than one office and that, at the
discretion of the Council, the functions of a town official may be validly performed and
discharged by a deputy or another town official, or an otherwise qualified employee of the
town.
(1991 Code, ' 3-1-4)
' 31.29 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer shall have any
further powers, perform further duties and hold any other office as may be directed by the
Town Manager or Town Council through ordinance, resolution or order.
(1991 Code, ' 3-1-5)
OFFICERS
' 31.40 TOWN MANAGER.
(A) Office created. The Office of the Town Manager is hereby created and established.
The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council wholly on the basis of administrative
and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the
Council.
(B) Bond. The Town Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the
Council in a sum as may be determined by the Council, and shall be conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the Manager as herein prescribed. Any
premium for the bond shall be a proper charge against the town.
(C) Compensation. The Manager shall receive compensation as the Council shall fix from
time to time.
20 Thatcher - Administration
(D) Removal procedure. The Manager may be removed from office by a majority vote of
the Council, with or without cause. If the removal is for cause and if requested, the Council
shall grant the individual a public hearing within 30 days following notice of removal. If the
removal is without cause, it shall become operative 30 days from the date of the notice of
removal. During the interim, the Council may suspend the Manager from duty but shall
continue his or her salary for three months following the removal date; provided, however, that
the Manager shall have been in the service of the town for at least one calendar year.
(E) Powers and duties. The Town Manager shall be the administrative head of the town
government under the direction and control of the Council, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter. The Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of
all affairs of the town. In addition to the Manager=s general powers as administrative head
and not as a limitation thereof, it shall be the duty of the Manager and he or she shall have the
powers set forth in the following divisions:
(1) Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the town, suspend or remove all
officers and employees of the town not appointed by the Council. He or she may authorize the
head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in the office or
department;
(2) Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Council together with a message
describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption;
(3) Prepare and submit to the Council at the end of each fiscal year a complete report
on the finances and administrative activities of the town during the preceding year;
(4) Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the town
and make recommendations as he or she may deem desirable;
(5) Recommend to the Council a standard schedule of pay for each position in the
town service, including minimum and maximum rates, and determine employee compensation
according to that standard schedule of pay. Authorize the payment of overtime pay for
employees as may work in excess of a normal work period. These rates of pay and periods of
work shall be in conformity with wages and salaries enacted by the Council;
(6) Recommend to the Council from time to time adoption of any measures which he
or she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or
for the improvement of administrative services;
(7) Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom and take part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the Council. He or she shall be entitled to notice of all
regular and special meetings of the Council;
(8) See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;
(9) Investigate the affairs of the town and any department or division thereof.
Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the town
government and in regard
Town Officials 21
to service maintained by the public utilities in the town, and see that all franchises, permits
and privileges granted by the town are faithfully observed; and
(10) Perform any other duties as may be required by the Council, not inconsistent with
state law or town ordinances.
(F) Council not to interfere with appointments or removals. With regard to officers and
employees appointed by the Manager, neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct
or request the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal or suspension from that
office by the Manager or any of his or her subordinates, or in any manner take part in the
appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative services of the town.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Manager.
(1991 Code, ' 3-2-1)
' 31.41 TOWN CLERK.
(A) Records. The Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business transacted by
the Council and any other records that either pertain to the business of the town or that the
Council directs. The Clerk shall number, plainly label and file separately in a suitable cabinet
all resolutions, ordinances, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid vouchers,
inventories, letters, orders and other documents of whatever nature.
(B) Public inspection of records. The Clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all
public records and public documents under his or her control, as provided by state statute.
(C) Monthly reports. The Clerk shall prepare and collect from town officers and
employees monthly reports prepared in a manner and to include any information as may be
directed by the Council.
(D) Minutes. The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of Council
proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.
(E) Ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices. The Clerk shall process, record, file,
publish and, if required by state statute, post all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices
that may be passed by the Council.
(F) Duties as Treasurer. The Clerk shall hold the Office of Town Treasurer and receive
and safely keep all monies that shall come to the town and pay out the same when authorized
by the Council. He or she shall keep a separate record and account of each different fund
provided by the Council, apportion the monies received among the different funds as
prescribed by the Council, and keep a complete set of books showing: every money
transaction of the town, the state of each fund, from what source the money in each fund was
derived and for what purpose expended, and he or she shall make monthly reports to the
Council of all receipts and disbursements and the balance in each fund. At the end of the
fiscal year he or she shall make a full and detailed statement of the receipts and expenditures
of the town during the year, specifying the different sources of revenue and the amount
received from each, all appropriations
22 Thatcher - Administration
made by the Mayor and Council, and the object for which they were made, and the amount of
money expended under each, the evidences of indebtedness issued, and what portion
remains thereof outstanding, with the rate and amount of interest due thereon, and the
amount of cash on hand.
(G) Term expirations. The Clerk shall notify the appointing authority of the impending
expiration of the term of office of a member of any board or commission at least 30 days
before the expiration of the term.
(H) Election Official. The Clerk shall be the Town Election Official and perform those
duties required by state statute.
(I) Licenses. The Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses that may be
prescribed by state statute or this code.
(J) Claims. All claims against the town must be filed in writing with the Clerk. Claims must
present a full account of the items and must contain verification under oath by the claimant to
the effect that the claim is correct, reasonable and just and that no part of the claim has been
paid. The Council must approve all claims before payment can be made.
(K) Damages. All claims for damages against the town must be filed with the Town Clerk
pursuant to A.R.S. ' 12-821.
(L) Administrative duties. The Clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities
and duties that are conferred upon him or her by the Council in addition to those specified in
this code.
(1991 Code, ' 3-2-2)
' 31.42 POLICE CHIEF.
The Chief of Police shall perform duties as may be required of him or her by '' 32.01
through 32.05 and the laws of this state.
(1991 Code, ' 3-2-3)
' 31.43 TOWN ENGINEER.
The Engineer shall perform those duties as may be required of him or her by law and any
other duties as the Council or Manager may direct.
(1991 Code, ' 3-2-4)
' 31.44 TOWN ATTORNEY.
The Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the Council and other officials
and, as such, shall give his or her opinion in writing when requested. He or she shall draft all
deeds, contracts,
Town Officials 23
conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the
Manager. He or she shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and all official or
other bonds before final approval or acceptance thereof by the Council. He or she shall return,
within ten days, all ordinances and resolutions submitted to him or her for consideration by the
Manager, with his or her approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with his or
her reasons therefor. He or she, or a designee retained with the approval of the Manager,
shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions or causes where the town is a party, and shall
report to the Council, when required, the condition of any suit or action to which the town is a
party.
(1991 Code, ' 3-2-5)
' 31.45 TOWN MAGISTRATE.
The Town Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the Magistrate=s Court and shall
perform those functions necessary to the maintenance of the Magistrate=s Court as provided
by state statute.
(1991 Code, ' 3-2-6)
24 Thatcher - Administration
CHAPTER 32: TOWN ORGANIZATIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
Police Department
32.01 Created; composition
32.02 Departmental rules and regulations
32.03 Duties of the Police Department
32.04 Answering calls outside the town
32.05 Reserve officers
Fire Department
32.20 Created
32.21 Officers
32.22 Duties of the Chief
32.23 Equipment
32.24 General provisions
32.25 Providing fire protection outside the town
Planning and Zoning Commission
32.40 Established
32.41 Membership
32.42 Officers
32.43 Duties of Commission
32.44 Rules; meetings
32.45 Quorum
32.46 Fee schedules
32.99 Penalty
Editor=s note:
The provisions of Ordinance 21 for the Police and Fire Departments was substantially
updated in
the prior codification.
25
26 Thatcher - Administration
POLICE DEPARTMENT
' 32.01 CREATED ; COMPOSITION.
There is hereby created a Police Department for the town which shall consist of a Chief of
Police and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the
Council for the safety and good order of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 4-1-1)
' 32.02 DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Chief of Police may make or prescribe any departmental rules and regulations as he
or she shall deem advisable. The rules and regulations shall be binding on members of the
Police Department. The rules and regulations may cover the conduct of the members,
uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried and all other similar matters necessary or
desirable for the better efficiency of the Department. The rules and regulations shall have final
approval by the Council.
(1991 Code, ' 4-1-2)
' 32.03 DUTIES OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the Chief of Police, to:
(A) Enforce this code and the statutes of the state within jurisdictional limits as conferred
by law and to arrest and charge the violators thereof;
(B) Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail upon conviction of a crime
committed under the jurisdiction of the Magistrate=s Court to the Police Chief or any officer of
the town authorized by him or her who shall at any time demand the prisoners. Any authorized
person receiving the prisoners shall work the prisoners on the streets or alleys of the town or
on any and all authorized work as may be determined by the Manager;
(C) Render an account of the Police Department, its duties and receipts as may be
required by the Council;
(D) Enforce the traffic regulations of the town as specified in Title VII of this code and
enforce the traffic laws of the state within the limits of the town;
(E) Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic-control devices of every description
which have been erected within the town on the authority of the Council and to notify the
Manager of any defects found therein; and
Town Organizations and Departments 27
(F) To respond, if available for fire duty, to all fire alarms and assist the Fire Department
in the protection of life and property, in regulating traffic, maintaining order and in enforcing
the provisions of '' 32.20 through 32.26.
(1991 Code, ' 4-1-3) (Ord. 21, passed 10-21-1957)
' 32.04 ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE TOWN.
The members of the Police Department of the town are duly authorized to answer calls for
aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town, whenever the Police Chief, in his
or her discretion, shall deem it necessary to protect lives and property, and pursuant to mutual
aid agreements and state statutes.
(1991 Code, ' 4-1-4) (Ord. 17, passed 12-15-1952)
' 32.05 RESERVE OFFICERS.
The town may establish a police reserve officer program. Members of the police reserve
shall serve the town subject to the rules and procedures specified by the town.
(1991 Code, ' 4-1-5)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
' 32.20 CREATED .
There is hereby created a Volunteer Fire Department for the town for the prevention of fire
and the protection of life and property within the limits of the town. The Department will be
governed by the bylaws approved by the Department. The bylaws are adopted by reference
as if set out in full. A copy of the bylaws can be found in the office of the Town Clerk.
(1991 Code, ' 4-2-1) (Ord. 21, passed 10-21-1957)
' 32.21 OFFICERS .
(A) The Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, one Assistant Chief and other officers as
may be deemed necessary by the Fire Chief for the effective operation of the Department.
(B) The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the members of the Department for an indefinite
period of time, and his or her tenure of office shall depend upon his or her good conduct and
efficiency. The Chief shall be technically qualified by training and experience and shall have
ability to command firefighters and hold their respect and confidence. He or she shall be
removed only for just cause and after a public hearing before the Council.
28 Thatcher - Administration
(C) The Chief shall be held accountable to the Council only and shall make written and
verbal reports thereto as the Council may require. All other Department and company officers
shall be accountable to the Chief only. The Fire Chief shall be the Aauthority having
jurisdiction@ for the town.
(1991 Code, ' 4-2-2) (Ord. 21, passed 10-21-1957; Ord. 138-2005, passed 10-11-2005)
Penalty, see ' 32.99
' 32.22 DUTIES OF THE CHIEF.
(A) The Chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern the Department and
shall be responsible to the Council for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the
Department.
(B) The Chief shall determine the number and kind of companies of which the
Department is to be composed and shall determine the response of those companies to
alarms.
(C) The Chief shall at least once a month conduct suitable drills or instruction in the
operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings
in the town, fire prevention, water supplies and all other matters generally considered
essential to good firemanship and safety of life and property from fire.
(D) The Chief is hereby required to assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime
of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of
all fires.
(E) The Chief is hereby empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises at any
reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written notice upon the
owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire hazards that may be
found. Any person so served with a notice to abate any fire hazard shall comply therewith and
promptly notify the Chief.
(F) The Chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus
and minor equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the Department.
(G) The Chief shall report monthly to the Council the condition of the apparatus and
equipment; the number of fires during the month, their location and cause, and date of same
and loss occasioned thereby; the number and purpose of all other runs made; the number of
members responding to each fire or other run; and any changes in membership.
(H) The Chief shall make a complete annual report to the Council within one month after
the close of the fiscal year. The report shall include the information specified in division (F) of
this section, together with comparative data for previous years and recommendations for
improving the effectiveness of the Department.
(1991 Code, ' 4-2-3) (Ord. 21, passed 10-21-1957)
Town Organizations and Departments 29
' 32.23 EQUIPMENT .
(A) The Fire Department shall be equipped with apparatus and other equipment as may
be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property
from fire.
(B) Recommendations concerning apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by
the Fire Chief, and, after approval by the Council, the apparatus and equipment shall be
purchased in a manner as may be designated by the Council.
(C) All equipment of the Department shall be safely and conveniently housed in places as
may be designated by the Council. The places shall be heated during the winter season.
(D) Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm
and for notifying all members of the Department so that they may promptly respond.
(E) No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor
shall any person willfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any article used in
any way by the Fire Department.
(F) No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any
apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless accompanied by or having
special permission of an officer or authorized member of the Fire Department.
(G) No fire apparatus shall be hired out or permitted to leave the fire station, except in
response to a call for aid at a fire within the corporate limits of the town, or in response to a
call for aid at a fire in an area authorized for fire protection service or mutual aid under the
provisions of ' 32.26.
(1991 Code, ' 4-2-5) (Ord. 21, passed 10-21-1957)
' 32.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) In accordance with the provisions of state law, all motor equipment of the Fire
Department shall have right-of-way over all other traffic when responding to an alarm.
(B) No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire hose except upon specific orders from
the Fire Chief or other member of the Fire Department where the hose is used.
(C) No unauthorized person shall park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to
be placed within 20 feet of the entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus
is stored and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
the entrance or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
(D) No unauthorized vehicle shall follow within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the
Fire Department or park within 300 feet of a fire.
30 Thatcher - Administration
(E) It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm.
(1991 Code, ' 4-2-6) (Ord. 21, passed 10-21-1957) Penalty, see ' 32.99
' 32.25 PROVIDING FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE THE TOWN.
(A) The Council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire protection outside
the town or enter into mutual aid agreements, and the Fire Department is authorized to render
firefighting service pursuant to the terms of the agreements or contracts.
(B) Whenever the Fire Chief, or in his or her absence his or her authorized
representative, shall deem it necessary to protect lives or property, the Fire Department is
authorized to answer fire alarms and fight fires outside the corporate limits of the town.
(C) (1) No apparatus shall be hired out or permitted to leave the fire station, except in
response to a call for aid at a fire in a neighboring community, without the consent of the Chief
or in his or her absence the Assistant Chief.
(2) The officer in charge of the Department shall have power to assign equipment for
response to calls for outside aid in accordance with division (A) of this section, and in other
cases only when the absence of that equipment will not jeopardize protection in the town.
(1991 Code, ' 4-2-7) (Ord. 21, passed 10-21-1957)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
' 32.40 ESTABLISHED .
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the town is hereby established.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-21-1969)
' 32.41 MEMBERSHIP .
(A) All members shall be appointed for full three-year terms, except that, in the event of
death or resignation of a member, the vacancy may be filled for the unexpired term. The term
for all members shall extend until their successors are qualified; provided, however, three
successive unexcused or unexplained absences for any regular or special meeting shall be
grounds for termination at the will and pleasure of the appointing authority without the
necessity of a hearing or notice and that action shall be final.
Town Organizations and Departments 31
(B) All members shall serve without pay. However, members of the Commission may be
reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties upon authorization or
ratification by the Commission and approval of the expenditures by the Town Council.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-21-1969)
' 32.42 OFFICERS .
The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its own
members, who shall serve for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified.
The Chairperson shall preside at all meeting and exercise all the usual rights, duties and
prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The Chairperson shall have the power to
administer oaths and to take evidence. The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the
Chairperson in the latter=s absence or disability. Vacancies created by any cause shall be
filled for the unexpired term by a new election.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-21-1969)
' 32.43 DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to formulate, create and administer any lawful plan
duly adopted by the governing body for the present and future growth of the town pertaining to
the use of land and buildings for any purpose, together with all incidental activities usually
associated therewith and commonly known as APlanning and Zoning@ to make or cause to
be made a continuous study of the best present and future use to which land and buildings
shall be put within the town and in cooperation with adjacent areas; to recommend to the
governing body revision in plans which, in the opinion of the Commission, are for the best
interest of the citizens of the town; to promulgate rules of procedure and to supervise the
enforcement of rules so promulgated by the Commission and approval by the governing body.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-21-1969)
' 32.44 RULES ; MEETINGS.
The Commission shall provide in its rules for its meetings; provided, however, that special
meetings may be called by the Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice Chairperson. In
addition, any three members of the Commission may make written request to the Chairperson
for a special meeting and in the event the meeting is not called, the members may call the
special meeting in a manner and form as may be provided in the Commission rules.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-21-1969)
' 32.45 QUORUM .
Four members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of four members shall be
required for passage of any matter before the Commission. In this connection, the minutes of
the meetings shall
32 Thatcher - Administration
reflect the vote of each member present. A member may abstain from voting only upon a
declaration that he or she has a conflict of interest, in which case that member shall take no
part in the deliberations on the matter in question.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-21-1969)
' 32.46 FEE SCHEDULES.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be authorized to establish a uniform schedule
of fees for services with all receipts to be paid into the General Fund of the town. These fee
schedules shall become effective upon approval by the Town Council.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-21-1969)
' 32.99 PENALTY .
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of ' 32.21 shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as
hereinabove described.
(Ord. 138-2005, passed 10-11-2005)
CHAPTER 33: PURCHASING
Section
33.01 In general
33.02 Exclusive service
33.03 Bidding
33.04 Determination of lowest responsible bidder
33.05 Performance bond
33.06 Emergency purchases
33.07 Forms
33.08 Professional services
33.09 Cooperative purchasing
33.10 Purchases from Mayor or Councilmembers
' 33.01 IN GENERAL.
(A) The Town Manager shall be the purchasing agent for the town. No purchase or
contract for services of any kind or description, payment for which is to be made from funds of
the town, shall be made by the purchasing agent, or any officer, employee or agent of the
town, except in the manner set forth in this chapter, and unless the purchase is in accordance
with the adopted town budget.
(B) (1) Under $1,000. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract for services is
for the sum of less than $1,000, the purchasing agent may order the item as needed without
further formality.
(2) $1,000 to $4,999 inclusive. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract for
services is for the sum of at least $1,000 but not more than $4,999, the purchasing agent shall
solicit at least three bids for the item or service. The solicitation may be orally obtained by him
or her, and he or she may then award the purchase or contract of service to the lowest
responsible bidder.
(3) $5,000 to $14,999 inclusive. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract
for services is for the sum of more than $5,000 but less than $14,999, the purchasing agent
shall solicit at least three written bids for the item or service on bid forms and award the
purchase or contract of services to the lowest responsible bidder.
(4) $15,000 and over. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract for services,
except for professional services as defined in ' 33.08, is for the sum of $15,000 or more, the
purchasing agent
33
34 Thatcher - Administration
shall cause to be published in two issues of a newspaper of general circulation, a notice
inviting bids, which notice shall be published at least five days prior to the date set for the
receipt of the bids. The notice herein required shall include a general description of the
articles to be purchased or services to be performed and the time and place for opening bids.
In addition, the purchasing agent shall post a notice inviting bids in the Town Hall and may
also mail to responsible prospective suppliers a copy of the notice inserted in the newspaper.
(5) No contract of $15,000 or more shall be let except by the Council. Whenever any
contemplated purchase or contract for services is for the sum of $15,000 or more, the
purchasing agent shall present the bids to the Council for approval and advise the Council of
the advantages or disadvantages of contract and bid proposals.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-1) (Ord. 126-2004, passed 2-17-2004)
' 33.02 EXCLUSIVE SERVICE.
In the event that there is only one firm or company or individual capable of providing
particular service or commodity and the services or commodities cannot be secured from
other persons or companies, ' 33.01 shall not be applicable, and the services or commodities
can be secured without bidding.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-2)
' 33.03 BIDDING .
The purchasing agent and all parties contracting with the town, except those parties
contracting for professional services as defined in ' 33.08, shall follow the procedure set forth
in this section in relation to all bids required under ' 33.01(B)(4).
(A) All notices and solicitation of bids shall state the time and place for opening.
(B) All bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as
bids on the envelope.
(C) All bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice.
(D) A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted in the Town Hall for public inspection.
(E) The purchasing agent under ' 33.01(B)(1), (2) and (3) and the Council under '
33.01(B)(4) shall have the authority to reject any and all bids and parts of all bids and
re-advertise or re-solicit bids.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-3)
Purchasing 35
' 33.04 DETERMINATION OF LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
(A) Unless the Council or purchasing agent shall exercise the right of rejection as
provided by ' 33.03, the purchase or contract shall be made from and with the lowest
responsible bidder for the entire purchase or contract or for any part thereof.
(B) In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the Council and purchasing agent shall
consider:
(1) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the
service required;
(2) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the services promptly or
within the specified time, without delay or interference;
(3) The quality of performance of previous contracts;
(4) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances of
the town;
(5) The financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract; and
(6) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or services.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-4)
' 33.05 PERFORMANCE BOND.
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond, in cash or
otherwise, for an amount as he or she may deem sufficient to secure the execution of the
contract for the best interest of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-5)
' 33.06 EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchases of supplies or services and
when time is of the essence, the Mayor shall be empowered to authorize the purchasing
agent to purchase or secure services without complying with the procedures of this chapter. A
full report in writing of the circumstances of any emergency purchase shall be filed by the
purchasing agent with the Town Council at its next meeting.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-6)
36 Thatcher - Administration
' 33.07 FORMS .
The purchasing agent shall prescribe and maintain forms as he or she shall find
necessary for the operation of the provisions of this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-7)
' 33.08 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
Unless required by the Council, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
professional services. These services shall include but not be limited to the following:
physicians, attorneys, engineers and similar professions.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-8)
' 33.09 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.
This chapter shall not apply to purchases made by, through or with the state or its political
subdivisions. The town may make purchases or award contracts for services without a formal
bidding process whenever other governmental units have done so for the same item or
service if, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, a separate bidding process is not likely to
result in a lower price for those items or services.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-9)
' 33.10 PURCHASES FROM MAYOR OR COUNCILMEMBERS.
Pursuant to A.R.S. ' 38-503(C), the town, through its Council, may purchase supplies,
materials and equipment not to exceed an amount as the Council may set by resolution from
time, from the Mayor or any member of the Council without using competitive public bidding
procedures according to an annually adopted town policy.
(1991 Code, ' 3-4-10)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
34.01 Purposes
34.02 Definitions
34.03 Civil preparedness organization
34.04 Powers and duties
34.05 Mutual aid
34.06 Immunity of town and representatives thereof
34.07 Enforcement of orders, rules and regulations
34.08 Violations
Emergency Operations Plan
34.25 Emergency Operations Plan adopted by reference
Editor=s note:
Editor=s note from the prior codification read thus: Ordinance 23, passed August 17, 1959
created
a civil defense organization. This is an updated version of that ordinance.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 34.01 PURPOSES .
The purposes of this chapter are to:
(A) Reduce vulnerability of people and the community to damage, injury and loss of life
and property resulting from natural or human-made catastrophes, riots or hostile military or
paramilitary action;
(B) Prepare for prompt and efficient rescue, care and treatment of persons victimized or
threatened by disaster;
(C) Provide a setting conducive to the rapid and orderly start of restoration and
rehabilitation of persons and property affected by disasters;
37
38 Thatcher - Administration
(D) Clarify and strengthen the roles of the Mayor, Council, Manager and town agencies in
prevention of, preparation for and response to and recovery from disasters;
(E) Authorize and provide for cooperation in disaster prevention, preparedness, response
and recovery;
(F) Authorize and provide for coordination of activities relating to disaster prevention,
preparedness, response and recovery by agencies and officers of this town, agencies of the
private sector and similar activities in which the federal government, the state and its political
subdivisions may participate; and
(G) Provide a disaster management system embodying all aspects of pre-disaster
preparedness and post-disaster response.
(1991 Code, ' 3-5-1)
' 34.02 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CIVIL PREPAREDNESS. The organization, administration, trained manpower, facilities,
equipment, material, supplies, programs, emergency plans, ability to execute emergency
plans and all other measures necessary and incidental thereto relating to disaster prevention
preparedness response and recovery by all governmental and private sector agencies to
protect or save health, life or property.
DIRECTOR. The Director of Civil Preparedness.
DISASTER. The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury
or loss of life or property or extreme peril to the safety of persons or property, resulting from
any natural or human-made causes, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind,
storm, blight, drought, famine, infestation, air contamination, epidemic, explosion, riot or other
acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property, or hostile military or paramilitary
action.
EMERGENCY. The existence of a disaster within the town limits requiring immediate
action by the emergency forces of the town.
EMERGENCY FORCES. All town governmental and private sector agencies, volunteers,
facilities, equipment, trained manpower and other resources required to perform civil
preparedness functions.
LOCAL EMERGENCY. The existence of a disaster within the town limits, and the
situation is or is likely to be beyond the capability and resources of the town as determined by
the Mayor and which requires the combined efforts of other political subdivisions.
Emergency Management 39
REGULATIONS. The orders, rules and emergency procedures deemed essential for civil
preparedness.
STATE OF EMERGENCY. The duly proclaimed existence of a disaster within the state
except a disaster resulting in a state of war emergency which is or is likely to be beyond the
capabilities and resources of any single county, city or town and requires the combined efforts
of the state and the political subdivision.
STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY. The situation which exists immediately whenever this
nation is attacked, or upon receipt by this state of a warning from the federal government
indicating that an attack is imminent.
(1991 Code, ' 3-5-2)
' 33.03 CIVIL PREPAREDNESS ORGANIZATION.
The Town Manager is hereby authorized and directed to create a civil preparedness
organization. The Director of Civil Preparedness shall be appointed by the Town Manager.
(1991 Code, ' 3-5-3)
' 33.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Council.
(1) Shall have the power to make, amend and rescind regulations, not inconsistent
with regulations promulgated by the governor, necessary for civil preparedness, which
regulations shall have the full effect of this chapter when a copy is filed in the office of the
Clerk. Existing ordinances and regulations, or ordinances and regulations issued under
authority of A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, in conflict therewith, are suspended during the time
and to the extent that they are in conflict;
(2) May appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute
equipment, materials and supplies for civil preparedness purposes;
(3) In the absence of specific authority in state emergency plans and procedures, the
Council shall take emergency measures as deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of
A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2; and
(4) In a state of war emergency the Council may waive procedures and formalities
required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, incurring
obligations, employing permanent and temporary workers, utilizing volunteer workers, renting
equipment, purchasing and distributing supplies, materials and facilities and appropriating and
expending public funds when the Council determines and declares that strict compliance with
these procedures and formalities may prevent, hinder or delay mitigation of the effects of the
state of war emergency. The
40 Thatcher - Administration
town shall be exempt during the emergency from budget limitations prescribed by Article 9,
Section 20 of the State Constitution.
(B) The Mayor.
(1) In addition to the powers granted by other provisions of the law or town
ordinance, the Mayor may, by proclamation, declare an emergency or a local emergency to
exist. The proclamation may be rescinded by a majority of the Council after 24 hours.
(2) During an emergency or local emergency, the Mayor shall govern by
proclamation and shall have the authority to impose all necessary regulations to preserve the
peace and order of the town, including but not limited to:
(a) Imposition of curfews in all or in a portion of the town;
(b) Ordering the closing of any business;
(c) Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place; and
(d) Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations
within or without the town for assistance.
(C) The Director.
(1) The Director is responsible in non-emergency periods to act on behalf of the
Mayor and Council to develop a readiness plan for the town=s civil preparedness and for
coordinated operations in disaster situations.
(2) During emergencies, the Director shall act as the principal advisor or aide to the
Mayor on emergency operations. His or her major responsibility is to assure coordination
among emergency forces and with higher and adjacent governments, by assuring that the
emergency operation center functions effectively. He or she shall assist the Mayor in the
execution of operations, plans and procedures required by the emergency.
(3) The Director shall prepare a comprehensive disaster basic plan, which shall be
adopted and maintained by resolution of the Council upon the recommendations of the
Director. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to town organization, it is the intent that
the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies be
used to the fullest extent.
(4) The disaster plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the
effect of law whenever emergencies, as defined in this chapter, have been proclaimed.
(1991 Code, ' 3-5-4)
Emergency Management 41
' 34.05 MUTUAL AID.
In periods of local emergency as declared pursuant to this chapter, the town is hereby
granted full power to provide mutual aid to any affected area in accordance with local
ordinances, resolutions, emergency plans or agreements therefor. The town may request from
state agencies mutual aid including personnel, equipment and other available resources to
assist the town during the local emergency in accordance with emergency plans or at the
direction of the governor.
(1991 Code, ' 3-5-5)
' 34.06 IMMUNITY OF TOWN AND REPRESENTATIVES THEREOF.
(A) The town shall not be liable for any claim based upon the exercise or performance of
or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty on the part of the town or
any employee of the town, except willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith of any
employee, in carrying out the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2.
(B) The immunities from liability, exemptions from laws, ordinances and rules, all
pensions, relief, disability worker=s compensation and other benefits which apply to the
activity of officers, agents or employees of the town when performing their respective
functions within the limits of the town shall apply to them to the same degree and extent while
engaged in the performance of any of their functions and duties extraterritorially under the
provisions of this chapter, excepting willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith.
(C) Volunteers duly enrolled or registered for services in a local emergency, a state of
emergency or a state of war emergency in carrying out, complying with or attempting to
comply with, any regulations issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2 or any local
ordinance, or performing any of their authorized functions or duties, or training for the
performance of their authorized functions or duties, shall have the same degree of
responsibility for their actions and enjoy immunities as officers and employees of the state
and its political subdivisions performing similar work.
(1991 Code, ' 3-5-6)
' 34.07 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Town Police Department shall enforce regulations issued pursuant to this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 3-5-7)
' 34.08 VIOLATIONS .
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to refuse or willfully
neglect to obey any lawful regulation or order issued as provided in this chapter. This
provision, however, does
42 Thatcher - Administration
not apply to the refusal of any private organization or members thereof to participate in an
emergency, local emergency or state of emergency as defined by this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 3-5-8) Penalty, see ' 10.99
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
' 34.25 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The Emergency Operations Plan of the town is adopted by reference and incorporated as
if set out in full. A copy of the plan can be found in the office of the Town Clerk.
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
35.01 Adoption of Model Tax Code
35.02 Ad valorem taxes
35.99 Penalty
' 35.01 ADOPTION OF MODEL TAX CODE.
The Town Tax Code adopted by Ordinance 57 and amendments thereto is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if fully set forth herein. Three copies of
the Code are on file with the Town Clerk and available for public inspection.
(1991 Code, Art. 9-1) (Ord. 57, passed 3-9-1987; Ord. 67, passed 5-21-1990; Ord. 83-1993,
passed 8-16-1993; Ord. 87-1995, passed 1-23-1995; Ord. 92-1995, passed 6-19-1995; Ord.
94-1996, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 96-1996, passed 11-19-1996; Ord. 105-1998, passed 5-19-
1998; Ord. 115-1999, passed 10-19-1999; Ord. 120-2001, passed 11-20-2001; Ord. 123-
2003, passed 4-15-2003; Ord. 129-2004, passed 10-12-2004; Ord. 137-2005, passed 10-11-
2005; Ord. 143-2006, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 147-2006, passed 11-14-2006; Ord. 148-2006,
passed 12-19-2006; Ord. 150-2007, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 153-2008, passed 3-18-2008;
Ord. 155-2009, passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 156-2009, passed 8-11-2009; Ord. 163-2011, passed
4-12-2011; Ord. 165-2011, passed 6-14-2011; Ord. 166-2011, passed 7-12-2011)
' 35.02 AD VALOREM TAXES.
(A) There is hereby levied on each $100 of the assessed value of property, both real and
personal, property as may not be lawfully exempt from taxation, a primary property tax rate
sufficient to raise a sum as determined by Council from time to time for each fiscal year. If the
sum exceeds the maximum levy allowed by the law, the Board of Supervisors of the county is
hereby authorized to reduce the levy to the maximum amount allowed by law after providing
notice to the town.
(B) Failure by the county officials to properly return the delinquent list, any irregularity in
assessments or omissions in the same, or any irregularity in any title conveyed by any tax
fees; failure or neglect of any officer or officers to timely perform any of the duties assigned to
him or her or pursuant thereto, the validity of the assessment or levy of taxes or of the
judgment of same by which the
43
44 Thatcher - Administration
collection of the same may be enforced shall not affect the lien of the town of overcharges as
to part of taxes or the foreclosure: and all acts of officers de facto shall be valid as if
performed by officers de jure.
(Ord. 135-2005, passed 5-10-2005)
' 35.99 PENALTY .
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of the code adopted in ' 35.01, as
amended, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall
be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.
(Ord. 57, passed 3-9-1987; Ord. 67, passed 5-21-1990; Ord. 83-1993, passed 8-16-1993;
Ord. 87-1995, passed 1-23-1995; Ord. 92-1995, passed 6-19-1995; Ord. 94-1996, passed 4-
15-1996; Ord. 96-1996, passed 11-19-1996; Ord. 105-1998, passed 5-19-1998; Ord. 115-
1999, passed 10-19-1999; Ord. 120-2001, passed 11-20-2001; Ord. 123-2003, passed 4-15-
2003; Ord. 137-2005, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 143-2006, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 148-2006,
passed 12-19-2006; Ord. 150-2007, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 153-2008, passed 3-18-2008;
Ord. 155-2009, passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 156-2009, passed 8-11-2009; Ord. 163-2011, passed
4-12-2011; Ord. 166-2011, passed 7-12-2011)
CHAPTER 36: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
36.01 Municipal Court established; jurisdiction
36.02 Proceedings of Court; conduct of business
Presiding Officer
36.15 Appointment; compensation
36.16 Powers and duties
36.17 Hearing Officers
Duties of Manager and Council
36.30 Duties of Town Manager
36.31 Town Council duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 36.01 MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.
There is hereby established in the town a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction of
all violations of this code, and jurisdiction concurrently with Justices of the Peace of precincts
in which the town is located, of violations of laws of the state committed within the limits of the
town. The Municipal Court is established pursuant to the State Constitution and A.R.S. '
22-402.
(1991 Code, Art. 5-1) (Ord. 64, passed 2-20-1989)
' 36.02 PROCEEDINGS OF COURT; CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
The proceedings of the Court shall be conducted in accordance with the State
Constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the State Supreme Court pertaining to
police courts. The proceedings shall also be conducted in accordance with the Rules of
Criminal Procedure for the Superior Court, unless otherwise prescribed, and providing this
code and resolutions of the town are not in
45
46 Thatcher - Administration
conflict therewith. The Municipal Court shall at all times be open for transaction of business
except on nonjudicial days.
(1991 Code, Art. 5-3) (Ord. 64, passed 2-20-1989)
PRESIDING OFFICER
' 36.15 APPOINTMENT ; COMPENSATION.
The Municipal Court shall be composed of a presiding Municipal Court Judge and any
other judges as determined by the Council. The Council shall appoint and may remove for
cause the presiding judge and additional judges appointed. All judges shall be appointed for a
period of two years, with their compensation to be determined by the Council.
(1991 Code, ' 5-2-1) (Ord. 64, passed 2-20-1989)
' 36.16 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) Each Municipal Judge shall exercise powers, duties and responsibilities as provided
by the Constitution and laws of this state, this code and town ordinances.
(B) The powers and duties of the Municipal Judge shall include but are not necessarily
limited to the following:
(1) Scheduling assignments of all judges;
(2) Submitting all reports required by the Constitution and the laws of the state, this
code and ordinances of the town;
(3) Reporting the activities of the Town Court as reasonably required by the Council;
(4) The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and receiving all
fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law; and
(5) The payment of all fines, penalties, fees and other monies collected by the Court
to the Town Treasurer.
(1991 Code, ' 5-2-2) (Ord. 64, passed 2-20-1989)
' 36.17 HEARING OFFICERS.
The Council may appoint one or more Hearing Officers to preside over civil traffic violation
cases when the appointment of the Hearing Officers is necessary to assure prompt disposition
of civil traffic
Municipal Court 47
violation cases. Hearing Officers may hear and dispose of civil traffic violation cases which
are appealable to the Superior Court pursuant to A.R.S. Title 22, Chapter 2, Article 4 under
the supervision of the presiding officer of the Magistrate Court.
(1991 Code, ' 5-2-3)
DUTIES OF MANAGER AND COUNCIL
' 36.30 DUTIES OF TOWN MANAGER.
The duties of the Town Manager include:
(A) Organize, administer, supervise and plan for all nonjudicial Municipal Court
operations, including personnel, payroll and insurance administration;
(B) Review Municipal Court schedule to ensure maximum utilization of town resources
and recommend changes to the Judge and to the Council to improve that utilization; and
(C) Collection and safekeeping of all monies, i.e., fines, penalties and fees collected in
the Municipal Court, except as otherwise provided by law. These monies are to be kept safe
until transferred to the Town Treasurer.
(1991 Code, Art. 5-4) (Ord. 64, passed 2-20-1989)
' 36.31 TOWN COUNCIL DUTIES.
The duties of the Town Council include to provide for the financial, physical, personnel
and consulting requirements of the Municipal Court. The Council may adopt those additional
ordinances which are deemed necessary for the consistent implementation of this section.
(1991 Code, Art. 5-4) (Ord. 64, passed 2-20-1989)
48 Thatcher - Administration
CHAPTER 37: TOWN POLICIES
Section
Personnel System
37.01 Personnel policies
37.02 Conditions of employment
37.03 Political contributions
37.04 Safety and loss prevention program
Cross-reference:
Arizonans with Disabilities Act, amending the 2009 International Building Code, see '
150.01
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
' 37.01 PERSONNEL POLICIES.
The town may adopt personnel policies, the provisions of which shall apply to all
employees of the town except elected officials, officers of the town appointed by the Council,
persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical services,
temporary employees, volunteer firefighters and volunteer personnel who receive no regular
compensation from the town.
(1991 Code, ' 3-3-1) (Ord. 79-1992, passed 10-19-1992)
' 37.02 CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.
(A) The appointment, promotion and tenure of every employee shall be conditioned solely
on merit and fitness and the satisfactory performance of the duties and responsibilities
assigned. No employee or applicant for employment shall be discriminated against on the
basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, political affiliation or disability. Also consistent with its
commitment to provide equal employment opportunities, the town will not tolerate any form of
employee harassment, including sexual harassment, harassment based upon race, gender,
national origin, religion, age or disability.
(B) (1) Sexual harassment. SEXUAL HARASSMENT is defined as any unwelcome
sexual advances, requests for sexual favors or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual
nature when submission to that conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an individual=s employment, submission to or rejection of the conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for
49
50 Thatcher - Administration
employment decisions affecting those individuals or the conduct has the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with an individual=s work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
(2) Other harassment. Any conduct which has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual=s work performance or creating any intimidation, hostile or
offensive work environment, based on that individual=s race, gender, national origin, religion,
age or disability, is also unlawful and will not be tolerated.
(3) Education. The Personnel Director shall be responsible for formally notifying all
employees, department directors, elected or appointed officials and volunteers of this policy.
Periodic training on the topic of offensive behavior and harassment may be conducted and
offered to all employees, elected and appointed officials and others.
(4) Reporting possible harassment. Any employee who feels he or she has been
harassed should immediately contact either the director of the department in which he or she
works, the Personnel Director or Manager to report the situation. All other employees,
including supervisors or directors who become aware of possible harassment of an employee,
either as a result of having received a complaint directly from the employee or from any other
reliable source of information, or from his or her personal observations, should report the
situation to the Personnel Director or the Manager.
(5) Implementation and no reprisals. The Manager and the department directors are
responsible for creating a productive work environment in which offensive conduct or
harassment is completely out of place, taking immediate and appropriate corrective action in
response to any confirmed violation of this policy, and assuring that no reprisals are taken
against those who complain or against corroborating witnesses.
(6) Enforcement and investigation. The town is committed to thoroughly investigate
each complaint and take immediate and appropriate corrective action on all confirmed
violations of this policy. The Personnel Director is responsible for the operation of this policy,
providing counsel and resolving any unsettled questions which may arise from this policy. The
Manager/Personnel Director, the appropriate department director or the Council is responsible
for thoroughly investigating and resolving any complaints. The Personnel Director shall be
responsible for overseeing the investigation of any complaint of harassment. The goal will be
to investigate any complaint promptly and thoroughly. Furthermore, to the extent possible, a
harassment complaint, as well as the investigation of any complaint, shall be kept confidential.
Following the investigation, the Personnel Director shall take (or recommend, if appropriate)
appropriate corrective action on all violations of this policy against harassment.
(C) Penalties. Any violation of this policy will result in appropriate discipline being taken.
The appropriate action to be taken necessarily will depend on consideration of all the
circumstances in a particular situation.
(1991 Code, ' 3-3-2) (Ord. 91-1995, passed 4-17-1995)
Town Policies 51
' 37.03 POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
No officer, official or employee of the town shall use any influence or pressure upon any
employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of money or time, either direct or indirect,
for any political campaign or personal gain.
(1991 Code, ' 3-3-3)
' 37.04 SAFETY AND LOSS PREVENTION PROGRAM.
The Town Manager may implement a safety and loss prevention program applicable to all
employees of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 3-3-4)
52 Thatcher - Administration
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. SOLID WASTE
51. WASTEWATER
52. ELECTRIC UTILITY
1
2 Thatcher - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
Garbage and Refuse Collection
50.01 Town as collection agency
50.02 Service charges
50.03 Disposal of garbage
50.04 Containers
50.05 Disposal of refuse
Removal of Litter
50.20 Definitions
50.21 Placement of litter
50.22 Owner to maintain premises
50.23 Violation for non-compliance
50.24 Notice to remove
50.25 Service of notice
50.26 Appeal to Council
50.27 Removal by town
50.28 Lien for removal
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
' 50.01 TOWN AS COLLECTION AGENCY.
+
(A) The town, or other collectors authorized by the town, shall have the exclusive right to
collect all garbage and refuse within the town, except as provided in this chapter or otherwise
authorized in writing by the Council.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person in possession of any building,
structure, residence, place of business or apartment unit within the town shall avoid or refuse
to accept garbage or refuse disposal service provided by the town, and any avoidance shall
not exempt the premises from the payment of charges for those services.
(1991 Code, ' 10-1-1)
3
4 Thatcher - Public Works
' 50.02 SERVICE CHARGES.
(A) The Council shall establish a monthly charge for garbage and refuse collection and
disposal services, by resolution, as is necessary to produce adequate revenue to cover the
cost of services rendered.
(B) Charges to newly constructed structures shall commence upon final inspection and
approval of the structure by the Town Building Inspector.
(C) The monthly charge shall be paid in advance of service and shall be paid by the
owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in possession of any occupied or utilized premises.
(D) Charges shall be delinquent upon the close of business 45 days after the date on
which they were due. The town may enforce the collection of any unpaid and delinquent
accounts by civil action or by discontinuance of service.
(E) All monies collected by the town under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
deposited to the General Fund of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 10-1-2)
' 50.03 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
(A) It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in possession of any
building, structure or premises within the town to fail to provide for the disposal of his or her
garbage or refuse.
(B) It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in possession of any
building, structure or premises within the town to dispose of his or her garbage and refuse at
other than a landfill approved by the town for that purpose.
(C) The term GARBAGE as used herein shall be deemed to comprise all wastes and
abandoned material commonly designated by that term, including food cans and receptacles
of like character and ashes, but it shall not include slop waters, dish waters and rinsings and
like liquids which later shall be disposed of through the sewer, or any dead animal or human
or animal excrement.
(1991 Code, ' 10-1-3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.04 CONTAINERS .
(A) Each inhabited or utilized structure in the town shall permanently provide one or more
substantial garbage cans of sufficient size to contain all garbage of the structure. The cans
shall be so constructed as to contain without leakage all garbage placed therein and shall be
covered with closely fitting covers of the same material which shall remain in place at all times
except when being emptied
Solid Waste 5
or when garbage is actually being placed therein. The cans shall be kept in some convenient
place where the garbage collector may find the same and remove the garbage therefrom. The
size of all cans shall not be in excess of 30 gallons and the maximum weight of each
container when full shall not exceed 50 pounds. All cans shall be kept on private property and
shall not be left upon the public streets and alleys, except for a reasonable time on the day of
pickup.
(B) The duty of providing garbage cans and covers and to see that the same are kept in
the place and condition required is imposed on each owner, lessee, tenant or person in
possession of a structure receiving service. Should any can being used fail to meet the
requirements provided herein and be deemed unfit for use as a garbage can in the opinion of
the garbage collector of the town, the garbage collector shall place on the can a tag notifying
the user thereof that the can is unfit for further use and that the can will be picked up and
carried away on the next garbage collection day.
(C) No person shall use or remove garbage from any cans or uncover or remove the
same, without permission or license of the owner or other person in charge or control thereof,
except a person actually engaged in the work of transporting the garbage.
(D) No person shall place or cause to be placed in any garbage can any dead animal or
any human or animal excrement.
(1991 Code, ' 10-1-4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.05 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
(A) The town has an automated collection system which uses special containers required
for this system. There is a charge set by Council from time to time per 90-gallon container per
month charge for residential collection.
(B) Garbage collection schedule: Downtown Thatcher is picked up on Mondays and
Thursdays; Daley Estates and Quail Ridge are picked up on Tuesdays and Fridays
(schedules may vary for holidays).
(C) The following guidelines and rules governing trash shall apply for all town residents
and are instituted to help keep the community safer and cleaner.
(1) Garbage.
(a) All containers shall be kept on private property and shall not be left upon
public streets, except for a reasonable time on the day of pickup.
(b) The garbage truck requires eight feet of free space on each side of the
container for the operation of the arms. The customer shall not to block trash containers with
vehicles, power poles and the like as this will prevent the emptying of the container. The
customer shall make sure the arrows are facing forward and the lid is closed completely.
6 Thatcher - Public Works
(c) The customer shall not place concrete, rocks, furniture, lumber, large
appliances or pieces of steel or hazardous waste in these containers as they could damage
the compaction mechanism.
(d) The customer shall not place hot ashes in these containers as it may ruin the
container and the customer may be responsible for its replacement.
(2) Trash.
(a) All grass, plants and leaves should be placed in plastic garbage bags. Small
amounts of grass/leaves may be placed in the 90-gallon or 300-gallon containers; however
these should not be more than half-filled with yard trash. Bags should be placed on the street
with the containers.
(b) For large piles or items such as limbs, dirt, appliances, furniture and the like,
customers should call the town hall at 428-2290 for a truck to be scheduled for them to load
themselves. If the load must be taken to the landfill, landfill charges will be passed onto the
citizen (minimum amount set by Council from time to time). If the load is burnable, there will
not be a charge. Burnable materials are vegetative materials (except oleanders) and
untreated wood. Grass in plastic bags is not burnable. Mixed loads will be taken to the landfill;
the town will not separate loads. Trucks will be scheduled on a first come first serve basis and
cannot be left for an extended period of time. Trucks will be delivered and dumped as time
allows.
(c) Burn permits are available from ADEQ by calling 888-271-9302. ADEQ burn
permit applications are available at the town hall.
(d) The town will not pick up building materials left by contractors; this includes
lumber, shingles, plaster or drywall, concrete, stone, aggregate, blacktop, bricks, block, carpet
and other solid materials. These should be hauled by the contractor to the landfill.
(e) The town will not pick up batteries, tires or appliances that contain or
contained refrigerant or other items considered hazardous waste. Disposal of these items are
the responsibility of the resident or business. These items cannot be placed in the 90- or
300-gallon containers or trash trucks.
(f) Trash not complying with these guidelines will not be collected.
(1991 Code, ' 10-1-5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
REMOVAL OF LITTER
' 50.20 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Solid Waste 7
LITTER. Any rubbish, trash, weeds, filth or debris which constitute a hazard to public
health and safety and shall include all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid
market and industrial waste; any deposit, accumulation, pile or heap of brush, grass, debris,
weeds, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish or other unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind
whatsoever.
PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard,
grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibules belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling,
house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways,
and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
(1991 Code, ' 10-2-1)
' 50.21 PLACEMENT OF LITTER.
(A) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any public place or occupied or unoccupied
private premises within the town, whether owned by the person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized containers for collection in a
manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public or private property.
(B) It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place any litter upon any private
premises or public place not owned or under the control of the person, firm or corporation and,
in addition to any fine which may be imposed for a violation of any provision of this section, he
or she shall be liable for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this subchapter for the
removal of the litter.
(1991 Code, ' 10-2-2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.22 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the
premises free of litter, provided that this section shall not prohibit the storage of refuse or
garbage in suitable containers as provided in this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 10-2-3)
' 50.23 VIOLATION FOR NON-COMPLIANCE.
The town shall site a violation to the customer for non-compliance of cleanup.
8 Thatcher - Public Works
' 50.24 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
To compel the removal of litter through the provisions of this subchapter, if a person
owning or controlling any property fails, neglects or refuses to remove or properly dispose of
litter, located on property owned or controlled by the person, he or she shall be given written
notice by any duly authorized official of the town to remove all litter from the property prior to
the date set on the notice for compliance, which notice shall be given not less than 30 days
before the date set for compliance. The notice shall contain an estimate of the cost of removal
by the town, a statement that, unless the person owning or controlling the property complies
therewith prior to the date of compliance, the town will, at the expense of the person owning or
controlling the property, perform the necessary work at a cost not to exceed the estimate
given in the notice, and that the person may appeal in writing to the Council prior to the date of
compliance on the notice.
(1991 Code, ' 10-2-4)
' 50.25 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
Notice shall be personally served on the owner or person controlling the property, by a
duly authorized official of the town in the manner provided in Rule 4(d) of the State Rules of
Civil Procedure, or mailed to the owner or person controlling the property at his or her last
known address by certified or registered mail, or the address to which the tax bill for the
property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, a duplicate notice shall
also be sent to him or her by certified or registered mail at his or her last known address.
(1991 Code, ' 10-2-5)
' 50.26 APPEAL TO COUNCIL.
Prior to the date set for compliance on the notice, the owner or person controlling the
property may appeal in writing to the Council from the demand as contained in the notice. The
Council may, at its next regular meeting after receiving the appeal, hear and determine the
same and the decision of the Council shall be final. The Council may either affirm or reverse
the decision of the duly authorized official or modify the scope of the work as required in the
notice. No action shall be taken by the town until the Council has heard and determined all
matters contained in the notice of appeal.
(1991 Code, ' 10-2-6)
' 50.27 REMOVAL BY TOWN.
When any person to whom notice has been given, prior to the date of compliance on the
notice, or within any further time as may have been granted by the Council on appeal, fails,
neglects or refuses to move from the property any or all litter, the duly authorized official is
authorized and directed to cause the litter to be removed and disposed of at the expense of
the owner or person controlling the property. Upon completion of the work, the duly authorized
official shall prepare a verified statement of account of the actual cost of the removal or
abatement, the date the work was completed, and the street address
Solid Waste 9
and the legal description of the property on which the work was done, including 5% for
additional inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, and shall serve a
duplicate copy of the verified statement upon the person owning or controlling the property in
the manner prescribed in ' 50.24. The owner or person controlling the property shall have 30
days from the date of service upon him or her to appeal in writing to the Council from the
amount of the assessment as contained in the verified statement. If an appeal is not filed with
the Clerk within this 30-day period, then the amount of the assessment as determined by the
duly authorized official shall become final and binding. If an appeal is taken, the Council shall,
at its next regular meeting, hear and determine the appeal and may affirm the amount of the
assessment, modify the amount thereof, or determine that no assessment at all shall be
made. The decision of the Council shall be final and binding on all persons.
(1991 Code, ' 10-2-7)
' 50.28 LIEN FOR REMOVAL.
If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an appeal is taken and the
Council has affirmed or modified the amount of the assessment, the original assessment or
the assessment as so modified shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder and,
from the date of its recording, shall be a lien on the private premises until paid. These liens
shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages
and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the
provisions of this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The
town shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the lien in the Superior Court at any time
after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by that action shall not
affect its validity. The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all
matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof. A
prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar to a subsequent
assessment for those purposes, and any number of liens on the same lot or tract of land may
be enforced in the same action.
(1991 Code, ' 10-2-8)
10 Thatcher - Public Works
CHAPTER 51: WASTEWATER
Section
General Provisions
51.01 Definitions
51.02 Town responsibilities and liabilities
51.03 Consumer responsibility
51.04 Interference with town officials; digging up streets without permit
51.05 Unsanitary disposal of excrement prohibited
51.06 Private sewage systems
51.07 Tampering with equipment prohibited
51.08 Permit required
51.09 Inspection and approval by town
51.10 Records to be kept of building connections
51.11 Regulations part of contract
Connection Fees and Rates
51.25 Application for service
51.26 Connection fees
51.27 Guarantee deposit
51.28 Monthly charges and rates
Use of Public Sewers
51.40 Prohibited substances
51.41 Interceptors required
51.42 Authority for review and approval of certain discharges
51.43 Preliminary treatment
51.44 Manholes
51.45 Tests and analyses
51.46 Special agreements with industrial concerns
51.99 Penalty
11
12 Thatcher - Public Works
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 51.01 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
B.O.D. (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five
days at 201C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other
place of disposal.
HAZARDOUS WASTE. Those items as defined in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261.
NORMAL WASTEWATER. Wastewater that contains not more than 300 mg/l B.O.D., or
300 mg/l suspended solids, is within a pH range of 6.5 to 8.0 or does not contain excessive
amounts of other materials as may reasonably be determined by the town.
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of
solution.
PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights
and which is controlled by public authority.
REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain
the capacity and performance for which the works were designed and constructed.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE. Wastes from toilets, baths, sinks, lavatories, laundries and other plumbing
fixtures in residences, institutions, public and business buildings, mobile homes, watercraft
and other places of human habitation, employment or recreation. SEWAGE does not include
motor oil, gasoline, paints, varnishes, solvents, pesticides, fertilizers or other materials not
generally associated with toilet flushing, food preparation, laundry and personal hygiene.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
Wastewater 13
SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of
sewage.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in,
water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
WASTEWATER. The same as sewage.
(1991 Code, Art. 13-1)
' 51.02 TOWN RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIABILITIES.
(A) The town shall not be responsible for the installation, maintenance or inspection of
the consumer=s service line, piping and apparatus or for any defects therein.
(B) The town shall have the right to refuse service, unless the consumer=s lines or piping
are installed in a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow.
(C) Under normal conditions, the consumer shall be notified of any anticipated
interruption of service.
(D) The town shall not be responsible for the negligence of third persons or forces beyond
the control of the town resulting in any interruption of service or damage to the property of the
consumer.
(E) The town may refuse service to any prospective consumer when the capacity of the
sewer system will not permit additional loads being placed thereon.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-1)
' 51.03 CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY.
(A) Building or house sewer connections on the consumer=s premises shall be so
arranged as to provide service to one lot. If additional service is required, it will be considered
as a separate and individual account.
(B) The consumer=s house or building service line, sewer connection and apparatus shall
be installed and maintained by the consumer, at the consumer=s expense, in a safe and
efficient manner and in accordance with the town=s rules and regulations and in full
compliance with the regulations of the State Department of Health Services.
(C) The consumer shall safeguard the town=s property placed on the consumer=s
premises and shall permit access to it only by the authorized representatives of the town.
14 Thatcher - Public Works
(D) In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the town or any accident or
injury to persons or property is caused by or results from the negligence or wrongful act of the
consumer, his or her agents or employees, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements
shall be paid by the consumer to the town and any liability otherwise resulting shall be
assumed by the consumer. The amount of the loss or damage or the cost of repairs may be
added to the consumer=s bill, and, if not paid, service may be discontinued by the town.
(E) The town may discontinue sewer service for the following additional reasons:
(1) To prevent fraud or abuse; and
(2) The consumer=s willful disregard of or refusal to comply with this chapter or other
rules as may be adopted by the Council.
(F) When service to a consumer shall require the laying of any town sewer lines or the
installation of any other town property on, under, across or over the consumer=s property, the
consumer will grant to the town an easement, right-of-way or license for the installation.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-2)
' 51.04 INTERFERENCE WITH TOWN OFFICIALS; DIGGING UP STREETS WITHOUT
PERMIT.
It is unlawful for any person:
(A) To interfere in any way with town officials in the discharge of any of their duties, either
in the tapping of any sewer pipe, main or lateral belonging to the town or in the laying or
connecting of the pipe, main or lateral;
(B) To dig up or cause to be dug up any street or alley in the town for the purpose of
connection with the sewer system of the town without first obtaining a permit from the town; or
(C) Who, having a permit, to dig up any portion of any street or alley of the town for the
purpose of connecting with the sewer system of the town, to fail or neglect to place the street
or alley in its original condition under the supervision of the town and as required by the town.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-3) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.05 UNSANITARY DISPOSAL OF EXCREMENT PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner
upon public or private property within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
town, any human or animal excrement or other objectionable waste.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-4) Penalty, see ' 51.99
Wastewater 15
' 51.06 PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS.
(A) Compliance with subchapter. Except as provided in this subchapter, it is unlawful to
construct or maintain within the town any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(B) When permitted; sanitation. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, the building sewer shall be connected to
a private sewage disposal system which complies with the regulations of the State
Department of Health Services. This private sewage disposal system shall be constructed,
maintained and operated at all times in a sanitary manner.
(C) Discontinuance. After a public sewer becomes available within 150 feet of any
property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private sewage facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-5) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.07 TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the
municipal sewage system.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-6) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.08 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the town.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-7) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.09 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BY TOWN.
No building sewer will be connected to the building connection until it has been inspected
and approved by the town. Fees for the inspections shall be determined from time to time by
the Council.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-8) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.10 RECORDS TO BE KEPT OF BUILDING CONNECTIONS.
The town shall keep a record of all building connections made, the purpose for which they
are to be used, together with the name of the owner of the property, his or her agent or
representative.
(1991 Code, ' 13-3-9)
16 Thatcher - Public Works
' 51.11 REGULATIONS PART OF CONTRACT.
All regulations contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract of every
resident of the town taking sewer service from the town, and the resident taking sewer service
shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. Consumers outside
the town limits shall, upon application for sewer service, be required to sign a statement
agreeing to the regulations set forth in this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 13-5)
CONNECTION FEES AND RATES
' 51.25 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
No sewer connection connecting the town sanitary sewer system to any consumer shall
be made by any person or the town except upon written application furnished to the town by
the owner of the premises to which sanitary sewer service is to be furnished, or his or her
authorized agent. A monthly service charge will be made for the sanitary sewer connection
according to the rates fixed by the town until the service is discontinued by order of the town
or written order of the owner or his or her authorized agent.
(1991 Code, ' 13-2-1) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.26 CONNECTION FEES.
The fee for each building connection for residential users and for commercial users shall
be set by resolution of the Council.
(1991 Code, ' 13-2-2)
' 51.27 GUARANTEE DEPOSIT.
(A) A deposit, the amount of which shall be established by resolution, shall be required of
a user. This deposit shall be retained by the town as security for payment of future sanitary
sewer charges until the service is terminated.
(B) The individual in whose name the deposit is made shall be responsible for payment of
all bills incurred in connection with the service furnished.
(C) A separate deposit may be required for each sewer connection or each dwelling unit.
(D) The guarantee deposit receipt is not negotiable and can be redeemed only at the
town offices.
Wastewater 17
(E) Where the town finds that the request for refund of a guarantee deposit is
questionable, the town may require the applicant for refund to produce the deposit receipt
properly endorsed.
(F) Upon discontinuance of sanitary sewer service for nonpayment of bills, or at the
request of the consumer, the guarantee deposit shall be applied by the town toward
settlement of the final account of the consumer and any excess remaining shall be refunded
to the consumer.
(1991 Code, ' 13-2-3) (Ord. 75, passed 4-20-1992)
' 51.28 MONTHLY CHARGES AND RATES.
(A) A monthly sewer service charge as established by the Council shall be made for each
sanitary sewer connection.
(B) Rates may differ depending upon use, occupancy or location.
(C) The Council shall regulate and change the rates as it becomes necessary to meet the
obligations of the town for the municipal sewer system.
(D) All charges for sewer service are payable on the last day of the month following billing
at Town Hall. Each consumer shall be responsible for the payment of charges at the proper
place and time. If a monthly bill is still unpaid 45 days following billing, the town reserves the
right to place a lien on the property or to take the customer to small claims court to collect
payment. Reconnection charge, payable in addition to a new deposit, shall be set by
resolution of the Council.
(E) Prior to terminating service for nonpayment of amounts due, the town will give written
notice to the consumer and provide an opportunity for a hearing for the consumer with the
Town Manager or his or her designee.
(F) In case any prescribed payment date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the
effective date of payment, as set forth above, shall be deemed to be the day following the
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
(1991 Code, ' 13-2-4) (Ord. 75, passed 4-20-1992; Ord. 82-1992, passed 12-21-1992)
Penalty, see ' 51.99
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
' 51.40 PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, swimming pool
water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
18 Thatcher - Public Works
(B) Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 1501F;
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than 50 parts per million by weight of
fat, oil or grease;
(3) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas;
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, paunch manure, grits such as brick, cement, onyx, carbide or any other solid
or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewer works;
(6) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works;
(7) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant;
(8) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of a character and quantity
that unusual attention or expense is required to handle these materials at the sewage
treatment plant; or
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
(C) Commercial operations utilizing hazardous substances or creating hazardous waste,
as defined in A.R.S ' 49-921(5), shall not be discharged into sanitary sewer lines.
(D) Hazardous waste and items not included in the definition of sewage shall not be
discharged into the sanitary sewer lines or the sewage lagoons of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 13-4-1) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.41 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
(A) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the town,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that these
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
Wastewater 19
(B) Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious material capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in
place, shall be gas-tight and watertight.
(C) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the
owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(1991 Code, ' 13-4-2)
' 51.42 AUTHORITY FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF CERTAIN DISCHARGES.
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having any of the following
characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of the town:
(A) A five-day biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D.) greater than 300 parts per million by
weight;
(B) Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids;
(C) Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in ' 51.40;
or
(D) Having an average daily flow of greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of
the town.
(1991 Code, ' 13-4-3)
' 51.43 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
(A) Required. Where necessary in the opinion of the town, the owner shall provide, at his
or her expense, any preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
(1) Reduce the B.O.D. to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts
per million by weight;
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits
provided for in ' 51.42; and/or
(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of the waters or wastes.
(B) Approval. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the town and the
State Department of Health Services. No construction of these facilities shall be commenced
until the approvals are obtained in writing.
20 Thatcher - Public Works
(C) Maintenance of facilities. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his or her expense.
(1991 Code, ' 13-4-4)
' 51.44 MANHOLES .
When required by the town, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation and sampling of wastes. This manhole, when required, shall be accessible and
safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the town. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him
or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(1991 Code, ' 13-4-5)
' 51.45 TESTS AND ANALYSES.
All tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes, to which reference is
made in '' 51.40, 51.42 and 51.43, shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided for in this subchapter or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole.
(1991 Code, ' 13-4-6)
' 51.46 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS WITH INDUSTRIAL CONCERNS.
No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the town and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the town for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(1991 Code, ' 13-4-7)
' 51.99 PENALTY .
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of ' 51.28(D) shall be guilty of a
Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as hereinabove described.
(Ord. 82-1992, passed 12-21-1992)
CHAPTER 52: ELECTRIC UTILITY
Section
Rates and Charges
52.01 Rates
52.02 Load restrictions
52.03 Minimum charges
52.04 Security lights
52.05 Special transformers
52.06 Late charges
52.07 Disconnect/reconnect charges
52.08 Access
52.09 Service agreement
52.10 Rates for purchases from customer generating facilities
General Provisions
52.25 Purpose
52.26 Introduction
52.27 Definitions
52.28 Conditions of service
Connection with Distributed Generation Facilities
52.40 Conditions of interconnection
52.41 Interconnection
52.42 Protective relaying
52.43 Power factor
52.44 Metering
52.45 System disturbances
52.46 Daily reporting
52.99 Penalty
21
22 Thatcher - Public Works
RATES AND CHARGES
' 52.01 RATES .
(A) Service rates. The service rates set by Council are applicable to all single- and threephase
residential service for individual private premises and individually metered apartments
when all service is supplied at one point of delivery and energy is measured through one
meter. The rates are not applicable to resale, breakdown or standby service for customers
operating their own generating facilities.
(B) General service rates. This rates set by Council are applicable to all general power
and lighting service for which no specific schedule of rates is provided and when all energy is
supplied at one point of delivery and measured by one meter.
(C) Commercial rates. The rates set by Council are applicable to all single- and threephase
commercial service when all service is supplied at one point of delivery and energy is
measured through one meter. The rates are not applicable to resale, breakdown or standby
service for customers operating their own generating facilities.
(D) Temporary service rates. The rates set by Council are applicable to all types of light
and power service for temporary service, which shall be in service for less than one month.
Applicant shall pay all costs incurred for the installation.
(E) Irrigation service rates. The rates set by Council are for irrigation pumping applicable
to three-phase service.
(F) Meter charge. The rates are set by Council.
(G) Contract and emergency service rates. Rates and conditions for this service shall be
determined by the Town Council.
(H) State and local sales taxes. The rate schedules for purchasing electricity shall add all
applicable state and local sales taxes to each customer=s bill. The sales tax shall be shown
as a separate item on the bill.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-1) (Ord. 80-1992, passed 12-21-1992) Penalty, see ' 52.99
' 52.02 LOAD RESTRICTIONS.
(A) Motors or other services requiring more than three horsepower, or equivalent, of
operating current for single-phase or more than ten horsepower, or equivalent, of operating
current for three-phase, shall have proper starting windings on equipment as approved by
authorized personnel of the town.
Electric Utility 23
(B) If the power factor falls below 95% lagging at any metering point during any billing
period, the town may:
(1) Adjust kilowatt-hours and kilowatts during this period, for billing purposes, to
equal 95% of kilovolt-ampere-hours and 95% of kilovolt-amperes (KVA);
(2) Require the customer to correct the power factor to an acceptable level;
(3) Require the customer to be continuously metered with a separate meter that
registers kilovolt-amperes, kilovars or actual power factor; or
(4) At the town=s discretion, customer may be required to pay all costs associated
with additional metering.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-2) (Ord. 124-2003, passed 10-21-2003)
' 52.03 MINIMUM CHARGES.
The minimum monthly charges as set forth in ' 52.01(A) and (B) are based on three KVA
or less of installed transformer capacity. When more than three KVA of transformer is
required, the minimum monthly charge shall be increased at the rate at an amount as the
Council may set by resolution from time to time for each additional KVA or fractional part
thereof required.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-3)
' 52.04 SECURITY LIGHTS.
This section is applicable to all security lights. The customer shall pay for the actual cost
of installing the light, to include the pole, light fixture and labor. Thereafter the town will
maintain the security light.
Rate: An amount as the Council may set by
resolution from time to time
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-4)
' 52.05 SPECIAL TRANSFORMERS.
This section is for all special order transformers, transformers that are installed for
exclusive use of a customer or at the specific request of a customer. The customer shall pay
for the first transformer and the town will stock a replacement transformer thereafter.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-5)
24 Thatcher - Public Works
' 52.06 LATE CHARGES.
(A) A late fee of 1.5% of the total bill with an amount as the Council may set by resolution
from time to time will be added to all electric bills not paid by the last day of each month,
unless the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, which would then put the
last day to make a utility payment on the next regular working day. This penalty applies to all
commercial, irrigation and residential customers when they are past due, regardless if they
enter into a payment extension agreement with the utility office and will continue to accrue to
an account for each month that late payments are made.
(B) A person is only eligible to enter into a payment extension agreement when he or she
is able to show how he or she will make the delinquent payments to the Utility Supervisor or
Town Manager, and it will be at their discretion and judgment whether to allow an account to
enter into a payment extension agreement. It shall be understood that an essential element of
a payment extension agreement is that all future electricity payments must be made by their
due date in conjunction with any delinquent payments. Should a customer not comply with the
terms of the payment extension agreement, including becoming delinquent on future utility
bills, then the payment extension agreement shall become null and void and this electric
service subject to shutoff. Payment extension agreements are not to continue beyond three
months in any calendar year for any customer or single account.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-6) (Ord. 98-1997, passed 1-21-1997)
' 52.07 DISCONNECT /RECONNECT CHARGES.
A disconnect/reconnect charge will be assessed for all disconnects/reconnects. The
Council from time to time will review and adopt by resolution the amount of these
disconnect/reconnect charges for electric service after it has been terminated due to
nonpayment of a utility bill or for any other valid reason caused by the customer.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-7) (Ord. 98-1997, passed 1-21-1997)
' 52.08 ACCESS .
The town=s authorized agents shall have unassisted access to the customer=s sites at all
reasonable hours to install, inspect, read, repair or remove its meters or to install, operate or
maintain other town property, or to inspect and determine the connected electrical load. If,
after three months (not necessarily consecutive) of good-faith efforts by the town to deal with
the customer, the town, in its opinion, does not have unassisted access to the meter, the town
may terminate service. Seven calendar days= advance written notice will be given prior to
terminating service for failure to provide unassisted access. If service is terminated as a result
of failure to provide unassisted access, town verification of unassisted access may be
required before service is restored. In addition to or in lieu of termination of service, the town
may install a specialized meter that allows unassisted access. If the specialized meter is
installed, the customer will be billed and must pay the cost of the specialized meter.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-8) (Ord. 151-2007, passed 4-10-2007)
Electric Utility 25
' 52.09 SERVICE AGREEMENT.
In the absence of a signed contract for electric service, the supplying of electric service by
the town and acceptance of electric service by the customer shall constitute a service
agreement between the town and the customer for delivery of, acceptance of and payment for
services, subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-9) (Ord. 151-2007, passed 4-10-2007)
' 52.10 RATES FOR PURCHASES FROM CUSTOMER GENERATING FACILITIES.
(A) The utility does not offer any subsidies to support the capital cost of the installation of
distributed generation facilities. The utility may revise this policy in the future without any
retroactive payments to then existing facilities.
(B) For distributed generation facilities of 100 kW or less, the kWh supplied by the utility
will be compared each month, during the normal billing cycle, with the kWh from the customer
generation. If the electricity supplied by the utility exceeds the customer generation, the
customer shall be billed for the net kWh by the utility according to the customer=s standard
rate schedule. If the customer generation exceeds the electricity supplied by the utility, the
customer shall be credited during the next billing period for the excess kWh generated, and
this credit will be applied to reduce the kWh supplied in that month in addition to the customer
generation supplied in that month.
(C) Once each calendar year, the utility shall issue a check or billing credit to the
customer for any balance due to accumulating generation credits described in division (B)
above.
(D) The standard rates for purchases from distributed generation facilities shall be based
on the utility=s Aavoided costs@ for energy (kWh).
(E) These rates may be adjusted for the distributed generation=s effect on the utility=s
system losses, administrative costs, dispatch ability, reliability, term of contract and other
factors which impact the utility=s costs.
(F) Should the utility=s actual avoided costs as determined in division (D) of this section
drop below a previously contracted rate, the utility retains the right to cancel the contract and
offer to renegotiate or wheel the power from a distributed generation facility. Sixty days=
notice shall be provided to the owner of the distributed generation of use of this provision.
(G) The utility shall review annually its avoided costs as determined above and publish
standard rates for purchase.
(H) Capacity payments shall be made in any case in which the distributed generation
owner enters into a legally enforceable contract to provide accredited capacity. The payment
for the capacity purchase from the distributed generation facility shall take into account the
following items:
26 Thatcher - Public Works
(1) Length of the contract term;
(2) Reasonable scheduling of maintenance;
(3) Willingness and ability of the customer to allow the utility to dispatch the customer
=s generation;
(4) The utility=s ability to defer a purchase from another source or to defer
construction of a facility or a portion of a facility;
(5) Sanctions imposed for noncompliance with these rules and any contract between
the utility and the distributed generation owner; and
(6) Availability and reliability of the distributed generation facility.
(I) Any tax or payment in lieu thereof imposed on the utility by any lawful authority on the
production, transmission, sale or purchase of energy or capacity and energy that would not
occur due to a comparable non-generating customer shall be the responsibility of the
distributed generation owner.
(1991 Code, ' 14-4)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 52.25 PURPOSE .
The town hereby undertakes to comply with all lawful regulations of the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) codified in 18 C.F.R. pt. 292, subpt. c dealing with
arrangements with qualifying cogeneration and small power production facilities under ' 210 of
Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA) and all amendments thereto.
(1991 Code, ' 14-2-1)
' 52.26 INTRODUCTION .
(A) The town electric utility is a non-regulated electric utility. The utility will implement, to
the extent possible, the connection of qualified distributed generation facilities to the utility=s
electric distribution system. DISTRIBUTED GENERATION for these purposes will be defined
as generation located at a utility customer site and meeting the necessary requirements to be
connected to the utility distribution system. This generation may include any of various types
of renewable energy. All generation facilities must meet utility requirements prior to
connection.
(B) These rules apply to all entities willing and able to enter into an agreement with the
utility. Provisions of these rules shall not supersede existing contracts.
Electric Utility 27
(C) These rules represent general guidelines since the nature, size and character of
qualifying facilities can vary widely. The utility reserves the right to evaluate qualifying facilities
on a case-by-case basis.
(1991 Code, ' 14-2-2)
' 52.27 DEFINITIONS .
(A) The following definitions apply to '' 52.10, 52.25 through 52.28 and 52.40 through
52.46.
(B) For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACCREDITED CAPACITY. The electrical rating given to generating equipment that
meets the utility=s criteria for uniform rating of equipment. These criteria include but are not
limited to reliability, availability, type of equipment and the degree of coordination between the
qualifying facility and the utility.
CAPACITY COSTS. The costs associated with providing the capability to deliver
energy. They consist of the capital costs of facilities used to generate and transmit electricity
or the cost to purchase that capacity from other utilities.
DEMAND. The average rate in kilowatts at which electric capacity is made available
as determined at the point of measurement during any 30-minute period or any other period to
be determined by the utility.
DISTRIBUTED GENERATION. Generation located at a utility customer site and
meeting the necessary requirements to be connected to the utility distribution system.
ENERGY. Electric energy as measured in kilowatt hours (kWh) at the point of
measurement.
ENERGY COSTS. The variable costs associated with the production of electric
energy. They represent energy related cost only or the average cost of purchased energy.
Identifiable capacity charges included in purchased power agreements shall not be included
in the calculation of the cost of purchased energy.
POINT OF INTERCONNECTION. The point or points at which the qualifying facility
is to receive and/or deliver energy or capacity and energy under normal operating conditions.
POINT OF MEASUREMENT. The point or points where energy and/or demand are
metered.
PRESENT UTILITY PRACTICE. Any of the practices, methods and acts engaged in
or approved by a significant portion of the electrical utility industry consistent with reliability,
safety and expedition.
(1991 Code, ' 14-2-3)
28 Thatcher - Public Works
' 52.28 CONDITIONS OF SERVICE.
The conditions listed in this subchapter shall apply to all qualifying facilities served under
these rules.
(A) The utility shall purchase energy or capacity and energy from any approved
distributed generation customer who offers to sell energy or capacity and energy from his or
her generation facilities under 100 kW. The generation may use renewable resources, a fuel
cell, cogeneration or a hydrocarbon fueled unit to generate electricity. It shall be intended to
provide part or all of the customer=s requirements for electricity and have a generating
capacity that is less than or equal to 125% of the customer=s total connected load at the site
where the distributed generation is located. Generation that is not consistent with these limits
shall be required to obtain a negotiated contract with the utility. Nothing in this subchapter
shall limit the utility=s ability to evaluate the distributed generation and determine terms and
conditions that are mutually satisfactory to all parties and in no way shall be detrimental to the
operation of the utility=s facilities and customers.
(B) The utility shall sell any capacity and energy that is required by the qualifying facility
to the qualifying facility. The qualifying facility shall be billed under the applicable residential,
general, industrial or contractual service schedule.
(C) The utility shall offer to provide maintenance, interruptible, supplementary and
back-up power to the qualifying facility if requested by the qualifying facility.
(D) The distributed generation owner shall execute a written agreement with the utility.
The utility reserves the right to waive this requirement. The waiving of this requirement by the
utility does not relinquish the utility=s right to require the execution of a written agreement in
the future.
(E) The distributed generation shall comply with all requirements of the National Electrical
Safety Code, American National Standards Institute, Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and any other applicable local, state
or national code, including current IEEE standards, and operate its equipment according to
prudent utility practice. In case of any conflict in the foregoing codes or standards, the utility
shall decide which shall govern.
(F) Switching equipment capable of isolating the distributed generation from the utility=s
system shall be accessible to the utility or its agent at all times.
(G) At its option, the utility or its agent may choose to operate, without notice or liability,
the switching equipment described in division (F) of this section if, in the opinion of the utility
or its agent, continued operation of the distributed generation in connection with the utility=s
system may create or contribute to a system emergency or safety hazard. The utility=s
obligation to purchase from the distributed generation system ceases when the utility or its
agent operates the switching equipment described in division (F) of this section. The utility
shall endeavor to minimize any adverse effects of the operation on the distributed generation
system.
Electric Utility 29
(H) The distributed generation owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the utility from
any and all liability arising from the operation and interconnection of the customer=s facilities.
The distributed generation owner shall bear full responsibility for the installation and safe
operation of the equipment required to generate and deliver energy or capacity and energy to
the point of interconnection.
(I) The owner of a distributed generation facility who employs operations, maintenance
or other personnel in relation to the distributed generation shall maintain worker=s
compensation insurance as required by law, and all distributed generation facilities shall
maintain public liability insurance covering bodily injury and property damage in an amount
not less than $5,000,000 per occurrence. Each public liability policy shall name the utility as
an additional insured.
(J) The utility shall not be liable whether in contract or in tort or under any other legal
theory to the owner of a distributed generation facility, the owner=s customers or any other
person or entity for:
(1) Lost generation revenue;
(2) Loss of use, revenue or profit;
(3) Cost of capital;
(4) Substitute use or performance; or
(5) Any other incidental, indirect, special or consequential damages.
(K) The utility shall provide upon request sufficient data to allow the customer to
determine the cost-effectiveness of the distributed generation if it goes into operation pursuant
to these rules.
(L) The distributed generation owner shall provide an advance payment to the utility if in
the opinion of the utility the costs of interconnection will be excessive or the amount of work
that must be done by the utility to provide the interconnection facilities will be excessive.
(M) Any costs of interconnection which are over and above the interconnection costs that
would be incurred due to the connection of a comparable non-generating customer and which
are incurred by the utility due to the interconnection of the distributed generation shall be the
responsibility of the distributed generation owner. Interconnection costs may be amortized
over a period of time not greater than the length of the contract between the utility and the
distributed generation owner, at the option of the utility.
(N) The utility may discontinue sales to the distributed generation customer during a
system emergency, providing that the discontinuance is on a nondiscriminatory basis.
(O) Should the owner of a distributed generation facility request the utility to wheel its
power to an adjacent utility, the utility may do so, at its option.
30 Thatcher - Public Works
(P) If the utility agrees to wheel the power, a charge may be made to the distributed
generation owner for interconnection costs, any modifications to the utility=s facilities to
accommodate the wheeling, use of the utility=s facilities to wheel and any associated
administrative costs.
(Q) The amount of power wheeled may be adjusted up or down according to the effect on
the utility=s system losses due to wheeling.
(1991 Code, ' 14-3)
CONNECTION WITH DISTRIBUTED GENERATION FACILITIES
' 52.40 CONDITIONS OF INTERCONNECTION.
(A) The utility shall allow interconnection between its facilities and distributed generation
facilities on a continuing basis as long as the parallel operation of the distributed generation
does not degrade, in any way, the quality of the electric service provided to the utility=s other
customers. The distributed generation owner shall ensure that its operation in no way creates
unsafe conditions either at its facility or on the utility=s facilities.
(B) The owner of the distributed generation shall enter into a written agreement with the
utility for interconnections, sale or wheeling of its power prior to actual connection and
operation of its facilities.
(C) The distributed generation shall comply with all requirements of the National Electrical
Safety Code, American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers (IEEE), American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), the
National Electric Code, General Order 95, including current IEEE standards, and all local,
state and federal rules and regulations or codes which may be applicable.
(1991 Code, ' 14-5-1)
' 52.41 INTERCONNECTION .
(A) The owner of the distributed generation shall, to the point of interconnection, furnish,
install, operate and maintain in good repair and without cost to the utility relays, locks and
seals, breakers, automatic synchronizers and other control and protective equipment as shall
be designated by the utility as suitable for the operation of the distributed generation in
parallel with the utility=s system. The distributed generation operator shall take appropriate
steps to ensure that operating in parallel will not degrade in any fashion the quality of service
that is normally maintained on the utility=s system.
(B) The owner of the distributed generation shall provide at no cost to the utility a
manually operated and lockable, visual disconnect device that shall be for the exclusive use
of the utility and accessible by utility representatives at all times. Usually the device will be an
air switch or fused cutouts located near the point of interconnection.
Electric Utility 31
(C) The protective switching equipment outlined above in division (B) of this section may
be operated without notice or liability by the utility or utility representative if, in the opinion of
the utility or its representative, continued operation of the distributed generation in connection
with the utility=s system may create or contribute to a system emergency or safety hazard.
The utility shall endeavor to minimize any adverse effects of the operation on the distributed
generation.
(D) The utility shall be advised of the proposed start-up and parallel time for the facilities
and a utility representative shall be in attendance and shall approve parallel operation.
(1991 Code, ' 14-5-2)
' 52.42 PROTECTIVE RELAYING.
(A) All generating units must be equipped with short-circuit interrupting devices consisting
of thermal-magnetic overcurrent devices on each phase as well as undervoltage release and
solenoid tripping accessories.
(B) Over and under voltage and frequency protection shall be provided to effectively
isolate the distributed generation from the utility=s facilities should its power output not be
within the utility=s normal operating tolerances. The normal tolerances for under and over
voltage are 80% with ten-second time delay and 120% with no time delay of normal. Under
and over frequency limits are 58 Hz and 62 Hz with one-second time delay. Frequency relays
are not required for solid state inverters which are line commutated.
(C) For distributed generation facilities, primary, ground-fault sensing equipment shall be
required to isolate the distributed generation from the utility=s facilities unless otherwise
specified by the utility.
(1991 Code, ' 14-5-3)
' 52.43 POWER FACTOR.
The power output of the distributed generation must approach a unity power factor when
operated in parallel with the utility=s facilities. Equipment shall be installed to correct any
deficiencies in power factor by the owner of the distributed generation at the owner=s
expense.
(1991 Code, ' 14-5-4)
' 52.44 METERING .
(A) The utility shall provide metering equipment capable of registering and accumulating
the kWh of electricity flowing in both directions and the customer kW in each billing period.
The customer shall be responsible for the difference in cost between a standard utilitysupplied
meter and the bi-directional meter required for distributed generation. A separate
meter may be installed by the utility on the generation unit to determine the amount of
generation (kWh) contributed to the utility=s system.
32 Thatcher - Public Works
(B) The utility shall own and maintain all necessary meters and associated equipment
utilized for billing and monitoring the customer=s load and generation.
(1991 Code, ' 14-5-5)
' 52.45 SYSTEM DISTURBANCES.
Disturbances to the utility=s facilities shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible.
These disturbances shall include but not be limited to lagging or leading power factors,
unacceptable voltage regulation, voltage flicker and harmonics.
(1991 Code, ' 14-5-6)
' 52.46 DAILY REPORTING.
(A) The owner or operator of a distributed generation facility shall maintain a daily
operations log for all facilities. The log shall contain information on unit parallel and separation
times, maintenance outages, trip operation and other unusual events. KW operating level may
also be required.
(B) The utility shall have the right to periodically review these logs.
(1991 Code, ' 14-5-7)
' 52.99 PENALTY .
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of ' 52.01(H) shall be guilty of a
Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as hereinabove described.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-1)
(C) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of ' 52.02 shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as
hereinabove described.
(1991 Code, ' 14-1-2)
(D) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of '' 52.08 and 52.09 shall be guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as hereinabove described.
(1991 Code, '' 14-1-8, 14-1-9)
Electric Utility 33
(E) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of '' 52.28 and 52.40 through 52.46
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate offense punishable as herein described.
(Ord. 80-1992, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 124-2003, passed 10-21-2003; Ord. 151-2007,
passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 159-2010, passed 1-20-2010)
34 Thatcher - Public Works
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION
71. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
72. PARKING
1
2 Thatcher - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION
Section
70.01 Duty of Police Department
70.02 Records of traffic violations
70.03 Accident investigation
70.04 Detention of persons to serve traffic complaint
70.05 Traffic accident studies
70.06 Traffic accident reports
70.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Civil traffic violations, see Hearing Officers, ' 36.17
' 70.01 DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department under the direction of the Police Chief to
provide for the enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the town and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the town, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to assist in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions
and to carry out all duties specially imposed upon the Police Chief by this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 12-1-1)
' 70.02 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
(A) The Police Chief shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the town or
of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the
final disposition of all the alleged offenses. This record shall accumulate during at least a fiveyear
period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the
most recent five-year period.
(B) All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially numbered.
(1991 Code, ' 12-1-2)
3
4 Thatcher - Traffic Code
' 70.03 ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department under the direction of the Police Chief to
investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to the accidents.
(1991 Code, ' 12-1-3)
' 70.04 DETENTION OF PERSONS TO SERVE TRAFFIC COMPLAINT.
Any police officer or duly authorized agent of the town may stop and detain a person as is
reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of this chapter and to
serve a copy of the traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violations of this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 12-1-4)
' 70.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Police Chief
shall conduct studies of the accidents and determine remedial measures.
(1991 Code, ' 12-1-5)
' 70.06 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
The Police Chief shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports.
(1991 Code, ' 12-1-6)
' 70.99 PENALTY .
Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by this title
constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of the
state statutes.
(1991 Code, Art. 1-8B.)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
71.01 Directing traffic
71.02 Obedience to traffic regulations
71.03 Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted
71.04 Traffic-control devices
71.05 Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark traffic lanes
71.06 Authority to place and obedience to turning markers
71.07 Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs
71.08 Limitations on turning around
71.09 One-way streets and alleys
71.10 Regulation of traffic at intersections
71.11 Designation of through streets
71.12 Drivers to obey signs
71.13 Processions
71.14 Unnecessary squealing tires
71.15 Damage to roadway
71.16 Streets under construction or repair
71.17 Motorized play vehicles and motorized skateboards
' 71.01 DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
(A) Police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal.
(B) Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist police
officers in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-1)
' 71.02 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may do any forbidden act or fail to
perform any act required by this chapter. No person may willfully fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order or direction of any police officer or of any Fire Department official.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-2) Penalty, see ' 70.99
5
6 Thatcher - Traffic Code
' 71.03 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller
skis or play vehicle in any of the following places:
(1) All that part of the town as described as follows: the sidewalk on the west side of
College Avenue from Highway 70 south to the railroad tracks, the sidewalk on the east side of
Stadium Avenue from Highway 70 south to the Canal, the sidewalk on the north and south of
Church Street from College Avenue to Stadium Avenue, the sidewalk on the north and south
side of Railroad Street from College Avenue to Stadium Avenue, the sidewalk on the south
side of Highway 70 from College Avenue to Stadium Avenue; or
(2) On private property, except where a sign allowing the use has been posted or
permission granted by the owner, lessee or person in charge of the property.
(B) In areas where not prohibited, operators of skateboards, roller blades, roller skates,
roller skis or play vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to other pedestrians using public
sidewalks, and shall not otherwise congregate, endanger or interfere with pedestrian traffic on
those sidewalks.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-3) (Ord. 107-1998, passed 9-15-1998) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.04 TRAFFIC -CONTROL DEVICES.
(A) Upon recommendation of the Police Chief and approval of the Council, the Town
Manager shall have placed and maintained traffic-control devices, signs and signals when
and as required under the traffic regulations of the town to make effective the provisions of
those regulations, and may have placed and maintained any additional traffic-control devices
as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the town or under
state law or to guide or warn traffic.
(B) The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control
device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the town unless
otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by
state law.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-4)
' 71.05 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES
AND MARK TRAFFIC LANES.
The Town Manager, upon recommendation of the Police Chief and approval by the
Council, is hereby authorized:
(A) To have designated and maintained, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the
surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his or her opinion, there is
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at other places as he or she may
deem necessary;
Traffic Regulations 7
(B) To establish safety zones of a kind and character and at those places as he or she
may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and
(C) To have marked lanes for traffic on street pavement at places as he or she may deem
advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-5)
' 71.06 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.
(A) The Town Manager, upon recommendation of the Police Chief, is authorized to have
placed markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at those intersections, and the course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
(B) When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of those indications.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-6) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.07 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
(A) The Town Manager, upon recommendation of the Police Chief and approval by the
Council, is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at those intersections. The
making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs may
be removed when the turns are permitted.
(B) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any sign.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-7) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.08 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any street in a business district and shall not so turn a vehicle upon any other
street unless the movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-8) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.09 ONE -WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
(A) The Council may designate any streets or alleys which are to be limited to one-way
traffic.
8 Thatcher - Traffic Code
(B) Whenever the Council designates any one-way street or alley, the Town Manager
shall have placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-9) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.10 REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.
(A) The Council shall designate through streets, intersections where stops are required
and intersections where vehicles shall yield the right-of-way.
(B) Whenever the Council shall designate any through street or intersection where
vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way, the Town Manager shall erect and maintain the
appropriate signs at every location where a vehicle must stop or yield the right-of-way.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-10)
' 71.11 DESIGNATION OF THROUGH STREETS.
(A) The streets set forth in Chapter 74, Schedule I are hereafter to be known as through
streets.
(B) To facilitate a safe and orderly flow of traffic upon streets under the jurisdiction of the
town, stop signs shall be placed upon all streets intersecting with the through streets and
other traffic signs and devices as deemed necessary.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-11) (Ord. 24-A, passed 9-21-1964) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.12 DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.
Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall obey the signs unless otherwise directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control
signal. No driver shall drive upon or through any private property, such as an oil station,
vacant lot or similar property, to avoid obedience to any regulation included in this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-12) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.13 PROCESSIONS .
(A) No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without first
securing a permit from the Police Chief, and all these requests for permits shall state the time,
place of formation, proposed line of march, destination and any other information as the
Police Chief may require therein.
(B) A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by
methods as may be determined and designated by the Police Chief.
Traffic Regulations 9
(C) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the conspicuously designated vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while the vehicles are in motion. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or
a police officer.
(D) Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge
of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and
safe.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-13) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.14 UNNECESSARY SQUEALING TIRES.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle at a speed on a curve or a turn or accelerate
the motor vehicle in a manner as to create loud and unnecessary noise through the squealing
of tires upon the pavement.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-14) (Ord. 42, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.15 DAMAGE TO ROADWAY.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle, including farm equipment, in a manner as to
cause damage to any public roadway.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-15) (Ord. 42, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.16 STREETS UNDER CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a roadway under construction or a roadway
under repair when signs and barricades are visibly in place or a flagperson is present so
designating that the roadway is closed to all vehicular traffic.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-16) (Ord. 42, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.17 MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLES AND MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE. A coaster, scooter any other alternatively fueled
device or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor or engine and which is not
otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28, as a motor vehicle, motor-driven cycle or motorized
wheelchair.
MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD. A self-propelled device which has a motor or engine,
a deck on which a person may ride and at least two wheels in contact with the ground and
which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28, as amended, as a motor vehicle,
motor-driven cycle or motorized wheelchair.
10 Thatcher - Traffic Code
OPERATOR. A person who operates or is in actual physical control of a motorized
play vehicle or a motorized skateboard upon a public roadway, sidewalk, right-of-way, park,
bicycle path or any other public property used for the operation of motor vehicles.
OWNER. A person who holds the legal title to a motorized play vehicle or motorized
skateboard, or any person who is a lessee, conditional vendee or mortgagor of a motorized
play vehicle or motorized skateboard with a right to immediate possession.
(B) Applicability of traffic laws.
(1) All traffic laws shall apply to persons riding motorized play vehicles and motorized
skateboards. Every person operating a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard upon
a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable
to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles, or by the traffic regulations of this town applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application.
(2) This section shall not be construed to require the licensing or registration of
motorized play vehicles or motorized skateboards, the licensing of motorized play vehicle or
skateboard operators, or the carrying of insurance covering accidents involving motorized
play vehicles or motorized skateboards.
(3) It is unlawful for any person operating a motorized play vehicle or motorized
skateboard not to obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other traffic
direction devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(C) Responsibility of parents, guardians and custodians. No person shall, if a parent,
guardian or custodian of a child, authorize or knowingly permit any child to violate this
chapter.
(D) Prohibited operation. No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized
skateboard:
(1) On any sidewalk, except for use in crossing the sidewalk by the most direct route
to gain access to any public or private road or driveway;
(2) In any town parking structure or town park, except for use on public roadways
within the park;
(3) On any public property that has been posted or designated by the owner of the
property as an area prohibiting skateboards;
(4) On any public roadway consisting of a total of four or more marked traffic lanes,
or having an established speed limit of greater than 25 mph;
Traffic Regulations 11
(5) On any private property of another, or any public property which is not held open
to the public for vehicle use, without the written permission of the owner, the person entitled to
immediate possession of the property, or the authorized agent of either; or
(6) Within any path or lane that is designated as a bicycle lane or path by state or
local authorities.
(E) General operating restrictions.
(1) No child under the age of 13 shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized
skateboard.
(2) No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard in
excess of the posted speed limit or at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the circumstances then existing.
(3) The operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard, approaching a
sidewalk, bicycle path, bicycle lane or multi-use path in order to cross it, shall yield the
right-of-way to all other users.
(4) No operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard shall allow
passengers when the motorized skateboard is in operation or motion.
(5) No person operating or riding upon a motorized play vehicle or motorized
skateboard shall attach himself or herself or the motorized skateboard in any manner to any
other vehicle.
(6) No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard while
carrying any package, bundle or article which prevents the operator from keeping both hands
upon the steering mechanism at all times.
(7) No person, other than the owner, shall operate a motorized play vehicle or
motorized skateboard without the written permission of the owner.
(8) No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard that
has been structurally altered from the original manufacturer=s design.
(9) No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard in a
crosswalk.
(F) Operating restrictions on roadway.
(1) A person operating a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard on a
roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic, at the time and place and under the then
existing conditions, shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb, edge of the
roadway or edge of a designated bicycle path or lane except under the following conditions
and when the movement can be made in safety:
12 Thatcher - Traffic Code
(a) If overtaking and passing a vehicle proceeding in the same direction;
(b) If preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway;
(c) If reasonably necessary to avoid hazardous conditions ahead in the roadway;
or
(d) If the lane in which the person is operating the motorized play vehicle or
motorized skateboard is too narrow for a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard and
a bicycle or another vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
(2) No operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard shall transport
extra fuel in a separate container or alter the fuel reservoir from the original manufacturer=s
design. This includes the prohibition of physically attaching fuel packs or containers to the
operator=s person.
(3) Persons operating motorized play vehicles or motorized skateboards on the
roadway shall not ride more than two abreast.
(G) Required safety equipment.
(1) No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard without
a head lamp emitting a beam and a red rear reflector anytime from sunset to sunrise, or any
other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons or vehicles on
the roadway.
(a) A head lamp shall emit a white light and be visible from the front at a distance
no less than 500 feet.
(b) A rear red reflector shall be visible when illuminated by a vehicle head lamp
from a distance of not less than 300 feet.
(c) A rear red lamp visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the rear red reflector.
(2) No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard unless
it is equipped with a brake which enables the operator to make a braked wheel(s) skid on
pavement.
(3) Any operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard under the age
of 18 years being operated on a roadway shall at all times wear a protective helmet on his or
her head in an appropriate and safely secured manner. The helmet shall meet minimum
standards of testing and safety inspected by the bicycle industry.
(4) No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard without
wearing footwear. The footwear must have a sole and completely cover the feet and toes.
Traffic Regulations 13
(5) The operator of a motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard shall wear, at
all times, protective glasses or goggles or a transparent face shield of a type approved for
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle use.
(1991 Code, ' 12-2-17) (Ord. 145-2006, passed 3-14-2006) Penalty, see ' 70.99
14 Thatcher - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 72: PARKING
Section
72.01 Method of parking
72.02 Blocking traffic
72.03 Parking adjacent to schools
72.04 Authority to erect signs restricting parking
72.05 Parking vehicles on sidewalks
72.06 Parking or encroachments on Main Street
72.07 Restricted parking areas for the physically disabled
72.08 Abandoned vehicles
72.09 Parking restrictions in residential zones
72.10 Parking restrictions in fire lanes
' 72.01 METHOD OF PARKING.
Except as otherwise posted, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where
there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the vehicle parallel to and within
18 inches of the curb.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-1)
' 72.02 BLOCKING TRAFFIC.
(A) No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, or other vehicle, upon a street
in the town in a manner or under conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may stop
temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or when necessary, in the
observance of traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
(B) No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within an alley or entrance to a
private driveway except for the loading or unloading of materials, and not then unless the
loading or unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement of
vehicular traffic.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-2) Penalty, see ' 70.99
15
2018 S-1
16 Thatcher - Traffic Code
' 72.03 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street adjacent to any
school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any thus designated place for one hour
before school opens until one hour after school closes on any school day.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-3) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 72.04 AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.
The Town Manager, upon approval of the Council, may erect signs or provide markings
requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left-hand curb on one-way
streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited and restricting parking in any way that may
be necessary. When the signs have been erected or the markings provided, no person shall
stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to the parking restrictions.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-4) (Ord. 109-98, passed 10-13-1998) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 72.05 PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not, nor shall an owner
permit his or her vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk in the town.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-5) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 72.06 PARKING OR ENCROACHMENTS ON MAIN STREET.
(A) No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle on Main Street within the corporate
limits of the town, in any manner other than at the curb of the street and parallel thereto.
(B) No person shall park or leave standing a motor vehicle on Main Street overnight or for
a period longer than two hours during the daylight hours.
(C) No person shall encroach upon or make private use of Main Street, as designated as
right-of-way for U.S. Highway 70 to the State Department of Transportation, from property line
to property line for the full length of the street within the corporate limits of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-6) (Ord. 24, passed 10-19-1959) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 72.07 RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS FOR THE PHYSICALLY DISABLED.
(A) No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space set aside and identified for use only
by persons with physical disabilities, unless the vehicle has displayed thereon a distinguishing
insignia or numbered plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol as provided in A.R.S.
' 28-881.
Parking 17
(B) Division (A) of this section shall apply only to those parking spaces identified with
standard signs or other markers, as specified in A.R.S. ' 28-883.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-7) Penalty, see ' 70.99
Editor=s note:
Ordinance 47, passed January 19, 1981, contained an earlier version of this material.
' 72.08 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
Any trailer, motor home, boat or other vehicle remaining parked upon any street or
right-of-way of the town for more than 72 hours is declared to be an abandoned vehicle, and
the police may remove the vehicle from the street at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-8) (Ord. 106-1998, passed 7-21-1998) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 72.09 PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
(A) No person shall park a vehicle of two and one-half tons or more in any residential
zone (R-1, R-2 or R-3).
(B) No person shall park a vehicle transporting or a vehicle that has transported
hazardous materials in any residential zone.
(1991 Code, ' 12-3-9) (Ord. 141-2006, passed 1-10-2006) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 72.10 PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN FIRE LANES.
(A) No person shall park any vehicle in a space or areas set aside and identified as a fire
lane by the Fire Department.
(B) The Fire Chief or his or her designee is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes on
both public and private property.
(C) This section shall apply only to those areas that are identified with signs stating ANo
Parking/Fire Lane/Town Code Section 72.10.@ The Fire Department through the Fire Chief or
his or her designee shall determine the location of all fire lanes and shall approve all fire lane
signs and markings.
(D) It shall be the duty of the owner of record of private property over which the Fire Chief
or his or her representative has designated a fire lane to post, at the owner=s expense,
approved signs prohibiting parking in the designated fire lane. Such signs shall be so placed,
and of sufficient number,
2018 S-1
18 Thatcher - Traffic Code
that at least one sign shall be visible to anyone attempting to park a vehicle at any location in
the fire lane. The failure to erect signs in accordance with this division within 30 days of
receipt of a notice from the Fire Department specifying the designation of a space or area as a
fire lane shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 183-2018, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 70.99
2018 S-1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS
1
2 Thatcher - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
90.01 Definitions
90.02 Regulations on keeping of pigs and reptiles
90.03 Housing
90.04 Restraint
Regulation of Dogs
90.20 Definitions
90.21 License required
90.22 Tags and collar
90.23 Running at large prohibited
90.24 Number of dogs permitted
90.25 Impounding and redemption
90.26 Disposing of unclaimed or infected dogs
90.27 Barking dogs
90.28 Disposing of biting dogs or other biting animals
90.29 Interference with officers
90.30 Muzzling proclamation
90.31 Ownership of habitually biting dogs
90.32 Liability for dog bites and property damage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 90.01 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMAL. Any horses, cows, mules, oxen, donkeys, pigs, sheep, goats, dogs and cats.
3
4 Thatcher - General Regulations
FOWL. Chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, peacocks and peahens.
REPTILES. All species of snakes and lizards, alligators and crocodiles.
RODENTS. Rabbits, chinchillas, skunks and domestic rats.
(1991 Code, ' 6-1-1) (Ord. 25, passed 2-20-1967)
' 90.02 REGULATIONS ON KEEPING OF PIGS AND REPTILES.
(A) No pigs shall be kept within the town limits except registered purebred miniature
Vietnamese potbelly pigs and other similar registered purebred miniature pigs. Miniature pigs
shall not exceed 100 pounds in weight and no more than two miniature pigs shall be allowed
per household.
(B) The rules pertaining to the keeping of miniature pigs shall generally follow the
confinement requirements for dogs, which prohibits running at large unless controlled by
either a leash, cord, chain or other restraint, and the same penalties shall apply for this type of
violation.
(C) No poisonous reptiles shall be kept within the town limits.
(D) Large reptiles, such as python and boa constrictor snakes, alligators, crocodiles and
the like, which are capable of doing significant physical harm to human life, should be kept in
appropriate containment structures on the premises. Additionally, some type of identification
indicating that these type of pets are being kept on the premises should be prominently
displayed to alert the public and emergency response staff, should they be called into service
at this location.
(E) State and federal laws pertaining to the capture and keeping of reptiles, which are
considered endangered, shall preempt local law. Additionally, this section shall not apply to
animal hospitals or medical clinics where these type of animals may be kept for medical
purposes for short periods of time.
(1991 Code, ' 6-1-2) (Ord. 97-1996, passed 12-17-1996) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.03 HOUSING .
(A) The premises upon which animals, fowl or rodents subject to this subchapter are kept
shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and subject to inspection and regulation by the
town, which shall have the right of entry upon private property at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspection.
(B) All enclosures referred to in this subchapter shall be kept in good repair and in a
condition to prevent the breeding of flies and other insects, and so that no offensive,
disagreeable or noxious smell or odor shall arise therefrom to the injury, annoyance or
inconvenience of any inhabitant of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 6-1-3) (Ord. 25, passed 2-20-1967) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Animals 5
' 90.04 RESTRAINT .
(A) It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit any animal to run
at large, to be pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, alley, lane, park or public place
within the town.
(B) Any animal tied or staked upon private property shall be subject to the limitation set
forth in the zoning chapter of this code.
(1991 Code, ' 6-1-4) (Ord. 25, passed 2-20-1967) Penalty, see ' 10.99
REGULATION OF DOGS
' 90.20 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner or a
member of his or her immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
DOG. Any member of the canine family, both male and female.
NUISANCE. A dog that harms, injures or annoys any person by any means.
OTHER BITING ANIMAL. Any animal capable of carrying or transferring rabies.
OWNER. A person, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog
or other biting animal.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-1) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993)
' 90.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) All dogs four months of age or older kept, harbored or maintained within the corporate
limits of the town shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian and then shall
be licensed and registered.
(B) Dog licenses shall be issued by the Town Clerk upon the payment of an amount as
the Council may set by resolution from time to time for neutered or spayed dogs or an amount
as the Council may set by resolution from time to time for non-neutered or non-spayed dogs
on or after the first day of the year, and the license shall expire on the last day of the year.
6 Thatcher - General Regulations
(C) Before a license is issued, the owner shall provide proof that the dog has been
vaccinated against rabies for the period for which the license is to be issued.
(D) This section shall not apply to nonresidents temporarily within the town, and a license
shall be issued without charge to properly trained Aseeing-eye@ dogs or companion dogs
actually being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to
place.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-2) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993)
' 90.22 TAGS AND COLLAR.
Upon payment of the license tax, the Town Clerk shall issue to the owner a license
certificate and a metallic tag for each dog licensed. The metal tag shall have stamped thereon
the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding with the number on the
certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the
license tag must be affixed. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by
the Town Clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the license tax for the
current year and payment of an amount as the Council may set by resolution from time to time
for the duplicate. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and no refunds
shall be made on any dog license tax because of death of the dog or the owner leaving town
before expiration of the license period.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-3) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993)
' 90.23 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit the dog to leave the premises of the owner or
keeper unless it is controlled by a leash, cord, chain or other restraint. Any dog in violation of
the aforesaid restrictions and upon complaint by any person or in the judgment of any law
enforcement officer or animal control officer may be impounded or the owner of the dog may
be cited for violation of this section. Citations for violations of this section may be issued by
any law enforcement officer or animal control officer.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-4) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.24 NUMBER OF DOGS PERMITTED.
(A) No person, firm or corporation shall own or keep on his or her premises more than
two dogs over the age of four months.
(B) No person, firm or corporation shall maintain a kennel where dogs are kept for sale.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-5) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Animals 7
' 90.25 IMPOUNDING AND REDEMPTION.
Any dog impounded for running at large contrary to the conditions set forth in ' 90.23 shall
be impounded in a suitable pound as may be designated by the Council. The poundmaster
will record the breed, color and sex of the dog and license number, if licensed, and shall notify
the owner, if known, by telephone or by mail of the impoundment. The owner of any dog
impounded may reclaim the dog upon payment of license fee, if the license fee is unpaid, and
all normal charges for impounding and maintaining the dog. In addition, an impoundment
penalty fee will be charged. The impoundment penalty fee must be paid prior to the animal
being released from the pound. The impoundment penalty fee shall be set by the Town
Council and shall be paid to the Town Clerk or his or her designate.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-6) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993)
' 90.26 DISPOSING OF UNCLAIMED OR INFECTED DOGS.
It is the duty of the poundmaster to keep all dogs so impounded for a period of three days,
and if, at the expiration of three days from date of notice to the owner, the dog has not been
redeemed, it shall be destroyed. Any unlicensed dog required by law to be licensed or any
dog that appears to be suffering from rabies or any other infectious disease or is of a
dangerous or vicious nature shall not be released but shall be destroyed.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-7) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993)
' 90.27 BARKING DOGS.
No person shall keep or harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-8) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.28 DISPOSING OF BITING DOGS OR OTHER BITING ANIMALS.
It is unlawful for any person to destroy or dispose of any dog or other biting animal that
has bitten any person for a period of seven days if the animal has been vaccinated against
rabies and ten days for animals not having been vaccinated. When any dog or other biting
animal bites any person, it shall be impounded and quarantined in the designated town pound
for a period of seven days if the animal has been vaccinated against rabies, or ten days if the
animal has not been vaccinated, for observation for rabies. The owner shall be responsible for
any and all expenses incurred for the impoundment and quarantine. A dog that has been
vaccinated against rabies may be quarantined by the owner in lieu of the town pound.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-9) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
8 Thatcher - General Regulations
' 90.29 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.
(A) It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to break open the pound or to attempt to do
so, or to take from any officer any dog taken up by him or her in compliance with this
subchapter or in any manner to interfere with or hinder the officer in the discharge of his or her
duties under this subchapter.
(B) It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to release or cause to be released any dog
from a town-owned animal trap. It is also unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage or
hinder the performance of the trap.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-10) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.30 MUZZLING PROCLAMATION.
Whenever the prevalence of rabies renders the action necessary, to protect the public
health and safety, the Mayor shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or
keeping a dog to confine it securely on his or her premises unless it is muzzled so that it
cannot bite. No person shall violate the proclamation, and any unmuzzled dog running at large
during the time fixed in the proclamation may be killed by the police without notice to the
owner.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-11) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993)
' 90.31 OWNERSHIP OF HABITUALLY BITING DOGS.
It is unlawful for any person to keep any dog within the town limits that displays a habit of
biting or otherwise being vicious with persons or other animals. Any owner that knowingly
owns such an animal may be cited for violation of this section by any police officer or animal
control officer.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-12) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.32 LIABILITY FOR DOG BITES AND PROPERTY DAMAGE.
(A) The owner of a dog that bites a person when the person is in or on a public place or
lawfully in or on a private place, including the property of the owner of the dog, is liable for
damages suffered by the person.
(B) The owner of a dog shall be liable for damages to real and personal property caused
by actions of the dog.
(1991 Code, ' 6-2-13) (Ord. 84-1993, passed 9-20-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. BUSINESS LICENSING REGULATIONS
111. PEDDLERS
112. CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
1
2 Thatcher - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING REGULATIONS
Section
110.01 License required
110.02 Issuance of license
110.03 Payment
110.04 Posting of license
110.05 Exhibition of license required
110.06 License not transferable
110.07 Exemption
110.08 Fees
110.09 Revocation
110.10 Notice of hearing and appeal
' 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to carry on any trade, calling, profession, occupation or
business without first having procured a license from the town to do so and without complying
with any and all regulations of the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business as
specified in this chapter.
(B) Every applicant for a license shall submit a written application, under oath, which shall
state:
(1) The character of the business;
(2) The name, address and phone number of the principal place of business and any
branch office;
(3) The name, address and phone number of the principal residence of the owner;
(4) Date business began operation in town; and
(5) Number of employees.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-1) Penalty, see ' 10.99
3
4 Thatcher - Business Regulations
' 110.02 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Clerk to prepare and issue a license under this chapter for
every person, firm, company or corporation liable to pay a license fee hereunder, and to state
in each license the amount charged, the period of time covered, the name of the person, firm
or corporation for whom issued, the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business licensed
and the location or place of business where the trade, calling, profession, occupation or
business is to be conducted.
(B) In no case shall any mistake of the Clerk, in stating the amount of a license, prevent
or prejudice the collection for the town of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a
trade, calling, profession, occupation or business, subject to license under this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-2)
' 110.03 PAYMENT .
(A) All business license fees shall be paid at the office of the Clerk of the town or in a
manner as may be specified by the Clerk. Payment of license fees shall be made for the
calendar year, January 1 to December 31. Fees shall be due and payable on January 1 of
each year unless specified otherwise. Notices shall be sent to each place of business or
person at least 30 days before January 1. Fees shall become delinquent March 1, and the
Police Chief shall be empowered and authorized to collect all delinquent fees together with an
amount as the Council may set by resolution from time to time.
(B) A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate place
of business in which any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business is conducted. Each
license shall authorize the person obtaining the license to carry on, pursue or conduct only the
trade, calling, profession, occupation or business described in the license and only at the
location or place of business which is indicated.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-3) (Ord. 90-1995, passed 3-20-1995)
' 110.04 POSTING OF LICENSE.
Every person, firm, company or corporation having a license under the provisions of this
chapter and carrying on a trade, calling, profession, occupation or business at a fixed place of
business shall keep the license posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part
of the place of business. Every person having a license, and not having a fixed place of
business, shall carry the license with him or her at all times while carrying on that trade,
calling, profession, occupation or business for which the same was granted. Every person,
firm, company or corporation having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall
produce and exhibit the same, when applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested
to do so by any police officer or by any other officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect
licenses.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-4)
Business Licensing Regulations 5
' 110.05 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED.
The Chief of Police or any duly authorized official of the town shall have the power to
enter free of charge at any time any place of business for which a license is required by this
chapter, and to demand the exhibition of the license for the current term, from any person
engaged or employed in the transaction of the business. It is unlawful for the person to fail to
exhibit the license when requested to do so.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.06 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
No license granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be in any manner
assignable or transferable to any other person, firm, company or corporation other than is
herein mentioned or named without first obtaining permission from the Council.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-6)
' 110.07 EXEMPTION .
Any person wishing to sell any form of agricultural products produced by himself or herself
shall be exempt from any license tax imposed hereunder for the privilege of selling those
products only. Before receiving the exemption, an affidavit of the facts entitling the seller to an
exemption must be filed with the Clerk.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-7)
' 110.08 FEES .
All businesses, occupations, professions, trades or callings shall pay annually a license
fee of an amount as the Council may set by resolution from time to time.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-8) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.09 REVOCATION .
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Town Clerk
after notice of hearing, for any of the following causes:
(A) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
(B) Any violation of this chapter; or
6 Thatcher - Business Regulations
(C) Conducting a trade, business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation
in violation of state law.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-9) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.10 NOTICE OF HEARING AND APPEAL.
(A) Notice of the hearing for revocation of license shall be given, in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall
be mailed, postage prepaid, certified mail to the licensee at the address shown on the
application for license at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing.
(B) Any person aggrieved by the denial of an application for license as provided herein or
the decision with reference to the revocation of a license shall have the right of appeal to the
Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within 14 days after notice of the
action complained of has been mailed to the person=s address shown on the application for
license, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set
a time and place for a hearing on the appeal and notice of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant in the same manner as provided for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision
and order of the Council in the appeal shall be final and conclusive, except any person
aggrieved may pursue any proper judicial proceedings.
(1991 Code, ' 8-1-10)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS
Section
111.01 Definitions
111.02 License required; renewals; restrictions
111.03 Application and application fee
111.04 Investigation of applicant; issuance of license
111.05 Fees
111.06 Bond required
111.07 License to be posted
111.08 Location restrictions
111.09 Noise; hours of operation
111.10 Signs to be observed
111.11 Enforcement by Police Department
111.12 Suspension and revocation of license; appeal
111.13 Exemptions
' 111.01 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PEDDLER. Any person, whether a resident of the town or not, traveling by foot, motor
vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from
street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meat, fish,
vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same
for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers or who, without traveling from
place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a motor vehicle, railroad car or other
vehicle or conveyance, or from a fixed location on foot; and further provided that one who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes delivery to purchasers as a part of the
scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a PEDDLER
subject to the provisions contained in this chapter.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER. Any individual, whether a resident of the town or not,
traveling either by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place,
from house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of
goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether he or she is
collecting advance payments on the sales or not, provided that the definition shall include any
person who, for himself, herself or for another person, hires, leases,
7
8 Thatcher - Business Regulations
uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging
house, apartment, shop or any other place within the town for the sole purpose of exhibiting
samples and taking orders for future delivery.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR. Any
person, whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident of the town or not, who engages in a
temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the town,
and who, in furtherance of that purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, public room in a hotel, lodging house,
apartment, shop or any street or other place within the town, for the exhibition and sale of the
goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided, that the
definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who, while
occupying that temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the
purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person so engaged shall not be
relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating
temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting the
transient business in connection with, as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-1) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
' 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; RENEWALS; RESTRICTIONS.
(A) It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser, transient merchant, itinerant
merchant or itinerant vendor as the same is herein defined, to engage in the business within
the corporate limits of the town without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to the producers of agricultural products as defined in A.R.S. '' 3-561 through 3-563, or
to any member of the family or agents or persons in the service of the producer when the
agricultural products are sold or disposed of on behalf of and for the benefit of the producer.
(B) Licenses which are continually renewed shall pay only the applicable fees prescribed
in ' 111.05. Licenses which are not continuously renewed, upon application for renewal, shall
be treated as an original application.
(C) If the license of the licensee has been revoked pursuant to provisions of ' 111.12, the
Town Clerk shall designate a period of time not exceeding three years, during which time a
renewal or a new license may not be issued to the same licensee or to a corporation
controlled by that licensee. Unless otherwise specified by the Town Clerk, the period of
disqualification shall be the maximum three-year period.
(D) No licensee shall knowingly permit a person whose license is under suspension or
has been revoked to be employed in any capacity by the licensee during the period of
suspension or the period of time that a renewal or new license may not be issued to the
person pursuant to provisions of division (C) of this section.
Peddlers 9
(E) Every licensee whose license has been revoked may be disqualified from obtaining or
retaining a privilege tax license for a period of up to one year from the date of the revocation.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-2) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.03 APPLICATION AND APPLICATION FEE.
(A) Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file with the Town Clerk a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk, which shall contain but not
necessarily be limited to the following information:
(1) Name and description of the applicant;
(2) Address (legal and local);
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold and, in the
case of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the applicant;
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials
establishing the exact relationship;
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
(6) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number
or other means of identification;
(7) A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date
of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
(8) The fingerprints of the applicant, the names of at least two reliable property
owners of the town, who will certify as to the applicant=s good character and business
responsibility, or in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the
good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to
properly evaluate the character and business responsibility; and
(9) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal laws, the nature of the offense and the punishment
or penalty assessed therefor.
(B) No license issued hereunder shall be transferable. At the time of filing the application,
a fee of an amount as the Council may set by resolution from time to time shall be paid to the
Town Clerk, no part of which shall be refunded.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-3) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
10 Thatcher - Business Regulations
' 111.04 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
Upon receipt of the application, the Town Clerk shall cause an investigation of the person
=s business responsibility or moral character to be made as he or she deems necessary to
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public. If, as a result of the investigation,
the applicant=s business responsibility and character are found to be unsatisfactory, the
application shall be denied. If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business
reputation appear to be satisfactory, and if a privilege license as set forth in the Town Tax
Code is required by the nature of the business the applicant desires to carry on, and has been
obtained by the applicant, a license shall be issued by the Town Clerk upon payment of the
required fee.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-4) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
' 111.05 FEES .
The license fee for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser or transient merchant shall be an
amount as the Council may set by resolution from time to time per quarter if paid on a
quarterly basis, or an amount as the Council may set by resolution from time to time per year
if paid on an annual basis. All fees shall be paid in advance.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-5) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
' 111.06 BOND REQUIRED.
(A) Before any license as provided in this chapter shall be issued for engaging in the
business of peddler, solicitor, canvasser or transient merchant, as defined in this chapter,
every applicant, plying his or her trade as an individual, shall file with the Town Clerk a surety
bond running to the town in the amount of $1,000. Every business, firm, company or
corporation, which has employees or agents acting in the capacity of peddler, solicitor,
canvasser or transient merchant, shall file with the Town Clerk a blanket surety bond covering
all those employees or agents and running to the town in the amount of $5,000.
(B) Every bond for those engaging in a transient or an itinerant business or as a peddler,
solicitor or canvasser as defined in this chapter shall be executed by the applicant as principal
with at least one surety upon which service of process may be made in this state. The bond
shall be approved by the Town Attorney, conditioned that the applicant and all of the applicant
=s agents and employees shall comply fully with all of the provisions of the laws of the town
and the state statutes regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and merchandise
and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation, together with all
judgments and costs that may be recovered against him or her by any person for damage
arising out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting any
business with the applicant, whether the misrepresentations or deceptions were made or
practiced by the applicant or its agents or employees, either at the time of making a sale or
through any advertising of any nature whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference to the
goods, wares, merchandise sold or any part thereof. In addition, if the applicant is a solicitor or
canvasser, the bond shall be conditioned
Peddlers 11
that the applicant and all of the applicant=s agents and employees shall comply fully with all of
the provisions of the laws of the town and the state statutes regulating and concerning the
business of solicitor or canvasser and guaranteeing to any citizen of the town that all money
paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of
the solicitor or canvasser, and further guaranteeing any citizen of the town, doing business
with the solicitor or canvasser, that the property purchased will be delivered according to the
representations of the solicitor or canvasser.
(C) Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the town to the use of the
aggrieved person or directly by the aggrieved person.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-6) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
' 111.07 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
The license issued to the licensee pursuant to this chapter by the Town Clerk shall be
posted in a conspicuous place if the licensee is using a vehicle or building in his or her
business and otherwise must be kept by the person and exhibited at any time upon request.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-7) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
' 111.08 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
(A) No licensee hereunder shall have any exclusive right to any location in a public street,
nor shall any be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor within 300 feet of a public school
ground, nor shall any be permitted to operate in any congested area where operations might
impede or inconvenience the public. For the purposes of this chapter, the judgment of a police
officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is
congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
(B) No business activity shall be carried on in any area of the town by any licensee who is
licensed pursuant to this chapter, where the business activity is prohibited by the town zoning
code.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-8) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.09 NOISE ; HOURS OF OPERATION.
Licensees, agents and employees of licensees and persons acting on behalf of licensees
shall not yell, shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound-amplifying devices such
as loudspeakers, microphones, radios, sound-amplifying systems or any other similar devices
for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods wares or merchandise, if the sound
emitted or produced is of sufficient volume that it can be plainly heard upon the public
thoroughfares. Licensees, agents and employees of licensees shall not conduct any business
activities between the hour of 8:00 p.m. of any day and the hour of 8:00 a.m. of the following
day.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-9) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984) Penalty, see ' 10.99
12 Thatcher - Business Regulations
' 111.10 SIGNS TO BE OBSERVED.
It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser or transient merchant in the course of
business to ring the doorbell or knock at any building whereon a sign bearing the words ANo
Peddlers or Solicitors@ or a similar message is exposed to public view.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-10) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.11 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the town to enforce this chapter. The Chief of
Police shall report to the Town Clerk all violations of this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-11) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
' 111.12 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL.
(A) The Town Clerk shall immediately suspend the license and give the licensee notice
by registered mail of the suspension and of a hearing to be held within ten days to determine
whether or not the permit should be revoked, whenever the Town Clerk has reason to believe
that any licensee is guilty of any of the following acts:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for
license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his
or her business;
(3) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
(5) Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute
a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public; and
(6) Failure to file an additional surety bond as required by ' 111.06, within ten days
after the liability of the surety on the previous bond has been exhausted.
(B) The notice shall contain a statement of the purported reason for the suspension. At
the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to introduce
witnesses on his or her behalf and at his or her own expense, and to have the testimony given
at the hearing transcribed. Within the next three days after the hearing, if the Town Clerk
determines that there is a good and sufficient reason for revocation of the licensee=s license,
the Town Clerk shall enter an order revoking the license effective immediately and notify the
licensee by registered mail.
Peddlers 13
(C) Within five days, excluding weekends and legal holidays, an applicant for a license or
a licensee may appeal to the Council, from either the refusal of the Town Clerk to issue a
license under this chapter or from the revocation of any license granted in accordance with
this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-12) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
' 111.13 EXEMPTIONS .
(A) Any person whose activities are regulated exclusively by this state shall be exempted
from the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Any person selling subscriptions for delivery of newspapers to the door of a residence
on a regular or weekly schedule shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
(C) Any organization operated exclusively for educational, religious, charitable public
service, fraternal or other nonprofit purposes and having a permanent address within the
confines of this county may be exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 8-2-13) (Ord. 54, passed 8-20-1984)
14 Thatcher - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 112: CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Section
General Provisions
112.01 Definitions
112.02 Grant of license
License Terms
112.15 Liability; indemnification
112.16 Installations
112.17 Use of streets
112.18 Assignment
112.19 Insurance required
112.20 Rules and regulations
112.21 Television receivers; prohibition
112.22 Fee to town
112.23 Compliance with license terms
112.24 Effect of license
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 112.01 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GRANTEE. Any cable company within whom the town contracts to provide cable
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
PROPERTY. All rights and contracts of whatsoever kind, and all poles, wires, cables,
apparatus and other appliances, appurtenances and fixtures owned by the licensee and
located within the corporate limits of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 15-1-1) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
15
16 Thatcher - Business Regulations
' 112.02 GRANT OF LICENSE.
(A) There is hereby granted to the grantee the right, privilege and authority to construct,
lay, maintain and operate and remove a system of poles, wires, conduits and other fixtures in,
upon, across, along and under and over the streets, alleys, parkways, easements, public
grounds and other places in the town for the purpose of constructing, maintaining and
operating a cable television system in the town.
(B) The non-exclusive license herein shall not be construed and it is not the intention of
the town that the rights herein granted shall be exclusive. Any and all other licenses, if any, for
cable television service shall be granted on the same or similar terms.
(1991 Code, ' 15-1-2) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
LICENSE TERMS
' 112.15 LIABILITY ; INDEMNIFICATION.
The grantee shall defend the town against all lawful claims for injury to any person or
property caused by the negligence of the grantee in the construction or operation of its
property, and in the event of a determination of liability, shall indemnify the town. More
particularly the grantee herein, its successors and assigns, does hereby agree to indemnify
and hold harmless the town from any and all liability, claim, demand or judgment growing out
of any injury to any person or property as a result of the violation or failure on the part of the
grantee, its successors or assigns, to observe their proper duty or because of negligence in
whole or in part arising out of construction, repair, extension, maintenance or operation of its
distributing lines, amplifiers or equipment of any kind or character used in connection with this
authorization.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-1) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.16 INSTALLATIONS .
(A) The grantee shall at all times make and keep full and complete plats, maps and
records showing the exact location of all poles, wires, guy poles, guy wires, amplifiers and all
construction upon the streets, parkways and other public places in the town.
(B) All of the installations shall be of a permanent nature, durable and of sufficient height
not to interfere in any manner with the rights of the public or individual property owners and
shall not interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public nor during the
construction, repair and removal shall not obstruct nor impede traffic unduly. The town
reserves the right of reasonable regulation of the erection and construction of any work by the
grantee and to reasonably designate where the works and construction shall be placed. The
grantee agrees that, when requested by the town to make minor changes in its distribution
system, in wires, poles or apparatus to conform to the reasonably necessary
Cable Communications 17
requirements of small localized areas, the changes will be effected when so requested within
a reasonable time.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-2) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.17 USE OF STREETS.
(A) The grantee shall have the non-exclusive right to furnish and distribute television
signals during the existence of this permit to all public and private customers and shall have
the right to extend its lines upon the streets, alleys, easements and public grounds of any
addition hereafter made in the town=s corporate limits and to use the streets, alleys,
easements and public grounds to continue the television signals to points beyond the
corporate limits of the town.
(B) The grantee shall restore any street or alley which might be excavated or damaged to
any extent by its operations to the condition in which the street or alley existed prior to the
excavation or damage as soon as is practicable thereafter. In the event that, at any time
during the period of this non-exclusive license, the town shall lawfully elect to alter or change
the grade of any street, alley or other public way, the grantee shall upon reasonable notice by
the town remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes
and other fixtures at its own expense.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-3) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.18 ASSIGNMENT .
The grantee shall have the right to assign this authorization upon delivery of a copy of the
assignment to the Mayor of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-4) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.19 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
(A) The grantee shall, at all times during the existence of this license, carry and require its
contractors to carry insurance as follows:
(1) Worker=s compensation insurance in accordance with the laws of this state, and
amendments thereto;
(2) Bodily injury liability insurance with limits of $500,000, each person, and
$300,000, each occurrence; and
(3) Property damage liability insurance with limits of $1,000,000 each accident and
$2,000,000 aggregate.
(B) The insurance described in divisions (A)(2) and (3) of this section shall also provide
contractual liability coverage satisfactory to the town with respect to all liabilities assumed by
grantee under the
18 Thatcher - Business Regulations
provisions of this agreement. The town shall notify the grantee=s representative in the town
within 30 days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise,
made against the town on account of any negligence as aforesaid on the part of the grantee.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-5) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.20 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate rules, regulations, terms and
conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise
its rights and perform its services under this non-exclusive license and to assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all its customers.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-6) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.21 TELEVISION RECEIVERS; PROHIBITION.
Grantee, its agents, employees and assigns shall not engage in the rental, repair or sale
of television receivers, either directly or indirectly.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-7) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.22 FEE TO TOWN.
In consideration for the rights, privileges and non-exclusive license hereby granted and as
compensation to the town for the use of its public ways and places by the grantee, and in lieu
of all occupation and license or other taxes, the grantee shall on or before the first day of
January and the last day of July each year in which this non-exclusive license is effective pay
to the town a sum equal to 2% of the receipts derived from the collection of monthly service
fees paid by subscribers residing within the town. The fee shall be levied as a tax upon
grantee in lieu of all other license or permit fees. The grantee shall render a sworn statement
of the receipts received under this non-exclusive license and deliver the same to the Town
Clerk simultaneously with its payments. The town shall have the authority to audit the books
and records of the grantee=s operation within the town under this non-exclusive license upon
request and prior notice during normal business hours.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-8) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.23 COMPLIANCE WITH LICENSE TERMS.
Failure or refusal to observe the terms and provisions of this non-exclusive license by the
grantee, its successors or assigns shall entitle the town to forfeit and terminate this
non-exclusive license and all rights thereunder, and the town may exercise these rights 90
days after service of notice upon grantee of failure to observe the terms thereof and upon
refusal during the 90-day period to perform or act or
Cable Communications 19
commence to perform or act as required by the non-exclusive license, after the failure or
violation of the terms and provisions hereof.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-9) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
' 112.24 EFFECT OF LICENSE.
All provisions of law provided and prescribed for the granting of this non-exclusive license
shall be binding upon the grantee and all successors and assigns of the grantee, whether
expressly stated herein or not, and all rights, authorities, powers, grants and privileges
secured by this nonexclusive license to the grantee shall be held to inure to the benefit of the
grantee and all successors and assigns of the grantee.
(1991 Code, ' 15-2-10) (Ord. 58, passed 10-19-1987)
20 Thatcher - Business Regulations
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL OFFENSES
131. PROVIDING A LOCATION FOR AN UNLAWFUL
MINOR PARTY OR GATHERING
1
2018 S-1
2 Thatcher - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
130.01 Dangerous constructions
130.02 Excavations
130.03 Explosives
130.04 Fireworks
130.05 Minors; curfew
130.06 Noise
130.07 Nuisance
130.08 Obstruction of view
130.09 Offensive premises
130.10 Spirituous liquor in town parks
130.11 Minors carrying or possessing firearms
130.12 Obscene conduct
130.13 False and fraudulent acts prohibited
130.14 Acts relative to police officers
130.15 Possession/use of a laser pointing device
130.16 Sale of products containing pseudoephedrine
130.17 Smoking in town parks
130.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Social host ordinance, see Ch. 131
' 130.01 DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS.
It is unlawful for any person to situate, construct or maintain any signs, billboards,
awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places
frequented by the public, in a manner as to endanger the public safety.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-1) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.02 EXCAVATIONS .
(A) It is unlawful for any person to excavate, dig or produce in any manner or cause to be
made any opening, displacement, depression or impairment of the surface of any public place
or public thoroughfare without first making application for a permit from the town.
3
2018 S-1
4 Thatcher - General Offenses
(B) The work of excavating shall be under the supervision and direction of an employee
designated by the Town Manager.
(C) The applicant shall be liable for all damages to persons or property caused by the
excavating and shall hold the town harmless for any damages incurred in performance of the
work specified.
(D) It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in
any highway or thoroughfare in the town without providing a sufficient light at night and a
temporary fence or suitable obstruction around the excavation to protect the public during the
day.
(E) It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other excavation of more
than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot, without substantial curbing, covering or
protection.
(F) Any person authorized to excavate in any public place, public road, street, alley,
right-of-way or public thoroughfare shall, as soon as is practicable, but in no event later than
30 days after completion of the excavation, restore the public place, public road, street, alley,
right-of-way or public thoroughfare to at least the same condition as existed prior to the
excavation; provided, however, in the event necessary for the public safety, the town may, by
written notice, require that the public place, public road, street, alley, right-of-way or public
thoroughfare be restored in less than 30 days.
(G) In the event the person making the excavation has made a good faith attempt to
restore the public place, public road, street, alley, right-of-way or public thoroughfare to at
least the condition as existed prior to the excavation, but has done so in a manner
unsatisfactory to the town, the town shall, by certified mail, notify the grantee, licensee or
other responsible party of its failure to properly restore the public place, public road, street,
alley, right-of-way or public thoroughfare, setting forth what actions must be taken to properly
restore the public place, public road, street, alley, right-of-way or public thoroughfare to its
previous condition and the time in which the actions must be taken.
(H) If the restoration required by divisions (F) or (G) of this section is not timely
performed, the town may perform the work necessary to restore the public place, public road,
street, alley, right-of-way or public thoroughfare to its previous condition and charge the
expense of the restoration to the responsible grantee, licensee or other responsible party.
(I) For the purposes of this section, unless the context otherwise requires,
EXCAVATION means any operation in which earth, rock or other material in the ground is
moved, removed or otherwise displaced by means or use of any tools, equipment or
explosives, and includes without limitation grading, trenching, digging, ditching, drilling,
auguring, tunneling, scraping, cable or pipe plowing and driving.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-2) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.03 EXPLOSIVES .
(A) It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the town to keep or use a highly
explosive substance without a written permit from the Police Chief.
General Offenses 5
(B) Persons who keep, use or transport their own ammunition or reloading supplies,
solely for sporting purposes, shall be exempt from these provisions.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-3) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.04 FIREWORKS .
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CONSUMER FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. ' 36-1601.
DISPLAY FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. ' 36-1601.
FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or combination
of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect
by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display
firework or permissible consumer firework as defined by A.R.S. ' 36-1601.
NOVELTY ITEMS. Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as snappers,
snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices, sparklers and certain toys
as defined in A.R.S. ' 36-1601.
PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks as defined by A.R.S. '
36-1601 that may be sold within the town even where the use of those items has been
prohibited.
SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY. A monitored performance of display fireworks
open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
(B) Fireworks prohibited; exceptions.
(1) The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the town is prohibited.
(2) Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use, discharge
or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of a supervised public display of fireworks.
(3) Permits may be granted by the Fire Chief or designee for conducting a properly
supervised public display of fireworks. Every public display of fireworks shall be of a character
and so located, discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does not
endanger persons, animals or property. A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked,
during time periods of high fire danger warnings. The Fire Chief has authority to impose
conditions on any permits granted.
(4) Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the Fire Chief is a civil
offense punishable by fines as set forth in ' 130.99.
6 Thatcher - General Offenses
(C) Sale of fireworks.
(1) No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer
fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age.
(2) No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer
fireworks in conflict with state law.
(D) Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks; civil penalty.
(1) Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in
those sales shall prominently display signs indicating the following:
(a) The use of fireworks, except novelty items as defined by this town code,
including permissible consumer fireworks is prohibited; and
(b) Consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state law may not be sold to
persons under the age of 16.
(2) Signs required under this section shall be placed at each cash register and in
each area where fireworks are displayed for sale.
(3) The Fire Chief along with the Building Inspector or designee shall develop
regulations concerning the size and color of the required signs and shall develop a model
sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the town=s website and
filed with the Clerk=s office.
(4) Failure to comply with divisions (D)(1)(a) and (b) of this section is a civil offense
punishable as set forth in ' 130.99.
(E) Authority to enforce violations of this section; means of enforcement.
(1) The Fire Chief or designee, a town police officer or the Town Attorney may issue
civil complaints to enforce violations of this section designated as civil offenses.
(2) Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a civil complaint may also
issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in which they are to be
taken to avoid issuance of a civil or criminal complaint.
(3) A town police officer or the Town Attorney may issue criminal complaints to
enforce this article.
(F) Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks; definitions.
(1) A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer fireworks,
fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode or to
detonate in the air or to fly
General Offenses 7
above the ground, is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required by
that use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a
violation(s) of this section is prima facie evidence of liability under this section.
(2) The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person liable
for those expenses pursuant to division (A) of this section. The charge constitutes a debt of
that person and may be collected proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities or
not-for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The person=s liability for the expense of an
emergency response shall not exceed the actual cost of the call for a single incident. The
liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any other liability
that may be imposed.
(3) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE. Reasonable costs directly
incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that make an appropriate
emergency response to an incident.
REASONABLE COSTS. Includes the costs of providing police, firefighting,
rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the salaries of the
persons who respond to the incident.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-4) (Ord. 162-2011, passed 1-10-2011) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.05 MINORS ; CURFEW.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADULT. A person 18 years of age or older.
CURFEW. The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
GUARDIAN. An adult having legal custody of a minor.
MINOR. A person 17 years of age or younger.
(B) Unlawful conduct.
(1) A minor shall not be upon any of the streets, alleys or public places in the town
during curfew.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor shall not permit the minor to be upon any of the
streets, alleys or public places in the town during curfew. It shall not constitute a defense that
a parent or guardian had no knowledge of a minor=s violation of division (B)(1) of this section.
8 Thatcher - General Offenses
(C) This section does not apply to a minor who is:
(1) Accompanied by the minor=s parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor=s parent or guardian, without any
detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an
employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor=s residence or abutting the residence of a
next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor
=s presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised
by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of
assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with state law.
(D) Penalty.
(1) A minor who violates this section shall be referred to Juvenile Court pursuant to
A.R.S. Title 8, Chapter 2.
(2) An adult who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-5) (Ord. 63, passed 11-21-1988) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.06 NOISE .
(A) In general. It is unlawful for a person to create, assist in creating, permit, continue or
permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise in the town
that produces annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to any person, or to the
enjoyment of property or comfort of any person, or affects the health, safety or morale of the
public.
General Offenses 9
(1) The following, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this section, but any enumeration herein shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
(a) The playing or permitting to be played of any music or musical instrument
whether played by individuals, orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box or other mechanical
device or means in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the senses, or so as
to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence;
(b) The use of any vehicle, engine or motor of whatever size, stationary or
moving, instrument, construction equipment, device or thing, in a manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, pounding or other noise;
(c) The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long,
continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity; or
(d) A person who, acting individually or as a group, creates verbal or other noises
in a manner which disturbs the peace, quiet or tranquility of a residential neighborhood,
apartment complex or other residential area; or operation of any sound amplification device
mounted on or inside a motor vehicle in a manner which disturbs the peace, quiet and
tranquility of a residential neighborhood, apartment complex or other residential area.
(2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section if any of the above noises are made, created or produced in any residential area
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(B) Vehicle noise.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times
be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise; and it is unlawful for any person operating
any motor vehicle to use a cut-out, by-pass or similar muffler elimination appliance.
(2) Any time a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a vehicle is not
equipped as required by law, or that its equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, the
officer will take appropriate action within the guidelines of A.R.S. '' 28-981, 28-982 and
28-983, and any later amendments or revisions thereto.
(C) Punishment. Any act in violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is hereby
declared to be a loud and unnecessary noise. Violations shall be subject to the provisions of '
130.99.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-6) (Ord. 68, passed 8-20-1990) Penalty, see ' 130.99
10 Thatcher - General Offenses
' 130.07 NUISANCE .
(A) Anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or which unlawfully obstructs the free
passage or use, in the customary manner, of any public park, square, alley, sidewalk, street or
highway is a public nuisance, and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance
or damage inflicted is unequal.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to maintain or commit a public nuisance, or to willfully
omit to perform any legal duty relating to the removal of a public nuisance.
(C) A public nuisance may be abated by order of the Town Court.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-7) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.08 OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other
obstruction which prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-8) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.09 OFFENSIVE PREMISES.
It is unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any premises belonging to or occupied by
him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, sewer, septic tank or private drain therein to
become nauseous, foul or offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health or
comfort.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-9) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.10 SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR IN TOWN PARKS.
(A) Spirituous beverages prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume
spirituous beverages on the premises of the Town Little League Ball Park, the Town Park
located at Reay Lane and Highway 70 or the Daley Estates Park.
(B) Duty of police officers to enforce. It shall be the duty of any police officer of the town
to enforce this section. The Chief of Police shall report to the Town Clerk all violations of this
section.
(C) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
General Offenses 11
DALEY ESTATES PARK. Those premises:
Beginning at the northwest corner of Section 26, Township 7 South,
Range 25 East of the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian, Graham
County, Arizona; running thence south 0 degrees 13' 13" west, along
the west line of said Section 26, a distance of 120.00 feet to the true
point of beginning;
Thence south 89 degrees 43' 57" east, 25.00 feet to the southwest
corner of Lot 14, Daley=s Country Club Estates, Unit II, according to
File No. 4, D-2, Records of Graham County, Arizona;
Thence south 0 degrees 13' 13" west, 80.00 feet;
Thence south 89 degrees 43' 57" east, 292.00 feet;
Thence south 0 degrees 13' 13" west, 195.00 feet;
Thence north 89 degrees 43' 57" west, 317.00 feet to the west line of
said Section 26;
Thence north 0 degrees 13' 13" east, along said west line of Section
26, a distance of 275.00 feet to the true point of beginning.
SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. Alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine,
porter, ale, beer, any malt liquor, malt beverage, absinthe or compound or a mixture of any of
them, or any of them with any vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing
alcohol, and any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which produces
intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits and beverages containing more than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume.
TOWN LITTLE LEAGUE PARK. Those premises located within the southwest
quarter of Section 11 or the southeast quarter of Section 10, all in Township 7 South, Range
25 East, and adjoining the Town Cemetery, used for the purpose of baseball, softball, tennis
or similar activities. Includes a regular park, playground equipment, armadas, splash park
and the like.
TOWN PARK. Those premises located within that part of the southeast quarter of
Section 3, Township 7 South, Range 25 East of the Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian,
Town of Thatcher, Graham County, Arizona, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the east quarter corner of said Section 3;
Thence south 00 degrees 14' 10" west a distance of 1054.42 feet to the
point of beginning:
Thence south 00 degrees 14' 10" west a distance of 326.57 feet to the
northerly right-of-way of U.S. Highway 70;
Thence south 89 degrees 45' 05" west, along said right-of-way, a
distance of 231.28 feet to the TS of a spiral curve;
Thence north 88 degrees 51' 53" west, along the chord of said spiral
curve whose a=1/3 and Ls=500 feet, a distance of 496.25 feet to a point
of curve;
Thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 3,387.75 feet, a
central angle of 001 degrees 33' 44", an arc length of 92.37 feet, and a
chord which bears north 85 degrees 18' 03" west to a point on a line;
12 Thatcher - General Offenses
Then north 00 degrees 20' 10" east, leaving said right-of-way, a distance
of 304.56 feet;
Thence south 89 degrees 45' 50" east a distance of 447.10 feet;
Thence north 00 degrees 14' 10" east a distance of 9.00 feet;
Thence south 89 degrees 45' 50" east a distance of 371.92 feet to the
point of beginning.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-10) (Ord. 60, passed 9-19-1988; Ord. 66, passed 11-20-1989) Penalty,
see ' 130.99
' 130.11 MINORS CARRYING OR POSSESSING FIREARMS.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, an unemancipated person who is
under 18 years of age and who is unaccompanied by a parent, grandparent or guardian, or a
certified hunter safety instructor or certified firearms safety instructor acting with the consent
of the unemancipated person=s parent or guardian, shall not knowingly carry or possess on
his or her person, within his or her immediate control, or in or on a means of transportation a
firearm in any place that is open to the public or on any street or highway or on any private
property except private property owned or leased by the minor or the minor=s parent,
grandparent or guardian.
(B) This section does not apply to a person who is 14, 15, 16 or 17 years of age and is
any of the following:
(1) Engaged in lawful hunting or shooting events or marksmanship practice at
established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited;
(2) Engaged in lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm for the purpose of lawful
hunting;
(3) Engaged in lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for the purpose of shooting events or marksmanship practice at
established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited; or
(4) Engaged in activities requiring the use of a firearm that are related to the
production of crops, livestock, poultry, livestock products, poultry products, or ratites or in the
production or storage of agricultural commodities.
(C) If the minor is not exempt under division (B) of this section and is in possession of a
firearm, a peace officer may seize the firearm and hold it until the agency returns the firearm
to the parent or guardian or initiates forfeiture proceedings pursuant to A.R.S. Title 13,
Chapter 39.
(D) A person who violates division (A) of this section is an incorrigible child and shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in ' 130.99.
(E) If the firearm is not returned to the parent or guardian pursuant to division (C) of this
section, it shall be held by the law enforcement agency responsible for the seizure until the
charges have been
General Offenses 13
adjudicated or otherwise disposed of and until the conclusion of any forfeiture proceedings.
Upon adjudication of a person for a violation of this section, the Court in accordance with
A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 39 shall order the firearm forfeited and sold, destroyed or disposed of
otherwise.
(F) If the Court finds that the parent or guardian of a minor found responsible for violating
this section knew of the minor=s unlawful conduct and made no effort to prohibit it, the parent
or guardian is jointly and severally responsible for any fine imposed pursuant to this section.
(G) This section is supplemental to any other law imposing a criminal penalty for the use
or exhibition of a deadly weapon. A minor who violates this section may be prosecuted and
convicted for any other criminal conduct involving the use or exhibition of the deadly weapon.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-11) (Ord. 85-1993, passed 10-18-1993) Penalty, see ' 130.99
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see A.R.S. ' 13-3111
' 130.12 OBSCENE CONDUCT.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any place open to the public view or
to be guilty of any lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct in any public place where other
persons are present or indecently to exhibit any animal.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-12) (Ord. 86-1994, passed 10-17-1994) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.13 FALSE AND FRAUDULENT ACTS PROHIBITED.
(A) It is unlawful for anyone to intentionally turn on, activate any mechanical, fire or
emergency alarm or otherwise falsely report an emergency, which causes any firefighter,
police officer or other persons to initiate an emergency response when there is no cause.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to represent falsely himself or herself to be an officer of
the town or to attempt to impersonate any officer or to perform without authority any official act
therein on behalf of an officer.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-13) (Ord. 86-1994, passed 10-17-1994) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.14 ACTS RELATIVE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
(A) It is unlawful for any citizen over the age of 18 years to refuse or neglect to render
assistance to any police officer when called upon for that assistance or aid in the suppression
of riot or other unlawful assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an
offense.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to willfully interfere with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or
threaten to molest any officer or any member of the Police or Fire Departments, Building
Inspector or
14 Thatcher - General Offenses
Animal Control Officer of the town in the exercise of his or her official duties or knowingly and
maliciously give any false information to any officer of the town.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-14) (Ord. 86-1994, passed 10-17-1994) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.15 POSSESSION /USE OF A LASER POINTING DEVICE.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser beam directly or
indirectly on another person or animal in such a manner as to harass, annoy or injure the
person or animal.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess a
laser-pointing device. A person shall not be in violation of this section if his or her possession
of a laser pointing device is necessary for his or her employment, trade or occupation and it is
necessary for the pointer to be carried on his or her person.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-16) (Ord. 113-1999, passed 6-15-1999) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.16 SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. Any product containing ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine and includes any compound, mixture or preparation that contains any
detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine or
phenylpropanolamine or their salts, optical isomers or salts of optical isomers. Product
packaging that lists ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine or
phenylpropanolamine as an active ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
product is a PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business that offers any pseudoephedrine
product for sale at retail.
(B) The operator of a retail establishment shall keep all products containing
pseudoephedrine behind a store counter or otherwise in a manner that is inaccessible to
customers without the assistance of the operator or an employee of the establishment.
(C) A person making a retail sale of a product containing pseudoephedrine shall require a
government-issued photo identification from the purchaser and shall record the purchaser=s
name, date of birth, quantity of pseudoephedrine product purchased, transaction date and the
initials of the seller.
(D) The information required to be obtained by division (C) above will be retained by the
retail establishment for a period of 90 days, and will be considered a confidential document
that will only be available to the operator of the retail establishment, and shall be available to
the Town Police Department officers, State Department of Public Safety officers, County
Sheriff=s Department officers, and other law enforcement officers.
General Offenses 15
(E) A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(F) This section is effective April 1, 2006.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-17) (Ord. 142-2006, passed 1-10-2006) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.17 SMOKING IN TOWN PARKS.
(A) Smoking prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any town park or
recreation facility.
(B) Duty of police officers to enforce. It shall be the duty of any police officer of the town
to enforce this section. The Chief of Police shall report to the Town Manager all violations of
this section.
(C) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SMOKING. Includes inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe, or other lighted or vaporized substance in any manner or form.
(Ord. 182-2018, passed 3-19-2018) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.99 PENALTY .
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement imposed by ' 130.04 is a Class
3 misdemeanor unless another penalty is specifically provided for.
(1) Failure to comply with the provisions of ' 130.04(B)(3) and (4) is a civil offense
punishable by fines for each violation not to exceed $2,500.
(2) Failure to comply with ' 130.04(D)(1)(a) and (b) is a civil offense punishable by
civil fine of $2,500.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-4)
(C) Any person who violates the provisions of ' 130.11(A) shall be subject to the following
fines:
(1) For an offense involving an unloaded firearm, a fine of not more than $250 and
the court may order the suspension or revocation of the person=s driver=s license; and
2018 S-1
16 Thatcher - General Offenses
(2) For an offense involving a loaded firearm, a fine of not more than $500 and the
court may order the suspension or revocation of the person=s driver=s license.
(1991 Code, ' 11-1-11)
(Ord. 85-1993, passed 10-18-1993; Ord. 162-2011, passed 1-10-2011)
2018 S-1
CHAPTER 131: PROVIDING A LOCATION FOR AN
UNLAWFUL MINOR PARTY OR GATHERING
Section
131.01 Definitions
131.02 Providing a location for a minor party/gathering
131.03 Collection of civil penalties
131.04 Hearings
131.99 Penalty
' 131.01 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABSENTEE OWNER. An owner that does not reside at the property.
JUVENILE. A minor under the age of 18 years.
MINOR. Any person under the age of 21 years.
MINOR PARTY/GATHERING. A party or gathering of two or more people where
spirituous liquor is served to, in the possession of, or consumed by any minor.
OWNER. A person, persons or legal entity listed as the current titleholder of real
property, as recorded in the official records of the County Recorder=s Office.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON. An owner, tenant, renter, lessor, lessee or other person
residing in or having charge, possession or control of the premises, or a person who
sponsored, allowed or authorized the party/gathering and who knew or should have known
that an unlawful minor party/gathering was occurring on the premises. If such person is a
juvenile, the term RESPONSIBLE PERSON includes, in addition to the juvenile, the juvenile=
s parents, legal guardian(s), or other person exercising care, custody or supervision of the
juvenile.
SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. Shall have the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. 4-101(31).
(Ord. 178-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
17
2018 S-1
18 Thatcher - General Offenses
' 131.02 PROVIDING A LOCATION FOR A MINOR PARTY/GATHERING.
It is unlawful for the responsible person to provide a location for, or to permit, authorize,
sponsor or allow, a minor party/gathering on private property under the responsible person=s
ownership, possession or control.
(Ord. 178-2015, passed 12-21-2015) Penalty, see ' 131.99
' 131.03 COLLECTION OF CIVIL PENALTIES.
Civil penalties may be collected in any manner provided by law.
(Ord. 178-2015, passed 12-21-2015) Penalty, see ' 131.99
' 131.04 HEARINGS .
The town=s Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and dispose of violations of this
chapter. Hearings shall be conducted pursuant to the Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil
Traffic Violation Cases except where otherwise inconsistent with or inapplicable to such
hearings.
(Ord. 178-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
' 131.99 PENALTY .
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Providing a location for minor party/gathering is a civil infraction. A person found
responsible of violation of this chapter is subject to a civil penalty as follows:
(1) For a first violation, the court may impose a civil penalty of not more than $250.
The court may allow the person to complete a substance abuse education program as
determined by the court in lieu of the penalty. An absentee owner will receive a notice of
violation for the first offense and will not be subject to a civil penalty. Thereafter, in addition to
other responsible parties, an absentee owner will be treated as an occupant of the premises
for subsequent offenses.
(2) For a second violation within a period of 18 months, the court may impose a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000.
(3) For the third or subsequent violation within a period of 18 months, the court may
impose a civil penalty of not more than $1,500 for each violation.
2018 S-1
Providing a Location for an Unlawful Minor Party or Gathering 19
(4) In applying the 18-month provision of divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3), the dates of
commission of the offense shall be the determining factor.
(Ord. 178-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
2018 S-1
20 Thatcher - General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDING CODES
151. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
152. SUBDIVISIONS
153. ZONING
1
2 Thatcher - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODES
Section
150.01 Adoption of International Building Code; amendments
150.02 International Plumbing Code
150.03 National Electrical Code
150.04 International Mechanical Code
150.05 International Fire Code
150.06 International Residential Code
150.07 International Fuel Gas Code
150.08 International Existing Building Code
150.09 International Energy Conservation Code
150.10 International Property Maintenance Code
150.11 International Private Sewage Disposal Code
150.12 International Urban-Wildland Interface Code
150.13 Incorporation of standards in building codes
150.14 Conformance to zoning ordinance
150.15 Building Official
150.98 Permit fees
150.99 Penalty
' 150.01 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE; AMENDMENTS.
(A) The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this code of ordinances;
and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and kept
available for public use and inspection.
(B) Amendments:
(1) Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be required for occupancy areas of all new
structures having a total floor area exceeding seven thousand five hundred (7500) square
feet. Automatic sprinkling systems shall be required for occupancy areas within existing
structures: when building additions or alterations result in a gross floor of seven thousand five
hundred (7500) square feet or more of the total floor area. This provision shall not exempt
those structures and occupancies for which the currently adopted edition of the International
Building Code requires automatic fire sprinkler systems or automatic fire-extinguishing
systems for structures and occupancies with total floor areas less than seven thousand five
hundred (7500) square feet.
3
2018 S-1
4 Thatcher - Land Usage
(2) No building shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, or
enlarged which shall exceed forty-five (45) feet from grade to the highest point of the building
or which shall exceed thirty (30) feet from grade to top of the highest outside wall.
(3) At Section 101.1 (Title), change to read: These regulations shall be known as the
Building Code of the Town of Thatcher, hereinafter referred to as Athis code@.
(4) Delete Section 110.3.7 (Energy Efficiency Inspections).
(5) At Table 2304.10.1 (Fastening Schedule), insert #43-Connection: Story-to-story
tie at 48" o.c. by minimum 18-gauge strap with minimum 9" lap on studs. Fastening: per
schedule in manufacturer=s installation instructions, or continuous sheathing with minimum 9"
lap on studs.
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-1) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.02 INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.
(A) That certain code entitled International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, is
hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter the same as though said code was
specifically set forth in full herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(B) Amendments:
(1) At Section 101.1, change to read: These regulations shall be known as the
Plumbing Code of the Town of Thatcher, hereinafter referred to as Athis code.@
(2) At Section 903.1, insert in (number), A12@.
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-2) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.03 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
That certain code entitled National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter the same as though said code was specifically set forth in full
herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and
kept available for public use and inspection.
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-3) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
2018 S-1
Building Codes 5
' 150.04 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
(A) That certain code entitled International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, as amended,
is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter the same as though said code was
specifically set forth in full herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(B) Amendments:
(1) At Section 101.1 (Title), change to read: These regulations shall be known as the
Mechanical Code of the Town of Thatcher, hereinafter referred to as Athis code@.
(2) At Section 504.8.2, delete the last sentence and replace with, AClothes dryer
exhaust ducts shall not be connected with screws or fasteners which extend into the duct.@
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-4) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.05 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
(A) The certain code and standards known as the International Fire Code and
International Fire Code Standards, 2015 Edition, as amended, is adopted and made a part of
this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion. Three copies of
such code and standards have been and are now filed in the office of the Town Clerk and the
same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the town limits.
(B) Amendments:
(1) There shall be no new building permits granted for the use of shake or wood
shingles within the city. Shake or wood shingles may be used only to repair or replace the
existing shake or wood shingle roofs or for additions not exceeding twenty (20) percent of
square footage of existing structure.
(2) When a property owner fails to respond to a notice of violation issued under the
International Fire Code within the time period prescribed by the fire marshal, and the fire
marshal determines that a violation exists in accordance with the adopted fire code sufficient
to constitute an immediate threat to life and property, the fire marshal may take such action as
is necessary to abate the violation at the expense of the property owner. Upon completion of
the abatement action, the fire marshal shall prepare a verified statement of the actual cost of
abatement, the date work was completed and the legal description of the property on which
said work was accomplished, and cause this statement to be served upon the property owner
of record by certified mail. Failure of the property owner to pay the cost of abatement within
ninety (90) days of service of statement shall result in the recordation of a
2018 S-1
6 Thatcher - Land Usage
lien against the subject property in the office of the county recorder and, from the date of its
recording, shall be a lien on said property until paid. Such lien shall be subject and inferior to
the lien for general taxes and shall be superior to all other recorded mortgages, liens and
encumbrances. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of this
section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The city shall have the
right to bring an action to enforce the lien in the superior court at any time after the recording
of the lien, but failure to enforce the lien by such action in the superior court shall not affect its
validity. The recorded lien shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited
therein, and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof.
(3) The building official shall be designated as the fire marshal for purposes of
administering the provisions of this chapter.
(4) At Section 101.1 (Title), insert ATown of Thatcher@.
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-5) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.06 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
(A) That certain code entitled International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, as amended,
is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter the same as though said code was
specifically set forth in full herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(B) Amendments:
(1) At Section R101.1 (Title), insert ATown of Thatcher@.
(2) Delete Section 303.4 (Mechanical Ventilation).
(3) At Section 309.5 (Fire Sprinklers), change Ashall@ to Amay.@
(4) At Section R313.1 (Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler System), change Ashall
@ to Amay.@
(5) At Section R313.2 (One and Two Family Dwellings Automatic Fire systems),
change Ashall@ to Amay@.
(6) Delete Chapter 11 (Energy Efficiency).
(7) At Section P2603.5.1 (Sewer Depth), revise the paragraph to read: ASewer
depth. Regardless of freezing conditions, all building sewers that connect to a private or public
system shall be a minimum of 12 inches below grade.@
2018 S-1
Building Codes 6A
(8) Delete Section 3902.16 (Arc-fault Circuit-interrupter Protection).
(9) Delete Section 3902.17 (Arc-fault Circuit Interrupter Protection for Branch Circuit
Extensions or Modifications).
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-6) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.07 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
(A) That certain code entitled International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, is
hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter the same as though said code was
specifically set forth in full herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(B) Amendments:
(1) At Section 101.1, change to read: These regulations shall be known as the Fuel
Gas Code of the Town of Thatcher, hereinafter referred to as Athis code.@
(2) At Section 614.8.2, delete the last sentence and replace with, AClothes dryer
exhaust ducts shall not be connected with screws or fasteners which extend into the duct.@
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-7) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.08 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
That certain code entitled International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby
adopted and made a part of this chapter the same as though said code was specifically set
forth in full herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the office of the Town
Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-8) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.09 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
That certain code entitled International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, is
hereby rescinded, as it is no longer needed.
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-9) (Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009, passed
12-22-2009; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
2018 S-1
6B Thatcher - Land Usage
' 150.10 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
That certain code entitled International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as
amended, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter the same as though said code
was specifically set forth in full herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in
the office of the Town Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.
(Ord. 167-2011, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.11 INTERNATIONAL PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE.
That certain code entitled International Private Sewage Code, 2009 Edition, is hereby
rescinded, as it is no longer needed.
(Ord. 133-2005, passed 4-12-2005; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.12 INTERNATIONAL URBAN-WILDLAND INTERFACE CODE.
That certain code entitled International Urban-Wildland Interface Code, 2009 Edition,
published by the International Conference of Building Officials and the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby rescinded, as it is no longer
needed.
(Ord. 133-2005, passed 4-12-2005; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.13 INCORPORATION OF STANDARDS IN BUILDING CODES.
Effective June 1, 2005, as per A.R.S. ' 41-1492.03:
(A) The standards and specifications referred to in this chapter and its implementing rules
as applying to public entities shall be incorporated in any building code in existence on or
adopted after the effective date of this chapter by this state or any agency, department or
political subdivision of this state. These standards and specifications apply to new
construction and alterations and are not required in buildings or portions of existing buildings
that do not meet the standards and specifications.
(B) The standards and specifications referred to in this chapter and its implementing rules
as applying to public accommodations and commercial facilities shall be incorporated in any
building code in existence on or adopted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter by
this state or any agency, department or political subdivision of this state. These standards and
specifications shall apply to new construction and alterations commenced after the effective
date of these standards and specifications.
(Ord. 133-2005, passed 4-12-2005)
2018 S-1
Building Codes 6C
' 150.14 CONFORMANCE TO ZONING ORDINANCE.
Effective June 1, 2005, whenever a building permit is issued and a building inspection
performed, the building must conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance in addition to
the provisions of this chapter.
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-10) (Ord. 133-2005, passed 4-12-2005)
' 150.15 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
Effective June 1, 2005, the Building Official and Administrative Authority, as it may be
referenced in any section of this chapter for all matters pertaining to any building, plumbing,
electrical or any other inspections, shall be vested in the Office of the Building Inspector or
any other person as the Council may determine.
(1991 Code, ' 7-1-11) (Ord. 133-2005, passed 4-12-2005)
' 150.98 PERMIT FEES.
Permit fees will be set by a resolution of the Town Council from time to time.
(Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
' 150.99 PENALTY .
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter except ' 150.10 shall
be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense punishable as herein above described.
(Ord. 133-2005, passed 4-12-2005; Ord. 157-2009, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 158-2009,
passed 12-22-2009)
2018 S-1
6D Thatcher - Land Usage
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
151.01 Findings of fact
151.02 Statement of purpose
151.03 Methods of reducing flood losses
151.04 Definitions
151.05 Application of chapter
151.06 Establishment of special flood hazard areas
151.07 Compliance
151.08 Abrogation and greater restrictions
151.09 Interpretation
151.10 Warning and disclaimer of liability
151.11 Statutory exemptions
151.12 Declaration of public nuisance
151.13 Abatement of violations
151.14 Unlawful acts
Administration
151.25 Establishment of development permit
151.26 Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
151.40 Standards of construction
151.41 Standards for storage of materials and equipment
151.42 Standards for utilities
151.43 Standards for subdivisions
151.44 Standards for manufactured homes
151.45 Floodways
7
8 Thatcher - Land Usage
Variance Procedure
151.60 Appeal Board
151.61 Conditions for variances
151.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
Authorization, see A.R.S. ' 48-3604
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 151.01 FINDINGS OF FACT.
(A) The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation which results in
loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(B) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of
special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately
anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(1991 Code, ' 16-1-1) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.02 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare,
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed to:
(A) Protect human life and health;
(B) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(C) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(D) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(E) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood
hazard;
Flood Damage Prevention 9
(F) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of
areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
(G) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard;
(H) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility
for their actions; and
(I) Maintain eligibility for state disaster relief.
(1991 Code, ' 16-1-2) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.03 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
(A) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood
heights or velocities;
(B) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve those uses,
be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(C) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
(D) Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood
damage; and
(E) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(1991 Code, ' 16-1-3) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.04 DEFINITIONS .
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator=s interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO Zone on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel
does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and velocity flow may
be evident.
10 Thatcher - Land Usage
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is
intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces,
without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection
system without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be
compromised.
DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE. Any form of loan, grant, guaranty, insurance, payment,
rebate, subsidy, disaster assistance loan or grant, or any other form of direct or indirect
federal assistance, other than general or special revenue sharing or formula grants made to
states.
FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of floodwaters;
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
or
(3) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high level in a natural body of
water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash
flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in FLOODING as defined in this definition.
FLOOD BOUNDARY FLOODWAY MAP. The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the flood boundary floodway map and
the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to
modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a
special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. This system typically
includes dams, reservoirs, levees or
Flood Damage Prevention 11
dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of Aflooding@).
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR . The Town Clerk who is hereby authorized by the
Floodplain Board to administer the provisions of this chapter.
FLOODPLAIN BOARD. The Town Council of the town at those times as it is engaged in
the enforcement of this chapter.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications
of police power. The term describes those state or local regulations in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes
or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOD-RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature,
such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
necessary in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage
or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior
to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
12 Thatcher - Land Usage
LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the
flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in
accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building
=s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that the enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community=s flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community.
PERSON. An individual or his or her agent, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.
PROGRAM. The National Flood Insurance Program authorized by 42 U.S.C. ''
4001-4128.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community=s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those
floodplain management regulations or of the NFIP standards.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. An elevation one foot above the base flood
elevation.
REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into compliance
with state or local floodplain management regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the
impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the
structure or other affected
Flood Damage Prevention 13
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard
to the structure or other development.
RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream,
brook and the like.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. An area having special flood or flood-related erosion
hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. Substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL
START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or
any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
(1) Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
(a) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
(b) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.
(2) For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or
(b) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
14 Thatcher - Land Usage
VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community=s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in this
chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is provided.
(1991 Code, Art. 16-2) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.05 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the corporate limits of
the town.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-1) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
(A) The Town Community Development Director is appointed/designated as the
Floodplain Administrator for the town and will serve as the community point of contact on
National Flood Insurance Program issues for county, state and federal officials.
(B) Those public records entitled AFlood Insurance Study (FIS) for the Town of Thatcher,
Arizona@ with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated December 15, 1983,
and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, three copies of which shall be kept on file in
the office of the Town Clerk, are hereby adopted by reference, as the basis for establishing
the special flood hazard areas for floodplain management in the town. The special flood
hazard areas documented in the flood insurance study and flood insurance rate maps are the
minimum area of applicability of the floodplain management regulations and may be
supplemented by studies for other areas as allowed in the regulations.
(C) The public record designated as the AFloodplain Management Regulations for
Graham County,@ dated March 16, 1998, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions,
three copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk, is hereby adopted as
the legal basis for implementing floodplain management in this community.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-2) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986; Ord. 152-2007, passed 5-8-2007)
' 151.07 COMPLIANCE .
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-3) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986) Penalty, see ' 151.99
Flood Damage Prevention 15
' 151.08 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another provision of this
code, or an ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-4) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.09 INTERPRETATION .
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered as minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-5) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.10 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods
can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within the areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town, any officer or employee thereof or the
Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-6) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.11 STATUTORY EXEMPTIONS.
(A) In accordance with A.R.S. ' 48-3609, nothing in this chapter shall:
(1) Affect existing uses of property or the right to continuation of the use under
conditions which existed on January 15, 1987;
(2) Affect repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which the property was
used on January 15, 1987; providing the repair or alteration does not exceed 50% of the value
of the property prior to the repair or alteration; and provided the repair or alteration does not
decrease the carrying capacity of the watercourse; or
16 Thatcher - Land Usage
(3) Affect or apply to facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of
environmental compatibility issued under the authority of A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2, Article
6.2.
(B) In accordance with A.R.S. ' 48-3613, written authorization shall not be required, nor
shall the Floodplain Board prohibit:
(1) The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures necessary to the
construction of public highways, roads and streets intersecting a watercourse;
(2) The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife, structures on
banks of a creek, stream, river, wash, arroyo or other watercourse to prevent erosion of or
damage to adjoining land, or dams for the conservation of floodwaters as permitted by A.R.S.
Title 48, Chapter 21;
(3) Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in connection with
mining and metallurgical operations. This division (B)(3) does not exempt those sand and
gravel operations which will divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse; or
(4) Any flood control district, or other political subdivision, from exercising powers
granted to it under A.R.S. Title 45, Chapter 10.
(C) Before any construction authorized by division (B) of this section may begin, the
responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the Floodplain Board for review
and comment.
(D) These exemptions do not preclude any person from liability if that person=s actions
increase flood hazards to any other person or property.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-7) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.12 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
Every new structure, building, fill, excavation or development located or maintained within
any area of special flood hazard after August 8, 1973 in violation of this chapter is a public
nuisance per se.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-8) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986) Penalty, see ' 151.99
' 151.13 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
(A) Within 30 days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator
shall submit a report to the Floodplain Board which shall include all information available to
the Floodplain Administrator which is pertinent to the violation.
(B) Within 30 days of receipt of this report, the Floodplain Board shall either:
(1) Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of the violation;
Flood Damage Prevention 17
(2) Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of '' 151.60 and
151.61;
(3) Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to provide
whatever additional information may be required for its determination. This information must
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator within 30 days of the order, and he or she shall
submit an amended report to the Floodplain Board within 20 days. At its next regularly
scheduled public meeting, the Floodplain Board shall either order the abatement of the
violation or it shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of '' 151.60 and 151.61;
or
(4) Submit to the Administrator of Federal Insurance Administration a declaration for
denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited state or local law,
regulation or ordinance, pursuant to ' 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 as
amended.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-9) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986) Penalty, see ' 151.99
' 151.14 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It is unlawful for any person to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any
watercourse whenever it creates a hazard to life or property without securing the written
authorization of the Floodplain Board.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-10) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986) Penalty, see ' 151.99
ADMINISTRATION
' 151.25 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
(A) A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins
within any area of special flood hazard established in ' 151.06. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include but
not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
(B) Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest habitable floor
(including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO, elevation of existing grade and proposed
elevation of lowest habitable floor of all structures;
(2) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be
floodproofed;
18 Thatcher - Land Usage
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in '
151.40(C)(3); and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as
a result of proposed development.
(1991 Code, ' 16-4-1) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.26 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but not be limited to:
(A) Permit review. Review all development permits to determine that:
(1) The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
(2) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
(3) The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
(4) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the
floodway. For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point.
(B) Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided
in accordance with ' 151.06, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer '' 151.40 through 151.45. Any information shall be submitted to the Floodplain
Board for adoption;
(C) Information to be obtained and maintained. Obtain and maintain for public inspection
and make available as needed for flood insurance policies:
(1) The certified elevation required in ' 151.40(C)(1);
(2) The certification required in ' 151.40(C)(2);
(3) The floodproofing certification required in ' 151.40(C)(3); and
(4) The certified elevation required in ' 151.43(B).
Flood Damage Prevention 19
(D) Alteration of watercourses. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Water Resources prior
to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of that notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration; and
(2) Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse is maintained.
(E) Delineation of floodplains affected. Within 120 days after completion of construction of
any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the flood or the
configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the project, the
person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall provide to the governing
bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected
by the project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the
Director of Water Resources;
(F) Written notice of Development Plan. Advise the flood control district of the county and
any adjunct jurisdiction having responsibility for floodplain management in writing and provide
a copy of Development Plan of all applications for floodplain use permits or variances to
develop land in a floodplain or floodway within one mile of the corporate limits of the town.
Also, advise the Flood Control District of this county in writing and provide a copy of any
development plan of any major development proposed within a floodplain or floodway which
could affect floodplains, floodways or watercourses within the district=s area of jurisdiction.
Written notice and a copy of the plan of development shall be sent to the District no later than
three working days after having been received by the town;
(G) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in '' 151.60 and 151.61; and
(H) Actions on violations. Take actions on violations of this chapter as required in '
151.13.
(1991 Code, ' 16-4-2) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
' 151.40 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Standards required. In all areas of special flood hazards the following anchoring
standards are required:
20 Thatcher - Land Usage
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; and
(2) All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of ' 151.44.
(B) Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(C) Elevation and floodproofing.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in division (C)(3) below. Upon the
completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in Zone AO shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, higher than the highest adjacent grade at least one
foot higher than the depth number on the FIRM, or at least two feet if no depth number is
specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in division (C)(3) of this section.
Upon completion of the structure, a registered professional engineer shall certify to the
Floodplain Administrator that the elevation of the structure meets this standard.
(3) Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with division
(C)(1) or (2) above, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the regulatory flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
standards of this division are satisfied. These certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
(4) Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
Flood Damage Prevention 21
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings
or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(5) Manufactured homes shall meet the above standards and also the standards in '
151.44.
(1991 Code, ' 16-5-1) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.41 STANDARDS FOR STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
(A) The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant,
flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
(B) Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage
by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within
the time available after flood warning.
(1991 Code, ' 16-5-2) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.42 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
(A) All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from systems into floodwaters.
(B) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
(C) Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a floodway.
(1991 Code, ' 16-5-3) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.43 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
(A) All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the
elevation of the base flood.
(B) All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structures and pads.
If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
22 Thatcher - Land Usage
(C) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. All subdivisions shall
provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(1991 Code, ' 16-5-4) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.44 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes
shall:
(A) Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the lowest point of any
attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at the regulatory flood elevation; and
(B) Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement.
(1991 Code, ' 16-5-5) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.45 FLOODWAYS .
(A) Located within areas of special flood hazard established in ' 151.06 are areas
designated as floodways.
(B) Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development unless certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, ' 16-5-6) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
VARIANCE PROCEDURE
' 151.60 APPEAL BOARD.
(A) The Floodplain Board shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
Flood Damage Prevention 23
(B) The Floodplain Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(C) In passing upon these applications, the Floodplain Board shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of the damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject
to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain
management program for that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions,
including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water system, and streets and bridges.
(D) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
division (C)(1) through (11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(E) Upon consideration of the factors of division (C) of this section and the purposes of
this chapter, the Floodplain Board may attach any conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
24 Thatcher - Land Usage
(F) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and
report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
(1991 Code, ' 16-6-1) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.61 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
(A) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(B) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(C) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(D) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(E) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood
elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. The notice will also state that the land upon
which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the
flood relocation and land exchange program provided for by A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, Article
2. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Board in the office of the County
Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.
(1991 Code, ' 16-6-2) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
' 151.99 PENALTY .
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
Flood Damage Prevention 25
(B) Any person violating the provisions of ' 151.14 shall be guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, ' 16-3-10) (Ord. 55, passed 12-15-1986)
26 Thatcher - Land Usage
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
152.01 Subdivision ordinance; adopted by reference
' 152.01 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The ATown of Thatcher Subdivision Ordinance@ dated June 2013 is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in full herein. Copies are available through town offices.
(Ord. 169-2013, passed 9-17-2013)
27
2018 S-1
28 Thatcher - Land Usage
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
153.01 Zoning ordinance; adopted by reference
' 153.01 ZONING ORDINANCE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The ATown of Thatcher Zoning Ordinance@ dated June 2013 is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in full herein. Copies are available through town offices.
(Ord. 170-2013, passed 9-17-2013; Ord. 177-2015, passed 7-20-2015; Ord. 180-2017,
passed 3-20-2017; Ord. 181-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
Cross-reference:
Amendments to the zoning map, see TSO II
29
2018 S-1
30 Thatcher - Land Usage
Town of Thatcher
Subdivision Ordinance
Town of Thatcher
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Acknowledgments
The Town of Thatcher would like to thank the various individuals and working groups for taking
the time to provide suggestions and acknowledge their input in the drafting of this Ordinance.
Town Council Bob Rivera, Mayor
Bill Mulleneaux, Vice Mayor
Aaron Allen, Council Member
D. Wayne Griffin, Council Member
Donald Innes, Council Member
Ken Larson, Council Member
Joy Martin, Council Member
Planning & Zoning Commission Ramon Morales, Chairman
Mike Ajeman, Vice Chairman
Jerry Hoopes, Commissioner
Eddy Carlton, Commissioner
David Griffin, Commissioner
Pat Nelson, Commissioner
Bret Whitmer, Commissioner
Town Project Team Terry Hinton, Town Manager
Heath Brown, Town Engineer
Matt Clifford, Town Attorney
Project Consultants Contract Planning Service, Inc.
Livability Law Group
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Table of Content Page i
TABLE OF CONTENT
Chapter 152, Article 1: Title, Authority and Purpose
Section 1.0 Short Title .................................................................................................................... 1.1
Section 1.1 Authority ...................................................................................................................... 1.1
Section 1.2 Purpose and Intent ..................................................................................................... 1.1
Section 1.3 Adoption of Figures and Tables ............................................................................... 1.1
Section 1.4 Adoption of Glossary, Appendices and Maps ....................................................... 1.1
Section 1.5 Conformance with the General Plan ....................................................................... 1.1
Chapter 152, Article 2: Administration
Section 2.0 Responsibility .............................................................................................................. 2.1
Section 2.1 Application .................................................................................................................. 2.1
Section 2.2 Filing Fees .................................................................................................................... 2.2
Section 2.3 Prohibition of Circumvention .................................................................................. 2.2
Section 2.4 Modifications ............................................................................................................... 2.2
Section 2.5 Enforcement and Penalties ..................................................................................... 2.3
Section 2.6 Conflicting Provisions ............................................................................................... 2.3
Section 2.7 Severability ................................................................................................................... 2.4
Chapter 152, Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
Section 3.0 Outline of Procedures and Requirements ............................................................... 3.1
Section 3.1 Step 1: Pre-Application Meeting .............................................................................. 3.1
Section 3.2 Step 2: Preliminary Plat Application ........................................................................ 3.3
A. Submittal Requirements ............................................................................... 3.3
B. Identification and Descriptive Data ........................................................... 3.4
C. Existing Conditions Data ............................................................................ 3.5
D. Proposed Conditions Data .......................................................................... 3.6
E. Proposed Utility Methods ............................................................................ 3.7
Section 3.3 Step 3: Technical Advisory Review .......................................................................... 3.7
Section 3.4 Step 4: Preliminary Plat Approval ............................................................................ 3.8
A. Preliminary Plat Re-submission .................................................................. 3.8
B. Preliminary Plat Hearing(s) .......................................................................... 3.9
C. Significance of Preliminary Approval ..................................................... 3.10
Section 3.5 Step 5: Improvement Plans and Final Plat Approval ......................................... 3.10
A. Document Submittal Requirements ........................................................ 3.11
B. Final Plat Submittal .................................................................................... 3.12
C. Improvement Plans and Reports ............................................................. 3.12
D. Information Required on the Final Plat ................................................. 3.12
E. Required Certifications, Signatures, and Notes ..................................... 3.15
F. Final Plat Approval .................................................................................... 3.18
Section 3.6 Step 6: Recordation of Final Plat .......................................................................... 3.19
Section 3.7 Replat ...................................................................................................................... 3.19
Section 3.8 Abandonment of Recorded Subdivision .............................................................. 3.19
Section 3.9 Condominium Developments ............................................................................... 3.20
Section 3.10 Minor Land Divisions and Lot Splits ................................................................... 3.20
Town of Thatcher
Page ii Table of Contents
Chapter 152, Article 4: Design Standards
Section 4.0 Purpose and Intent ...................................................................................................... 4.1
Section 4.1 General Requirements ............................................................................................... 4.1
Section 4.2 Site Design Standards ................................................................................................ 4.2
A. Residential ...................................................................................................... 4.2
B. Commercial and Industrial ........................................................................ `4.2
C. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) .................................... 4.2
Section 4.3 Open Space and Landscape Standards .................................................................... 4.3
A. General Requirements .................................................................................. 4.3
B. Specific Open Space Design Standards ..................................................... 4.4
C. Specific Landscape Standards ..................................................................... 4.6
D. Walls and Fences ........................................................................................... 4.6
Section 4.4 Access Requirements ................................................................................................. 4.7
Section 4.5 Street Location and Arrangement ............................................................................ 4.7
Section 4.6 Street Design Standards ............................................................................................. 4.8
A. Design of Streets ........................................................................................... 4.9
B. Private Streets ............................................................................................. 4.12
C. Cul-de-Sac Streets ...................................................................................... 4.12
D. Dead-end Streets ........................................................................................ 4.12
E. Private Access and Driveways ................................................................. 4.12
F. Bicycle Lanes .............................................................................................. 4.12
G. Alleys ............................................................................................................ 4.12
H. Sidewalks ..................................................................................................... 4.12
I. Street Intersections .................................................................................... 4.13
J. Street Grades .............................................................................................. 4.13
K. Surface Treatment ...................................................................................... 4.14
L. Structural Section ....................................................................................... 4.14
M. Roadway Design ......................................................................................... 4.14
Section 4.7 Block Planning ......................................................................................................... 4.15
Section 4.8 Lot Planning ............................................................................................................. 4.16
Section 4.9 Easement Planning .................................................................................................. 4.16
Section 4.10 Street Naming .......................................................................................................... 4.17
Section 4.11 Drainage .................................................................................................................... 4.17
Section 4.12 Sanitary Sewage Disposal ....................................................................................... 4.18
Section 4.13 Water System ............................................................................................................ 4.19
Section 4.14 Public Utilities .......................................................................................................... 4.20
Section 4.15 Outdoor Lighting .................................................................................................... 4.21
Chapter 152, Article 5: Improvement Requirements
Section 5.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................... 5.1
A. Developer Responsibilities .......................................................................... 5.1
B. Streets and Public Easements ..................................................................... 5.1
C. Utilities ............................................................................................................ 5.2
D. Monuments .................................................................................................... 5.2
E. Phased Development ................................................................................... 5.2
Section 5.1 Submittal Requirements ............................................................................................. 5.2
A. General ........................................................................................................... 5.2
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Table of Content Page iii
B. Improvement Plan Submittal Requirements ............................................. 5.3
C. Water Service Requirements ....................................................................... 5.4
D. Landscape and Open Space Plan Submittal Requirements .................... 5.5
E. Report Submittal Requirements .................................................................. 5.6
Section 5.2 Improvement Plan Review Process .......................................................................... 5.9
Section 5.3 Assurances of Construction ................................................................................... 5.10
A. Agreement by Developer .......................................................................... 5.10
B. Financial Assurances of Construction .................................................... 5.11
Section 5.4 Construction and Inspection ................................................................................. 5.12
Section 5.5 Subdivision Improvement Acceptance ................................................................ 5.13
A. General ........................................................................................................ 5.13
B. Final Inspection .......................................................................................... 5.13
C. Final Report ................................................................................................ 5.13
D. Procedure .................................................................................................... 5.14
E. Warranty Period on Public Improvements ............................................ 5.14
List of Figures
Figure No. 1 Natural Character Drainage Way .......................................................................... 4.5
Figure No. 2 Flood Control Canal/Irrigation Canal Trail ........................................................ 4.5
Figure No. 3 Principal Arterial (US Hwy 70) ............................................................................. 4.9
Figure No. 4 Minor Arterial .......................................................................................................... 4.9
Figure No. 5 Collector Street ........................................................................................................ 4.9
Figure No. 5A Collector Street (Alternative Cross Section) .................................................... 4.10
Figure No. 5B Collector Street (Alternative Cross Section) .................................................... 4.10
Figure No. 6 Local Street (Standard Residential Cross Section) ........................................... 4.10
Figure No. 6A Local Street (Alternative Residential Cross Section) ....................................... 4.11
Figure No. 7 Local Street (Standard Commercial and Industrial) ......................................... 4.11
Figure No. 8 Cul-de-Sac ............................................................................................................. 4.11
List of Tables
Table No. 1 Driveway Setbacks from Intersections ............................................................. 4.13
Table No. 2 Right-of-Way Dimensions .................................................................................. 4.15
Table No. 3 Minimum Road Design Standards ..................................................................... 4.15
Glossary of Terms ........................................................................................................................ G.1
Appendices
Appendix A (For Future Use) ............................................................................................................ A.1
Town of Thatcher
Page iv Table of Contents
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 1: Title, Authority and Purpose Page 1.1
CHAPTER 152, ARTICLE 1: Title, Authority and Purpose
Section 1.0 Short Title. These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the
Town of Thatcher Subdivision Ordinance and will be referred to herein as this
Code, or this Ordinance.
Section 1.1 Authority. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained
in the Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.)  9-463.01, et seq. in order to conserve and
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the present and future
citizens of the Town of Thatcher.
Section 1.2 Purpose and Intent.
A. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious
development of the Town of Thatcher; to ensure adequate vehicular and pedestrian
traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major
thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; to achieve individual
property lots of reasonable utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for
water supply, drainage, flood protection, storm water detention, sanitary sewerage,
and other health and safety requirements; to ensure consideration for adequate sites
for schools, open space, recreation areas, and other public facilities; to help ensure
that emergency services such as fire, ambulance and police services can be provided
to all developed land; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal
description; and to provide practical procedures for the achievement of this purpose.
B. In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, it is intended that a common
ground of understanding and a sound and equitable working relationship exist
between the public and private interests and to this end, the independent and mutual
objectives of the public and private interests can be achieved in the subdivision of
land.
Section 1.3 Adoption of Figures and Tables. All figures and tables within this
Ordinance are hereby adopted and shall be incorporated herein as a part of this
Ordinance.
Section 1.4 Adoption of Glossary, Appendices and Maps. The Glossary of
Terms along with any appendices and maps within this Ordinance are hereby
adopted and shall be incorporated herein as a part of this Ordinance.
Section 1.5 Conformance with the General Plan. This Ordinance is intended
to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Town of Thatcher General
Town of Thatcher
Page 1.2 Article 1: Title, Authority and Purpose
Plan and is hereby deemed to be in conformance with the adopted General Plan.
Any amendments to or actions pursuant to this Ordinance shall be in conformance
with the General Plan, as it may be amended from time to time.
(End of Article)
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 2: Administration Page 2.1
CHAPTER 152, ARTICLE 2: Administration
Section 2.0 Responsibility.
A. The Thatcher Planning and Zoning Commission is charged with the duty of
reviewing the design and improvements of proposed subdivisions and to provide the
Town Council with a recommendation to approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove preliminary subdivision plats, final subdivision plats, subdivision
regulation exceptions and protected development rights plans. The Commissions
recommendation shall also include recommendations on the kinds, nature and extent
of the improvements to be installed in the subdivisions.
B. The Town Council for the Town of Thatcher is hereby authorized to receive,
process and otherwise act upon applications for preliminary subdivision plats, final
subdivision plats, subdivision regulation exceptions and protected development
rights plans in accordance with this Ordinance. Additionally the Town Council is
hereby authorized to receive, process, and act upon an appeal of the Zoning
Administrators decision on a minor land/lot split application.
C. The Town Council shall have final jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to the
implementation of this Ordinance.
D. All applications for action under this Ordinance shall be filed initially with the
Zoning Administrator or his/her designee for processing in accordance with this
Ordinance.
E. All applications shall be reviewed, from a technical aspect, by the Subdivision
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) which shall act in an advisory capacity to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The TAC shall, at a minimum, consist of the
following Town Staff and agency members: Zoning Administrator, Town Engineer,
Parks and Recreation Director, Public Works Director, Fire Chief, local Postmaster,
representatives from the serving utility companies, Irrigation District, and the local
School District. Additional members may be consulted when deemed necessary by
the Zoning Administrator including the County Engineer and County Zoning
Administrator if the proposed subdivision abuts property under Graham County
jurisdiction.
Section 2.1 Application.
A. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon land, land improvement, or
development, and land use than is imposed by existing provisions of law, ordinance,
contract or deed, this Ordinance shall control.
B. This Ordinance shall apply to all land, within the corporate limits of the Town of
Thatcher, coming within the definition of subdivisions, land splits, and minor land
divisions as defined in Appendix A of this Ordinance.
Town of Thatcher
Page 2.2 Article 2: Administration
Section 2.2 Filing Fees. The Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Thatcher may
from time to time establish and set by resolution, administrative fees considered
necessary to process subdivision applications, and to review improvement plans and
construction documents. The developer shall, at the time of filing, pay to the Town
those established fees. These fees shall be non-refundable.
Section 2.3 Prohibition of Circumvention.
A. No person, firm, corporation or legal entity shall sell, offer to sell, or divide any lot,
piece, or parcel of land which constitutes a subdivision, as defined herein, or part
thereof without first having recorded a final plat thereof in accordance with this
Ordinance.
B. No person, firm, corporation or legal entity shall sell, offer to sell, or divide any lot,
piece, or parcel of land that is not within a subdivision but which constitutes a lot
split or minor land division, as defined herein, without first obtaining approval by the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with this Ordinance.
C. The County Recorder shall not record a plat unless the plat has been approved and
signed by the Town Council. The Town shall not issue any permits for work on any
lot, piece or parcel of land in violation of this Ordinance.
Section 2.4 Modifications.
A. Where, in the opinion of the Council, and after review by the Zoning Administrator
and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission, there may exist extraordinary
conditions of topography, land ownership or adjacent development, or other
circumstances not provided for in this Ordinance, the Council may modify these
provisions in such a manner and to such extent as it may deem appropriate to the
public interest.
B. In the case of a plan and program for an approved Traditional Neighborhood
Development (TND), the Council may modify this Ordinance in such manner as
appears necessary and desirable to provide adequate space and improvements for the
circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the development when fully
developed and populated and may require conditions to assure conformance with
the achievement of the TNDs approved Master Plan Map and Architectural
Design Standards & Guidelines.
C. In modifying the standards or requirements of this Ordinance, as outlined above, the
Council may make such additional requirements as appear necessary, in its judgment,
to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 2: Administration Page 2.3
Section 2.5 Enforcement and Penalties.
A. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
Ordinance to further the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. No building permit shall be issued for the erection or use of any structure or part
thereof, to be located in a subdivision or lot created or established subsequent to this
Ordinance becoming effective, that is not in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. Any such permit issued shall be void and of no effect.
C. Any building or structure erected or maintained on a lot or parcel of land that is
subject to this Ordinance, created or established subsequent to this Ordinance
becoming effective, that is contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be and
the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the Town
Attorney shall, upon order of the Town Council, immediately commence action or
actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment
thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps, and shall
apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will
abate or remove such building or structure.
D. Any subdivision, land split, minor land division or other use of property in violation
of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be prevented or restrained through appropriate
action instituted by the Town in accordance with ARS Section 9-463.01, 9-240.B28
and 9-240.B29.
E. The Zoning Administrator may also request that the court issue an injunction against
a violator to prevent further violations or irreparable harm to persons or property
when the circumstances warrant it.
F. Unless a specific penalty is set forth herein any person, firm, or corporation found
guilty of violating any provision of this Ordinance, or any amendments thereto, shall
be guilty of a class one misdemeanor punishable as set forth in the Town Code for
the Town of Thatcher, and each day of continued violation shall be a separate
offense, punishable as described.
G. In addition to, or independent of the penalties provided above, the Town may bring
a civil proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with
the terms of this Ordinance or to prevent, restrain, or abate any violation of the
terms of this Ordinance.
Section 2.6 Conflicting Provisions.
A. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Ordinance or any other Town
ordinance or code specify the use of different standards, different construction or
other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is conflict
between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement
Town of Thatcher
Page 2.4 Article 2: Administration
shall apply.
B. This Ordinance also is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any private
agreements between persons, such as easements, deeds or covenants, except that if
this Ordinance imposes higher standards or a greater restriction on land, buildings or
structures than an otherwise applicable provision of a law, ordinance, or a private
agreement, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
C. Where other private agreements, covenants or restrictions are more restrictive, the
Town cannot enforce the more restrictive private agreements, covenants or
restrictions as a part of this Subdivision Ordinance.
Section 2.7 Severability.
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance
not specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any
provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building, or other structure,
such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other
property, building or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
(End of Article)
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.1
CHAPTER 152, ARTICLE 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
Section 3.0 Outline of Procedures and Requirements
A. The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all subdivision plats located
inside the jurisdictional boundaries of the Town of Thatcher shall proceed through
the following progressive steps.
B. If a submittal is determined to be incomplete or inaccurate at or during any of the
different stages of the process, the developer shall be required to correct the
inaccuracy and/or produce the omitted information before proceeding any further
through the process.
Section 3.1 Step 1: Pre-Application Meeting.
A. The pre-application meeting step is an investigatory meeting, to obtain advice and
assistance from the Town that precedes the actual preparation of preliminary plans
by the subdivider. During this meeting, the subdivider makes known its intentions
and the town staff gives informal guidance at a time when potential points of conflict
can most easily be resolved, advises of specific public objectives related to the
subject tract, and other details regarding platting procedures and requirements.
During this stage, it may be determined that a change in zoning would be required
for the subject tract or part thereof, and in such case the subdivider shall initiate the
necessary rezoning application.
Step 1 Pre-Application Meeting
Step 2 Preliminary Plat Application
Step 3 Technical Advisory Review
Step 4 Preliminary Plat Approval
Step 5
Improvement Plans and
Final Plat Approval
Step 6 Recordation of Final Plat
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.2 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
B. In carrying out the purposes of the pre-application step, the subdivider and the
Town shall be responsible for the following actions.
1. Actions by the Subdivider: The subdivider shall schedule a pre-application
meeting with the Town and submit copies of a Sketch Plan for staff to
review prior to and in preparation for the meeting. The subdivider shall
meet informally with the Zoning Administrator and Public Works
Departments staff to present and discuss the general outline of its proposal,
including but not limited to:
a. Sketch plans and ideas regarding land use, street and lot arrangement,
tentative lot sizes; and
b. Make tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal,
irrigation (if any), surface drainage, flood hazard, and street
improvements.
c. The subdivision shall be designed to comply with the requirements of
the specific zoning district within which it is located.
2. Actions by the Town: The Town will discuss the proposal with the
subdivider and advise him of procedural steps, design and improvement
standards, and general plat requirements. Then, depending upon the scope
of the proposed development, the Town will proceed with the following
investigations:
a. Check to determine if the subdivision is in conformance with existing
zoning regulations and advise the subdivider if a zoning change or a
General Plan Amendment is necessary or desirable.
b. Determine the relationship of existing or proposed school sites,
parks, and other public spaces in the subdivision with the adopted
Thatcher General Plan and any adopted or proposed general or
master plan of schools, parks, and recreation areas to determine what
space needs shall be reserved or set aside with any special
requirements for such site.
c. Determine relationship of the subdivision to any adopted or
proposed Town plan, development master plan, or neighborhood
plan that embraces the subject subdivision.
C. If a General Plan Amendment is required that amendment must be obtained prior to
additional processing of the application. In the event that a change of zoning is
necessary, the zoning application and subdivision may be processed concurrently,
but in no event will the preliminary plat be approved until the change of zoning is
adopted by the Council.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.3
Section 3.2 Step 2: Preliminary Plat Application. The preliminary plat stage of
land subdivision includes detailed subdivision planning, submittal, review and
approval of the preliminary plat by the Council. Application for approval of the
preliminary plat is made to the Zoning Administrator. To avoid delay in processing
the application, the subdivider should provide the Town with all information
requested herein.
A. Submittal Requirements. All preliminary plat applications shall comply with the
submittal requirements and submit the required documents as outlined herein and on
the application:
1. The information herein required as part of the preliminary plat submitted
shall be shown graphically or by note on plans, or by letter, and may
comprise several sheets showing various elements or required data. All
mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn at the same standard
engineering scale, said scale being not less than 100 feet to an inch (1"=100').
Whenever practical, scales shall be adjusted to produce an overall drawing
not exceeding 24" x 36" in size. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a
land surveyor registered to practice in the State of Arizona.
2. The subdivider (or its representative) shall file the proposed preliminary plat,
electronic copy of the preliminary plat, one (1) 8 " x 11" copy of the plat
and required supporting data (including application form and fees) with the
Zoning Administrator at least twenty-five (25) working days prior to the
regular Commission meeting at which the applicant desires to be heard.
However, further processing of the plat shall be dependent upon the
adequacy of the data presented, the completion of the technical review, and
whether responses have been received from all the required departments
demonstrating that the preliminary plat is compliance with this Ordinance.
The subdivision files will be available for examination by the developer or his
its representative in the office of the Zoning Administrator by prearranged
appointment.
3. All subdivision submittals shall provide Identification and Descriptive
Data, Existing Conditions Data, Proposed Conditions Data, and
Proposed Utility Methods information by graphic representation or note as
further outlined in the following sub-sections B-E. The submittal shall be
checked by the Town for completeness; if incomplete as to those
requirements set forth in this section, the submittal shall be rejected and the
developer notified within fifteen (15) days of the date the application was
received.
4. A Title Report showing the current owner.
5. A letter from the property owner giving authorization to process the
application for the subdivision if the owner is not the developer.
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.4 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
6. The subdivision closure calculations in both print and electronic format.
7. If the proposed preliminary plat is within an approved Traditional
Neighborhood Development (TND), copies of the approved TND master
plan and the zoning conditions shall also be submitted as supporting
documentation
8. If the developer is planning to plat the proposed development in phases it
must be so indicated on their preliminary plat when submitted for Technical
Review. If the developer later decides to phase the development, it may be
necessary to re-submit for a second review.
9. The Preliminary Drainage Report in a separate bound folder. See Article 4
for more specific details.
10. The Preliminary Geotechnical/Soils Report in a separate bound folder. See
Article 4 for more specific details.
11. The Traffic Impact Analysis, if required, in a separate bound folder. See
Article 4 for more specific details.
12. Submit a Lot Statistical Table.
13. The Preliminary Landscape and Open Space Plan for all open space,
retention area, and required landscaping for both on-site and off-site. See
Article 4 for more specific details.
14. The subdivision fencing detail, if applicable, depicting the type of fencing
being proposed; including elevations, and general locations.
15. If the subdivision is a conventional subdivision that proposes to use standard
plans then copies of the proposed elevations and floor plans should be
submitted.
16. A draft copy of the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs) for the
subdivision.
B. Identification and Descriptive Data. All preliminary plats shall contain the
following information:
1. The proposed name of the subdivision and its location by section, township
and range shall be clearly indicated; small scale vicinity map showing relative
location of the plat to arterial or collector streets; reference by dimension and
bearing to two (2) section corners and/or quarter section corners, and all
subdivision boundaries shall be clearly identified on the plat.
2. Name, address and phone number of land owner and the subdivider.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.5
3. Name, address, phone number, and seal of Registered Land Surveyor
preparing the preliminary plat and the Registered Civil Engineer preparing
the improvements.
4. North point, scale, and date of preparation, including dates of any
subsequent revisions.
5. A surveyed boundary, including distances, lengths and bearings and the total
size of the proposed subdivision.
C. Existing Conditions Data. All preliminary plats shall contain the following
information obtained from a field survey:
1. Existing and proposed contours established by field survey relating to USGS
survey datum, or other datum approved in writing by the Town Engineering,
to be shown on the same map as the proposed subdivision layout. Location
and elevation of the bench mark used should also be shown on the plat.
Acceptable contour interval; grades up to five percent (5%), two (2) feet; five
percent (5%) to ten percent (10%) grades, five (5) feet; grades over ten
percent (10%), ten (10) feet. Contours shall be shown extending a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from the external boundaries of the proposed development
so to adequately reflect the character and drainage of the land. For
developments of five (5) acres or more the developer is required to submit
black and white aerial photos of proposed area, including contiguous streets
and drainage channels.
2. Location by survey of streams, washes, canals, irrigation laterals, private
ditches, culverts, lakes or other water features, including direction of flow
and water level elevations, and location and extent of areas subject to
inundation and whether such inundation is frequent, periodic or occasional.
If any portion of the land subdivided is below the elevation of the delineated
Floodplain of such flood the floodplain shall be shown.
3. Location, widths and names of all existing or platted streets or other public
ways within or adjacent to the tract, existing permanent building, railroad
rights-of-way and other important features such as section lines, political
subdivisions, or corporation lines and school district boundaries.
4. Existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or other underground structures
within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes, grades and
locations indicated. Where sewers or water mains are not immediately
adjacent thereto give direction and distance to nearest such usable utility.
5. Name, book and page numbers of any recorded subdivision adjacent to or
having common boundaries with the proposed development.
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.6 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
6. The gross acreage of the subject parcel(s). Do not include previously
dedicated rights-of-way in this figure.
7. Boundaries and dimensions for the parcel(s) to be subdivided shall be fully
dimensioned.
D. Proposed Conditions Data. All preliminary plats shall contain the following
information:
1. Street layout, including design cross section, preliminary curve data, curve
lengths, proposed street(s) names based on existing projected alignments
wherever possible, alleys, drainage ways, pedestrian connections and
crosswalks and easements including all connections to adjoining platted or
un-platted tracts.
2. Lot layout, including minimum building lines related to all streets; lot
numbers, and approximate dimensions and area of proposed lots. A nonaccess
easement shall be provided on all residential lots adjoining an arterial
street. Each lot shall be numbered individually and the total number of lots
or dwelling units provided. Where plats will consist of a number of
units/phases, utilizing the same subdivision name, the lot numbering shall be
consecutive through the total number of lots or units.
3. Designation of all land to be dedicated, provided, or reserved for public or
semi-public uses, with use indicated.
4. If plat includes land for which multi-family, commercial or industrial use is
proposed, such areas shall be clearly designated together with the existing
zoning classification, present district boundary lines and status of any
pending zoning change.
5. Storm water disposal system, preliminary calculations, and layout of
proposed drainage system. The direction of proposed street drainage to be
indicated by arrows on the plat; the 100-year flood plain delineation and a
proposal to provide for the retention of storm water generated on the
property. Retention and detention of storm water to comply with the Town
of Thatcher Standards.
6. Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located in the
area being subdivided, provision shall be made for an adequate easement
along each side of the stream or drainage course for the purpose of widening,
deepening, realigning, improving, or protecting the stream for drainage
purposes.
7. Irrigation: If lots are proposed to be irrigated, all easements, the preliminary
location of valves, and the tentative line of the underground pipe shall be
shown.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.7
8. Fire Hydrants: The type, number and location of fire hydrants shall be
shown on the preliminary plat. Subsequently submitted domestic water
distribution plans shall show connections of fire hydrants.
9. A statement as to the type and extent of proposed improvements should
appear on the face of the plat. The subdivider shall provide Town
Engineering with information as to the method whereby streets and their
improvements are proposed to be financed
E. Proposed Utility Methods. All preliminary plats shall contain the following
information:
1. Sewage Disposal - The plat shall show the preliminary sewer layout
indicating line sizes, manholes, direction of flow, and cleanout locations. A
statement as to the type of facilities proposed shall appear on the preliminary
plat.
2. Water Supply - A statement as to the assured water supply for the
development shall appear on the preliminary plat. The preliminary layout of
the water system shall be shown, indicating fire hydrants, valves, meter
vaults, water line sizes and locations. A statement as to the type of facilities
proposed shall appear on the preliminary plat.
3. Electric and Gas Supply, and Telecommunications Service - A
statement as to the electric and gas supply, and the telephone, cable and
internet service for the development shall appear on the preliminary plat.
Any necessary easements shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
4. Refuse Service - A statement as to the garbage service for the development
shall appear on the preliminary plat.
Section 3.3 Step 3: Technical Advisory Review. .
A. The Town shall distribute copies of the plat to the following reviewing offices:
1. US Postmaster
2. City of Safford - Water Department
3. Town of Thatcher - Sanitary Sewer Department
4. Gila Valley Irrigation District
5. Thatcher School District
6. Graham County Coop - Electric Department, if appropriate
7. Town of Thatcher - Electric Department, if appropriate
8. Graham County Coop - Gas Department
9. Cable One
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.8 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
10. Century Link
11. Thatcher Fire Department
12. Graham County Flood Control District, if appropriate
13. Town of Thatcher - Engineer
14. Town of Thatcher - Recreation Dept. Staff Representative
15. Eastern Arizona College, if appropriate
16. ADOT, if appropriate
B. Before hearing by the Commission and if determined to be necessary because of the
size or complexity of the development, the preliminary plat may be scheduled for
review by the Technical Advisory Committee. The purpose of this Committee is to
resolve, with all affected parties, technical problems with the proposed subdivision
before being scheduled for hearing by the Commission. The developer and its
representatives will be invited to attend together with representatives of the
aforementioned reviewing offices.
C. Extensive revisions caused by the comments received at this meeting or by voluntary
action of the developer, may require additional review time or another meeting.
Additionally, circumstances may exist where the project may experience delay due to
the developers time line in addressing agency comments.
D. The right is reserved to disapprove any subdivision that is subject to periodic
flooding or that contains extremely poor drainage facilities. However, if the
subdivider agrees to make improvements that will in the opinion of the Town of
Thatcher make the area safe for residential occupancy, the subdivision may be
considered for approval.
Section 3.4 Step 4 Preliminary Plat Approval. The preliminary plat approval
step involves the re-submission of the preliminary plat to address all of the review
comments from the Town, agencies and utilities. Included in this step is the review
of the resubmitted plans, reports, and required studies and acceptance of the
preliminary plat. The developer shall provide the Town with all information
essential to determine the character and general acceptability of the proposed
development.
A. Preliminary Plat Re-submission.
1. The developer shall resubmit full-sized copies/sets of the preliminary plat
and 8 x 11 photo mechanical transfer (PMT) of each sheet/exhibit and
all other required or requested supporting data to the Town (see the Town of
Thatcher Submittal Requirement Checklist for the specific number of sets or
copies). Preliminary plats that correctly contain all of the information
requested or required through the development review process, as
determined by the Town, shall be scheduled for Planning and Zoning
Commission hearing. Incomplete or incorrect re-submittals could cause
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.9
delays in a preliminary plat being presented to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Scheduling of the case for Commission hearing shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator and shall be dependent upon
adequacy of data presented, completion of processing, and other legalities
that may be required if the subdivision involves rezoning and other land use
exceptions.
2. Due to the size, location or complexity of a project the developer may be
required to conduct a neighborhood meeting as a prerequisite to the
Commission hearing on the preliminary plat. The purpose of the meeting
would be to provide information to the adjacent property owners and to
provide an opportunity for questions and concerns to be expressed. The
Zoning Administrator shall determine the method of notice to the adjacent
property owners and citizens. The developer shall submit documentation of
the attendees and minutes of the meeting(s) to the Zoning Administrator.
Meeting(s), when required, shall be held within the Town of Thatcher
corporate limits.
B. Preliminary Plat Hearing(s).
1. The Commission shall consider the preliminary plat and the Zoning
Administrators staff report and recommendations.
2. The subdivider shall confer with the Commission regarding the type and
character of development that will be permitted in the subdivision and may
agree as to certain minimum deed restrictions to be placed upon the property
to prevent the construction of sub-standard buildings, control the type of
structure or the use of the lots, which, unless so controlled, would clearly
depreciate the character and value of the proposed subdivision and adjoining
property. These deed restrictions or covenants may include provision for the
creation of a Homeowner/Property Owner's Association or Board of
Trustees for the proper protection and maintenance of the subdivision in the
future, provided, however, that such deed restrictions or covenants should
not contain reversionary clauses wherein any lot shall return to the subdivider
because of a violation thereon of the terms of the restrictions or covenants.
3. If satisfied that all objectives of this Ordinance have been met, the
Commission may recommend to the Town Council approval of the
preliminary plat.
4. If the Commission finds that the plat requires revision, the plat may be held
over pending revision, resubmittal, processing, and rescheduling for hearing.
Preliminary plats needing only minor revisions may be submitted to Town
Council for consideration provided the revisions are noted both graphically
and within the narrative of the Commissions written recommendation to the
Council.
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.10 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
5. If approved by the Town Council a notation of approval shall be stamped on
two (2) copies of the plat, one (1) being returned to the subdivider and one
(1) retained in the permanent file of the Town.
6. If a plat is rejected, the new filing of a plat for the same tract, or any part
thereof, shall follow the aforementioned procedure and shall pay a new filing
fee.
C. Significance of Preliminary Approval. Preliminary plat approval constitutes
authorization for the subdivider to proceed with preparation of the final plat and the
engineering plans and specifications for public improvements. Preliminary plat
approval does not authorize the developer to cut roads or other easements, begin
site preparation and grading, or any similar such work unless authorized in writing by
the Town. Preliminary approval is based upon the following terms:
1. Subject to the Basic Approval. The basic conditions under which
preliminary approval of the preliminary plat is granted will not be
substantially changed prior to the expiration date.
2. One (1) Year Approval. Approval of the preliminary plat is valid for a
period of twelve (12) months from the date of Council action. Preliminary
approval may, upon written application to the Council by the subdivider, be
extended for an additional twelve (12) month period if in the opinion of the
Council there is no change in conditions within or adjoining the preliminary
plat that would warrant a revision in the design of the original preliminary
plat.
3. Multi-Phased or Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND)
Approval. Approval of the preliminary plat for a multi-phased development
and/or for a TND, approved by the Town of Thatcher, is valid for a period
of twelve (12) months; provided that the first phase/unit of the approved
multi-phased development and/or TND is final platted within the initial
twelve (12) month period. The remaining phases/units of the approved
preliminary plat shall remain valid in accordance with the initially approved
preliminary plat.
4. No Authority to Record. Preliminary approval, in and of itself, does not
assure final acceptance of streets for dedication nor constitute authorization
to record the plat.
Section 3.5 Step 5: Improvement Plans and Final Plat Approval. The final
plat step includes submittal, review and approval of the final plat, engineering of
public improvements, final reports, plans for all improvements required by the
Council, and recording of the plat with the County Recorder. Application for
approval of the final plat is made to the Zoning Administrator. Improvement plans
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.11
prepared by the Subdivision Engineer for roads, drainage, utilities and other related
improvements must be submitted for review with the final plat.
A. Document Submittal Requirements.
1. Utility Documentation. The Subdivision Engineer shall submit one (1)
mylar copy of the plat to the utility agency or agencies, concerned with the
installation of utilities within the subdivision. The mylar shall be submitted
to the aforementioned at least fifteen (15) working days prior to the submittal
of the final plat to the Town. The Subdivision Engineer must state that
utility service is to be underground. One (1) copy of the plat will be returned
directly to the Subdivision Engineer and the Town with any required
additions or corrections noted thereon from all utility companies and the
irrigation district having jurisdiction. A will serve letter from the respective
utility companies proposed to serve the subdivision shall be submitted. This
shall also include documentation from the City of Safford for water service
and the Town of Thatcher for sewer services.
2. Covenants, Conditions & Restrictions (Deed Restrictions). The
subdivision deed restrictions shall be submitted to the Town for review as
part of the final plat and improvement plan submittal package.
3. Title Report. The developer shall, at the time of filing the application(s) for
the final plat and improvement plans, submit a Title Report, certifying that
the developer has title, acceptable to the Town Attorney, for all of the land
being subdivided.
4. Filing Fees. The developer shall, at the time of filing the application(s) for
the final plat and improvement plans, pay the Town the final plat application
fee, improvement plan review fee, and the fee for recording the final plat and
accompanying deed restrictions. If the recording fee is submitted in the form
of a check, it must be made payable to the County Recorder.
5. Engineers Cost Estimate & Financial Assurance Document. Assurance
in the form acceptable to the Town Attorney and in the amount required by
the Town of Thatcher shall be deposited with the Zoning Administrator to
guarantee construction of the required subdivision improvements.
6. Commitment of Water Service. The developer shall provide the
documentation from the City of Safford that states the City of Safford will
serve the subdivision, in accordance with Section 45-576 of the Arizona
Revised Statutes (ARS).
7. The final plat and improvement plans prepared by the Developer and
Subdivision Engineer shall comply with the special conditions of approval,
the design standards of this Ordinance, and any zoning conditions imposed
by the Zoning Ordinance and/or the Town Council.
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.12 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
B. Final Plat Submittal.
1. The final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat and any
stipulations attached thereto by the Council. One (1) mylar print and eight
(8) paper copies of the final plat shall be filed with the Town. The mylar
copy shall bear the original signatures of the owner or owners and be duly
acknowledged. A letter of application addressed to the Council and
requesting their approval shall accompany the final plat. This letter shall
indicate the name and address of the subdivider and the party responsible for
preparing the plat.
2. The final plat shall be filed with the Town at least twenty-five (25) working
days prior to the regular meeting at which the applicant desires to be heard
by the Council. Upon receipt of the final plat submittal, the Town shall
immediately check it for completeness and if the final plat is not complete it
will be immediately returned to the subdivider. If the final plat is not in
conformance with the preliminary plat or stipulations attached thereto, it will
be returned to the subdivider for compliance. If the final plat is complete
and conforms to the approved preliminary plat and any stipulations attached
thereto, it will be transmitted to all reviewing departments and/or agencies.
3. If additional information or changes are recommended by any of the
reviewing departments and/or agencies, a revised final plat must be
submitted to the Town. Referral and scheduling of a revised final plat shall
be the same as that required for the original final plat. Plats not in
satisfactory form to be considered by the Council will not be scheduled for a
public hearing.
C. Improvement Plans & Reports. Infrastructure construction plans and reports will
be submitted concurrently with the final plat submittal for review. The Final Plat
will not be approved until the infrastructure plans are approved. Improvement plans
and reports shall be submitted in accordance with the procedures and design
standards established in Article(s) 4 and 5 of this Ordinance. Complete sets of
improvement plans shall be submitted to the Town (see the Town of Thatcher
Submittal Requirement Checklist for the specific number of sets or copies). If the
submittal is complete, the Town shall distribute sets of the plans to the appropriate
reviewing departments, agencies and utility companies who shall make known their
recommendations in writing.
D. Information Required on the Final Plat.
1. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on mylar or other approved material on a
sheet not exceeding 24" x 36" in size. Copies of the final plat shall be
reproduced in the form of blue line or black line prints on a white
background. The plat shall be drawn to an accurate scale of not less than 100
feet to an inch (1"=100'). If more than two (2) sheets are required, a key
map shall be shown on the first sheet or on a separate sheet. The Town shall
require the plat to be submitted digitized in an appropriate format.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.13
2. A title, which includes the name of the subdivision and its location by
Section, Township, Range, and County.
3. Name, address, registration number and seal of the Arizona-Registered Land
Surveyor responsible for preparing the plat.
4. Scale (written and graphic), north point and date of plat preparation.
5. Location and description of cardinal points to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referenced
6. Any excepted parcel(s) within or surrounded by the plat boundaries shall be
noted as Not a Part of This Subdivision and shall be accurately described
by bearings and distances. Proper street and alley dedications adjacent to any
proposed tracts or excepted parcels shall be provided by the subdivider by
inclusion within the plat or by separate dedication noted on the plat
7. The corners of the plat shall be located on the monument lines of abutting
streets; boundaries of the parcel(s) to be subdivided fully balanced and
closed, showing all bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey
in the field. The surveyor of record shall also provide a copy of the
computer closure, properly stamped and signed showing registration number.
All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
8. Corners of the plat should be noted and monuments found or set should be
indicated; each of two (2) separate corners of the subdivision traverse shall
be tied by course and distance to separate section corners or quarter section
corners. Portions of any contiguous property between major road
intersections shall not be excluded from within the boundaries of the
subdivision when needed or required for dedication or improvement of any
traffic, drainage, or flood control facility. Such areas may be indicated as
excluded tracts after necessary dedications are shown. The certifying Land
Surveyor shall submit subdivision boundary and lot closure and area
calculations to the Town.
9. Total subdivision gross acreage. Total number of lots and parcels, and the
size, in square feet, of each lot or parcel.
10. Names, centerlines, right-of-way lines, courses, lengths and widths of all
public streets, alleys, crosswalks and utility easements; radii, points of
tangency, curve lengths, and central angles of all curvilinear streets and alleys,
and radii of all rounded street line intersections.
11. All drainage easements shall be shown on the plat and the limit of the
Floodplain if any portion of the land being subdivided is within the
Floodplain. No structure will be allowed in the easements to obstruct
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.14 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
drainage. The rights-of-way of all major drainage ways shall be dedicated
drainage easements or right-of-way as determined by the Town Engineer.
12. The location, width and use of all public or private utility easements shall be
noted.
13. Location and dimensions of all lots shall be shown. Lot dimensions shall be
indicated on at least one side lot line and either the front or rear lot line. In
areas subject to flooding, minimum finished first floor elevations shall be
shown as may be recommended by the appropriate authority. All lots shall
be numbered consecutively throughout the plat. Exceptions, tracts,
parcels and private parks shall be so designated, lettered or named, and
clearly dimensioned; parcels which are not part of the subdivision shall be so
designated.
14. Typical Building Lines: A graphic depiction of the typical minimum
building lines shall be shown on the plat. Such building lines shall not be less
than required by any zoning ordinance or building line regulations applying
to the property.
15. The accurate outline, with dimensions and bearings for all property that is
offered for dedication for public use and of all property that may be reserved
by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in the
subdivision.
16. Name, Book and Page number of adjacent recorded subdivisions, with
location of existing adjacent lots, easements and right-of-way shown, or
notation unsubdivided where appropriate. All proposed conditions shall
be graphically differentiated from existing conditions on adjacent properties
and on excepted parcels within the plat.
17. Any proposed private deed restrictions to be imposed upon the plat or any
part or parts thereof pertaining to the intended use of the land, and to be
recognized by the Town, shall be noted on the plat.
18. All existing private easements within, on or over the plat shall be indicated,
dimensioned, and noted as to their use. The location and widths of all
easements for right-of-way provided for public services, utilities, or drainage,
and any limitations of the easements.
19. Dedications: There shall be a statement of dedication of all streets, alleys,
drainage detention/retention basins and drainage ways, pedestrian/bicycle
ways, equestrian trails and easements, and other easements for public use,
including sanitation, utility, fire and other emergency related vehicles,
executed by the person or persons holding title by deed to the lands, by
persons holding any other title of record, by persons holding title as vendees
under land contract, by spouses of said parties, lien holders and all other
parties having an interest in the property. If land dedicated is mortgaged, the
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.15
Notary Acknowledgment: State of Arizona)
On this, the day of , (year), before me the undersigned
(title) personally appeared (Name) who acknowledges
that he/she executed the foregoing instrument for the purposes
contained therein.
In witness whereof I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
Notary Public Covenants, Codes and Restrictions for (name of subdivision)
Thatcher, Arizona are recorded in (document recording number) ,
Graham County Records.
mortgagee shall also sign the plat. Dedication shall include a written location
by Section, Township and Range. Signatures must be witnessed. If the plat
contains private streets, provisions should be made for installation and
maintenance of utilities and drainageways. Easements shall be provided for
purposes indicated, including refuse collection, fire and other emergency
services.
20. Acknowledgment of Dedications: Execution of dedication, acknowledged
and certified by a notary public.
E. Required Certifications, Signatures, and Notes. Multiple notations are required
to appear on a final plat. The notations that are standard on every final plat include,
but are not limited to, the following:
1. Notary Acknowledgment Statement as follows:
2. Covenants, Conditions & Restrictions (Deed Restriction) information as
follows:
3. Certificate of County Assessor as follows:
CERTIFICATE OF COUNTY ASSESSOR: I, the undersigned as a
Deputy County Assessor, Graham County, Arizona, do herby certify
that as of this date the records of this office reflect that   as
designated on the plat is owner of the property as shown on the plat
and more particularly described as Assessors parcel number: .
County Assessor Date
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.16 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
Conveyance and Dedication:
Know all men by these presents that (owners name), as owner, have
subdivided (or re-subdivided) under the name of (name of
subdivision), (add Section, Township and Range) of the Gila and Salt
River Base and Meridian, Graham County, Arizona as shown platted
hereon, and hereby publishes this plat as and for the plat of said
(subdivision name), and hereby declares that said plat sets forth the
location and gives the dimensions of all lots, easements, tracts and
streets constituting the same, and that each lot, tract and street be
known by the number, letter and name given each respectively, and
that (owners name), as owner, hereby dedicates to the Town of
Thatcher for use as such the streets and hereby grants to the public
the drainage and public utility easements as shown on said plat. In
witness (owners name), as owner, has hereunto caused its name to be
signed and the same to be attested by the signature of (owner or
designated signatory and title).
By: Date: .
Owners Name and Title
Town Council Approval:
Approval by the Town Council of Thatcher, Arizona, this day of
, (year)
By: Attest:
Mayor Town Clerk
Town Department Approvals:
This plat was approved by the Zoning Administrator and the Town
Engineer.
By: date:
Zoning Administrator
By: date:
Town Engineer
4. Conveyance and Dedication Statements, as follows:
5. Town Approval Signature Blocks as follows:
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.17
Notes:
(benchmark information).
(basis of bearing information).
Agricultural Disclosure Statement (for spraying activities).
Surveyors Certification:
This is to certify the survey and subdivision premises described and
platted hereon were made under my direction during the month(s) of
, , (year) that the plat is correct and accurate, that the
monuments shown hereon have been located or established as
described and lot corners have been permanently set.
(Surveyors name and registration number) (stamp)
(Surveyors address)
6. Surveyors Certification as follows:
7. Easement Statements & Notes:
8. Typical Notes and List of Disclosures as follows:
9. Graham County Recorder Block (must be on first page as a 2 X 2 blank
space) as follows:
Drainage Easement:
No structure of any kind shall be constructed or any
inappropriate vegetation be planted nor be allowed to grow
within, on or over the drainage easement, which would obstruct
or divert the flow of storm water. The Town may, if it so
desires, construct and/or maintain drainage facilities on or
under the land of the easement.
This instrument was filed
and recorded in Book
of Plats Page .
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.18 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
F. Final Plat Approval.
1. Upon approval of the improvement plans, documents and final reports;
letters from all involved utility companies approving the utility installation
plans and confirming the availability of services; all required certifications
from State and County agencies; and receipt of a request for Town Council
action from the Town Engineer; the Zoning Administrator shall first place
the final plat on the Planning and Zoning Commission agenda for review and
recommendation.
2. The Town shall assemble the recommendations of the various reviewing
offices, prepare a concise summary of these recommendations and submit
said summary together with the reviewer's recommendations at the next
regular meeting of the Commission.
3. The Commissions recommendation shall be forwarded to the Mayor and
Council. If the Town Council approves or conditionally approves the plat,
the Mayor shall sign the plat and the Town Clerk shall attest the Mayor's
signature.
4. When the certificate of approval by the Town Council has been transcribed
on the plat, the Zoning Administrator shall retain the recording copies until
the Town Engineer certifies that the subdivision has been staked; the
improvement plans and final reports have been approved; a computer
closure of the plat has been received; recording fees submitted; that the
subdivision improvement construction assurances are in the form and
amount to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and the Town Attorney,
along with the Engineers estimated cost of said improvements has been
received; and that any drainage or other restrictive covenants have been
signed, notarized and received from the developer.
5. The final plat and the deed restrictions will be transmitted by the Zoning
Administrator to the County Recorder's Office for recording.
6. Where the subdivision contains a park, school or other public area that is
shown upon the Town General Plan or as recommended by the Commission
such area shall be reserved for acquisition by the proper public agency within
a period of one (1) year after recording the final subdivision plats
7. Approval of the final plat is valid for a period of one (1) year from the date
of Town Council approval. If the developer fails to provide the required
material or perform the necessary work, as indicated in Section 3.5 (F)(4),
within this one (1) year period, the final plat approval by council shall
become null and void; unless a time extension has been approved by the
Town Council. Any further action on said plat, after the expiration of the
approval, shall require a complete re-submittal of the plat.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.19
Section 3.6 Step 6: Recordation of Final Plat. .
A. Upon receipt of the required material, documents, and fees, and performance of the
necessary work as listed in Section 3.5, the Town shall then cause the final plat to be
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Graham County.
B. An electronic copy of the recorded plat shall be provided to the Town of Thatcher
by the project Engineer.
Section 3.7 Replat.
A. Any division of a lot in a recorded subdivision, or any change in lot lines in a
recorded subdivision, shall be processed in accordance with Section 3.5 of these
regulations, after a pre-application meeting with Town staff as provided in Step 1.
B. Any replat involving dedication of land for a public street shall comply with all
procedures set forth in these requirements unless, at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator after a Pre-application Meeting, Step 2, the Preliminary Plat Step, is
waived.
C. If abandonment of a street, alley or public utility easement or other recorded
easement in a previously recorded subdivision is necessary, either a replat of that area
or a Certificate of Correction, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be
processed concurrently with the abandonment and recorded immediately subsequent
to the recordation of the abandonment.
Section 3.8 Abandonment of Recorded Subdivision
A. Pursuant to provisions of Title 28, Chapter 14, Article 1, Subsections 28 - 1901
through 28 - 1908, ARS, the abandonment of all or part of a recorded subdivision
may be initiated by written petition to the Council, said petition to be signed by all
owners of real property in said subdivision requesting abandonment of all streets,
alleys and easements within said subdivision and giving the legal description and
recording information thereof.
B. Applications for abandonment of a recorded subdivision are filed with the Zoning
Administrator and referred for recommendation to the appropriate Town Staff and
utility companies concerned. After approval of the abandonment of the streets,
alleys and easements by the Council and upon recordation of the abandonment
Resolution and a subsequent Town road map in the Town Clerk's Office, the
subdivision is removed from official maps.
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.20 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
Section 3.9 Condominium Developments
A. The application requirements, processing and approval regulations contained within
this Ordinance shall apply to all condominium developments.
B. All condominium subdivisions shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance
and the Town of Thatcher Zoning Ordinance, and the location of building shown on the
plat and the manner in which the airspace is to be divided in conveying the
condominium shall be clearly defined and shall not violate any provision of this
Ordinance.
C. In order for the condominium subdivision application to be considered complete,
the developer shall provide to the Town any plans, specifications, and/or analysis
needed to show that the proposed condominium subdivision is in compliance with
this Ordinance and the Town of Thatcher Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to
grading plans, site plans, floor plans, elevations, and improvement plans.
Section 3.10 Minor Land Divisions and Lot Splits
A. The provisions in this section shall apply to any minor land division and/or
lot split of improved or unimproved property, including a lot, parcel, tract,
or combination thereof, for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether
immediate or future, if one of the following conditions exists:
1. The division of land whose area is two and one-half (2) acres or less
and is being divided into two (2) or three (3) tracts or parcels of land
for the purpose of sale, lease or conveyance.
2. The area of the property to be divided is greater than two and one-half
(2) acres and requires the creation of a public or private street or
easement to provide legal access to one (1) or more additional lots.
3. Any lot or parcel of land, not a part of a recorded subdivision plat,
that has a tax parcel established by the county and is being divided into
two (2) or three (3) lots.
4. The division of land into more than two (2) parts, and when the
boundaries of such property have been fixed by a recorded plat.
B. A minor land division and/or lot split does not include the adjustment of a
property line, where land taken from one (1) lot is added to an adjacent lot,
provided the proposed adjustment does not create a substandard lot.
Administrative review by the Town is required. A certificate of correction,
from an AZ Registered Land Surveyor, shall be required if the property line
adjustment is for lots within a recorded subdivision plat.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.21
C. The City may approve minor land divisions and lot splits administratively.
Prior to recording any deeds related to a minor land division and/or lot split
with the Graham County Recorders office, a property owner shall submit to
the Zoning Administrator an application containing the following
information.
1. A completed application form.
2. A drawing or sketch showing the proposed land split. The drawing or sketch
should be fully dimensioned and prepared at a scale that maintains legibility.
The drawing or sketch shall show the following information.
a. The boundaries of the original parcel or lot prior to the land split.
b. The proposed lots.
c. The rights-of-way adjacent to or within the property, including streets
and easements.
d. The locations and dimensions of any existing structures.
e. The setbacks of existing buildings from existing and proposed
property lines.
f. The land area of each proposed lot in square feet or acreage.
g. Access to all proposed lots.
h. Whether there is any shared use of facilities between properties.
3. Documentation of the land division history of the parcel. Documentation
may consist of Assessors maps and records, deeds, title history search, or
any other information that would credibly show the number of land divisions
that have occurred from the original parcel over the last twenty (20) years or
from the date of annexation if the annexation occurred within the last twenty
(20) years.
4. If applicable, a copy of any easement agreement or other legal document that
permits shared facilities.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and make a
determination on the following.
1. Whether the proposed minor land division and/or lot split constitutes a
subdivision as defined in the Glossary of this Ordinance, requiring
compliance with platting requirements of this Ordinance.
2. If the proposed minor land division and/or lot split does not constitute a
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.22 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
subdivision, whether:
a. The lots resulting from the proposed minor land division and/or lot
split conform to the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning
classification of the property.
b. Access to the proposed lots is in compliance with this Ordinance.
c. The location of any existing building on any lot resulting from the
proposed minor land division and/or lot split complies with building
setbacks for the applicable zone.
E. If dedicated and/or public improvements are required for minor land
divisions and/or lot splits, the developer shall be responsible for the
preparation of a complete set of improvement plans, prepared by an Arizona
registered civil engineer, satisfactory to the Town Engineer for the
construction of the required improvements. The plans shall be prepared in
conjunction with the minor land division and/or lot split map and the
requirements outlined in Article 5 of this Ordinance
F. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the review
decision and findings within ten (10) working days after the minor land
division and/or lot split application is filed.
1. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed minor land
division and/or lot split constitutes a subdivision, compliance with this
Article shall be required for the proposed minor land division and/or lot
split.
2. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed minor land
division and/or lot split complies with minimum requirements of this Article,
a letter of approval shall be issued to the applicant together with an approved
copy of the land split drawing.
3. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed minor land
division and/or lot split does not comply with minimum requirements for
this Article, a letter of denial shall be issued.
4. If the Zoning Administrator does not issue a decision within the time
required by this Section, the minor land division and/or lot split shall be
deemed not to constitute a subdivision requiring approval of a subdivision
plat.
5. Compliance with Town ordinances and regulations not reviewed as part of
the minor land division and/or lot split review process will be determined at
the time of application for building permits when more detailed information
is provided on the proposed development.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements Page 3.23
G. No building permit or zoning compliance certificate shall be issued for development
on any parcel that does not comply with the minor land division and/or lot split
regulations of this Article.
H. The minor land division and/or lot split map shall not be recorded, nor shall any
improvement work commence until the Town Engineer has approved the
improvement plans.
I. No minor land division and/or lot split, which creates a substandard or
nonconforming lot or structure, shall be approved except by council action.
J. If any improvements are required for the minor land division and/or lot split
pursuant to regulations contained herein, no building permit for any lot created will
be issued until such improvements are completed and the work accepted by the
Town Engineer unless the developer provides construction assurance in a form
acceptable to the Town Attorney.
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.24 Article 3: Platting Procedures and Requirements
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.1
CHAPTER 152, ARTICLE 4: Design Standards
Section 4.0 Purpose and Intent.
A. The purpose of this Article of the Subdivision Ordinance is to provide the
development community and the citizens of Thatcher with a minimum set of
standards to guide the physical development and the visual quality of the
subdivisions being developed throughout the community.
B. The intent is to create functional developments, minimize adverse impacts on the
community, and to insure that future subdivisions will conform to the communitys
expectations and implement the General Plan. All subdivision plats shall comply
with the design standards in this Article which are designed to result in a wellplanned
community without adding unnecessarily to development costs yet
encourage new development that is dynamic, creative and imaginative.
Section 4.1 General Requirements.
A. Consideration should be given in the design and development of all Subdivisions to
conserve natural features such as trees, watercourses, historical and archaeological
sites and similar community assets which add value and beauty to the community.
B. Every subdivision shall conform to the goals, objectives and policies of the General
Plan. All improvements proposed shall conform to this Subdivision Ordinance, the
Zoning Ordinance, and the Arizona Revised Statutes and shall be acceptable to the
Town Engineer.
C. All public improvements shown on the final plat and the improvement plans, and
any additional improvements that may be required by the Town Council as a
condition for approval of the final plat, shall be the responsibility of the developer;
unless otherwise approved by the Town Council.
D. Where the area proposed for development contains all or part of a park, a school,
flood control facility, or other public site, as shown on the General Plan or as
recommended by the Commission or Town Council, such site shall either be
dedicated to the public or reserved for acquisition by the public or appropriate
agency or land trust within a specified period of time as prescribed in A.R.S. 9-463.01
(D) and (E).
E. Land which is subject to periodic flooding, land which cannot be properly drained,
land which has unstable soils or slopes, or land which is otherwise unsuitable for
residential, commercial, or industrial uses shall not be subdivided. The Town
Council may approve the subdivision of such land upon receipt of evidence,
including subdivision construction assurances satisfactory to the Town Engineer and
Town Attorney, that the construction of specific improvements will render the land
suitable. The construction of subdivision improvements shall not commence until
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.2 Article 4: Design Standards
after final plat and improvement plan approval, and financial assurances have been
secured to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, Zoning Administrator, and Town
Attorney.
F. Any contiguous property owned by the subdivider shall not be excluded from the
boundaries of a Subdivision when needed or required for traffic, drainage or flood
control facility for the Subdivision.
G. If the Subdivision is traversed by or is adjacent to streams or other bodies of water,
the Subdivider shall provide a right-of-way for storm drainage conforming
substantially with the line of the natural watercourse or provide an acceptable
realignment of the watercourse.
H. When the land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such
parcels shall be arranged to allow for future streets and Subdivisions that may
develop.
Section 4.2 Site Design Standards.
A. Residential. Regardless of the density of the individual developments, single family
residential subdivisions and condominium or multi-family subdivisions shall be
properly designed and shall be required to provide open space as well as landscaping.
Depending upon site and location factors the subdivision may also be required to
provide physical connections to adjacent neighborhoods and to the greater
community.
B. Commercial and Industrial. Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be required
to provide open space as well as landscaping. Further, the subdivisions shall be
designed in a manner so that the surrounding land uses are considered; sufficient
access is provided; and adverse impacts buffered. In addition, the following
standards shall apply to commercial and industrial subdivisions:
1. Commercial and industrial lots/developments that back up to an existing or
designated residential land use shall be designed with extra depth to
accommodate a landscaped buffer strip adjacent to the common property
line to mitigate any adverse effects to the residential neighborhood from a
permitted commercial or industrial use.
2. Street right-of-way and pavement design shall be adequate to accommodate
the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated by the
development.
C. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND): A TND, as described in Article 12
of the Thatcher Zoning Ordinance, shall establish the minimum lot area and lot
width, the associated development standards, mix of land uses, density, open space,
amenities, and landscaping in effect for the various subdivision(s), provided that the
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.3
TND is approved by the Town Council prior to or in conjunction with, the
preliminary plat approval for the subdivision.
Section 4.3 Open Space and Landscape Standards.
A. General Requirements.
1. Required open space for all types of subdivisions shall be as prescribed in the
Thatcher Zoning Ordinance.
2. Open space intended to fulfill the open space requirements shall be
calculated upon the net acres of the subdivision whether residential,
commercial, or industrial.
a. Net acres for a residential project are defined as: total acres exclusive
of the area required for arterial or collector street right-of-way
dedications, reserved school sites, and all commercial and/or
industrial acreage.
b. Net acres for nonresidential projects are defined as: total acres
exclusive of the area required for arterial or collector street right-ofway
dedications.
3. Open space area shall mean any area of land that can be enjoyed by people.
Any of the following may be calculated as part of the required open space:
a. Landscaped or hardscaped plazas,
b. Any parking area landscaping that exceeds that which is required by
the Zoning Ordinance,
c. Fountains, and sitting areas all meant to provide an open park like
atmosphere,
d. Playgrounds,
e. Golf courses,
f. Bicycle trails (but not bike lanes within the public right-of-way),
g. Pedestrian trails (but not residential sidewalks integrated with the
curb),
h. Landscape buffers,
i. Landscaped medians, and
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.4 Article 4: Design Standards
j. Landscape strips associated with curb separated sidewalks.
4. Open space does not include retention and/or detention basins that are
concrete lined or non-landscaped, vacant lots, or undeveloped lots.
5. Improvement of the open space, landscaping, and amenities shall be the
responsibility of the developer and shall be part of the subdivision
improvements. An improvement district shall be established by the
developer to provide for the long-term maintenance responsibilities of these
areas; unless otherwise accepted by the Town into the Town park system for
such maintenance responsibilities.
B. Specific Open Space Design Standards.
1. The open space areas should be designed in such a manner as to be easily
accessible to all lots. Accessible means that there is no more than 1/6 of a
mile or 880 feet of pedestrian travel between any one lot and an entrance
area allowing people and bikes to enter into the open space area or view the
open space area.
2. Residential subdivision retention or detention basins, that are required in
accordance with the subdivision drainage report, shall qualify as open space
only if they are landscaped, multi-tiered and designed to be used as an active
multi-use area. Retention basins with a bottom area in excess of one-half
(1/2) acre, shall be designed and turfed and encouraged to be equipped to
accommodate a play/sport field. All play structures and restrooms within
the basin shall be located at least one-half () foot above the 100-year storm
level. All basins to be accepted by the Town for maintenance shall be
constructed with a minimum of four to one (4:1) side slopes.
3. Commercial and industrial subdivision retention or detention basins, that are
required in accordance with the subdivision drainage report, shall qualify as
open space only if they are landscaped. Terracing, berming and contouring
may be required to naturalize and enhance the aesthetics of the basin. Basin
slopes shall not exceed a three to one (3:1) slope.
4. Existing watercourses and drainage ways shall qualify as open space if they
are incorporated into the design of the subdivision in their historic unaltered
location, given a natural character (not ditch-like in design), constructed
with/of natural materials, and incorporated into the larger open space design
(see Figure No. 1).
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.5
5. Existing canal right-of-way, if within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision,
may be calculated as open space if improved with a multi-use pathway, for
bicycles, pedestrians, equestrians, and landscaping as part of the subdivision
improvements (see Figure No.2). At least one-side of the canal should be
designed to provide an access road for cleaning and dredging of the canal
and depositing of the dredged material.
6. If the developer chooses to provide a median and/or a curb separated
sidewalk with a tree-lined street cross section as the collector and/or local
street cross section (see Figure 5A, 5B and 6A respectively), the landscaped
Figure No. 1
Natural Character Drainage Way
Figure No. 2
Flood Control Canal/Irrigation Canal Trail
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.6 Article 4: Design Standards
median and boulevard strip area, within the public right-of-way may be
calculated as part of the required open space.
7. The location of neighborhood parks, mini parks, tot lots and similar
recreation areas should wherever possible be internalized to the
neighborhood and not adjacent to an arterial street.
C. Specific Landscape Standards.
1. Landscaping, as a major element of the streetscape and open space, shall be
required as part of any subdivision development. All developments shall
provide landscaping within, but not limited to, the required open space areas,
retention or detention basins, the community trail system if applicable, and
the public right-of-ways as required in Article 17 of the Thatcher Zoning
Ordinance. Installation of the required landscaping shall be in accordance
with the approved landscape plan for the development.
2. To insure plant materials are installed and properly maintained, a Preliminary
Landscape and Open Space Plan will be required of all developments as part
of the Preliminary Plat submittal package and a Final Landscape and Open
Space Plan (including irrigation) as part of the Improvement Plan submittal
package (see Article 5 for details). This plan shall show all required plant
material locations and include a plant list/palette, indicating species, size,
quantity, and spacing specifications.
3. Streetscape shall be required along the arterial and collector streets that are
within or adjacent to a subdivision as part of the required improvements for
that subdivision. Landscaping should be a major element of the streetscape.
4. Landscaping on parcels must gradually taper to meet the top of the sidewalk
fronting the street at all points. Developers shall install curbing or retaining
walls on the outside of the sidewalk for parcels graded such that landscaping
lies above the sidewalk or where landscaping slopes more than 10% within 8
ft. of the sidewalk.
D. Walls and Fences.
1. In order to enhance the appearance of the community, neighborhoods rather
than individual subdivisions are desired. Walled-in separated subdivisions do
not create neighborhoods by themselves and are strongly discouraged.
External orientation of the subdivision to the surrounding arterial, collector
and local streets as well as adjacent residential development is strongly
encouraged and should limit the need for solid view-obscuring perimeter
walls.
2. Where a commercial or industrial development share a common property
line with a residentially zoned property (including agricultural lands) or the
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.7
community open space areas, a solid perimeter wall shall not enclose the
developments required open space area.
3. Any solid view-obscuring perimeter wall along the boundary of the
subdivision shall be specifically indicated on the final plat and approved by
the Town Council.
Section 4.4 Access Requirements.
A. Every subdivision (residential, commercial and industrial) shall have at least two (2)
separate and distinct access points both of which shall provide fully-improved and
accepted access from public, or approved private streets, developed to Town of
Thatcher street standards.
B. Every lot shall have frontage onto a fully-improved, publicly-dedicated and accepted
right-of-way (street or alleyway) that meets all Town of Thatcher street standards.
Private streets that meet all Town of Thatcher street standards may provide frontage
to lots if the development is approved by the Town Council for private streets.
Section 4.5 Street Location and Arrangement.
A. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and orderly
movement of traffic and pedestrians; meet the needs of present and future
population served; have a simple and logical pattern; respect natural features and
topography, and; present an attractive streetscape.
B. In residential subdivisions, the road system shall be designed to serve the needs of
the greater neighborhood. Through vehicular traffic should be discouraged by
means of traffic calming methods, as defined by the Institute of Traffic Engineers
(I.T.E.).
C. There shall be no development of roadways built to arterial or major collector
standards unless and until that roadway and roadway alignment is shown in the
Circulation Element of the Thatcher General Plan as a proposed roadway; unless an
amendment to the General Plan is approved.
D. Whenever a proposed subdivision embraces any part of an arterial or collector street
designated in the General Plan, such street shall be platted in conformity thereto.
Street layout shall provide for the continuation of such arterial and collector streets
as the General Plan or Town Engineer may designate
E. Certain proposed streets, as designated by the Town, shall be extended to the
subdivision boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unsubdivided
lands.
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.8 Article 4: Design Standards
F. Half width streets may be approved in a Subdivision where there is adjacent property
that may be developed in the future which can provide the other half width to the
street. The width of a half width street shall not be less than thirty (30) feet. A full
width street shall be provided where it would be impractical for half width streets. A
Subdivision that adjoins existing streets shall dedicate additional rights-of-way to
meet the dimensional requirements established by the Town and this Ordinance.
G. Local streets are encouraged to be designed with curb-separated sidewalks to meet
the safety needs of the pedestrian and to enhance the streetscape. The landscaped
boulevard strip created with this curb-separated sidewalk may be calculated as
open space (see Section 4.3B.6. above for details).
H. Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to produce desirable
lots of maximum utility, streets of reasonable gradient, and the facilitation of
adequate drainage.
I. Where private streets are approved, such streets shall be constructed to Town
specifications and shall be placed into specific street tracts of land. Statements
shall be contained on the plat and in the Deed Restrictions that those streets are
declared private subject to an easement authorizing use by emergency and public
service vehicles and utilities, and remain the permanent responsibility of that
developments improvement district. If at any time the streets are dedicated to, and
accepted by the Town, the streets must first be improved by the developer to the
current standards specified by the Town at the time of dedication.
Section 4.6 Street Design Standards.
A. Design of Streets. The street construction shall be fully paved streets with curbs,
gutters and sidewalks. The specific design of streets shall conform to the standards
established by this Ordinance; see Figure 3 through Figure 8 for specifics. The use
of the alternative cross sections for collector and local residential streets (Figure 5A,
5B and 6A respectively) is encouraged by the Town. The landscaped boulevard strip
and center median created by these alternative cross sections may be calculated as
open space (per Sec. 4.3B 6). When using these alternative cross sections the Town
may permit flexibility to vary the number of drive lanes, include bicycle lanes, onstreet
parking, wider center medians, and wider shared-use paths in lieu of sidewalks.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.9
Figure No. 3 - Principal Arterial (U.S. Hwy 70)
Figure No. 4 - Minor Arterial
Figure No. 5 - Collector Street
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.10 Article 4: Design Standards
Figure No. 5A - Collector Street (Alternative Cross Section)
Figure No. 5B- Collector Street (Alternative Cross Setion)
Figure No. 6 - Local Street (Standard Residential Cross Section)
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.11
Figure No. 6A- Local Street (Alternative Residential Cross Section)
Figure No. 7 - Local Street (Standard Commercial and Industrial)
Figure No. 8 - Cul-de-Sac Street
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.12 Article 4: Design Standards
B. Private Streets. Private streets shall conform to above stated design standards
unless otherwise approved by the Town Council. Private streets shall be placed
within their own parcel or tract of land. Where site conditions necessitate unique
design solutions, modifications may be approved by the Town Council.
C. Cul-de-Sac Streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall be constructed with a minimum
unobstructed turn-around radius of fifty (50) feet which shall be free from parked
vehicles. The Town Engineer may recommend an equally convenient form of
turning and backing areas where extreme conditions justify. The maximum length of
Cul-de-sac streets shall be seven hundred fifty (750) feet or 20 homes, whichever is
more restrictive, as measured from the curb line of the intersection street to the curb
line at the end of the of the cul-de-sac, along the street centerline. An exception may
be made where topography justifies but shall not be made merely because the tract
has restrictive boundary dimensions, wherein provision should be made for
extension of street pattern to the adjoining unplatted parcel and a temporary
turnaround installed.
D. Dead-end Streets. Dead-end streets will not be approved except in locations
recommended by the Zoning Administrator as necessary to future development of
adjacent lands; with an acceptable all-weather access emergency turn around.
E. Private Access and Driveways. Access from private property to any dedicated
street shall be constructed in accordance with permits issued by the Town. Width of
driveway at the property line shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and a maximum
of thirty (30) feet. The width will depend on the access to be served (i.e., residential
or commercial) and approved by the Town.
F. Bicycle Lanes. Bicycle lanes are designated on-street facilities that shall be
provided on arterial and collector streets. Within all new developments a bike lane
no larger or smaller than six and one-half (6-6) feet, as measured from back of
curb, shall be constructed on main collector roads throughout the development and
arterial and major collector streets adjacent to the development. All bike lanes shall
be marked with a white stripe no wider than five (5) inches and clearly marked
bicycles only. Under some circumstances the Town Engineer may require a
different section, such as a shared-use path on the shoulder in lieu of the bicycle
lane, if necessary to accommodate on-street parking.
G. Alleys. Alleys are not required but may be permitted in commercial and industrial
subdivisions or may be desired in residential developments to facilitate detached rear
loading garages. Where needed, and approved by Town Council, they shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) and a maximum of thirty (30) feet in width for commercial
and industrial and a minimum of sixteen (16) and a maximum of twenty (20) foot in
width for residential. Dead-end and half alleys shall be prohibited.
H. Sidewalks. Sidewalks are required and shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete. The minimum width for sidewalks in residential areas shall be four (4) feet.
The Town may require wider sidewalks in commercial areas, by schools or similar
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.13
areas. The Town encourages curb separated sidewalks (see Sec.4.3 B.6 open space
incentive).
I. Street Intersections.
1. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible and no
intersection shall be less than sixty degrees (60). Exceptions to these
requirements will be considered by the Town Engineer based on terrain and
other conditions.
2. Street jogs with centerline offsets less than 135 feet shall be prohibited
except when approved by the Town Engineer. Under special circumstances
where local streets intersect collector or arterial streets, the Town Engineer
may require minimum centerline offsets of 400 feet.
3. Local streets intersecting a collector street or arterial street shall have a
tangent section of centerline at least 150 feet in length measured from the
right of way line of the major street, except that no such tangent is required
when local street curve has a centerline radius greater than 400 feet with the
center located on the major street right-of-way line. Where topographic
conditions make necessary other treatment to secure the best overall design,
these standards may be varied by the Town Council upon the
recommendation of the Town Engineer.
4. Street intersections with more than four legs and y-type intersections where
legs meet at acute angles shall be prohibited unless specifically approved by
the Town Engineer.
5. Property line radii at street intersections shall not be less than thirty (30) feet
for all streets, and when the angle of the street intersection is less than
seventy-five (75) degrees, the Town Engineer may require a greater curb
radius.
6. Minimum intersection setbacks and spacing between driveways varies with
street classification as follows:
Table No. 1  Driveway Setbacks from Intersections
Street Classification Spacing Requirement (feet)
Principal Arterial 250
Minor Arterial 200
Collector 100
Local 30
J. Street Grades. The minimum street grade shall not be less than two-tenths of one
percent (0.2%). The maximum street grade shall not exceed a six (6%) percent
grade. Street grades between six (6%) percent and ten (10%) percent may be
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.14 Article 4: Design Standards
approved only for such distances as topographical conditions make lesser grades
impractical.
K. Surface Treatment. The traveled way of all streets shall be surfaced with asphalt
concrete. The placing of asphalt concrete shall be accomplished under generally
accepted construction techniques provided in Section 321 of the MAG Standard
Specifications.
L. Structural Section.
1. The thickness of base and surface treatment for all streets shall be based on
geotechnical/soils report and pavement thickness design provided by the
developer. In no case will the base be less than eight (8) inches of aggregate
base course and the surface treatment less than three (3) inches compacted
thickness of hot mix asphalt.
2. All streets shall be constructed with a minimum crown of two (2) percent
from the centerline to the gutter. Warping of the cross-slope is allowed at
intersections, driveways and other similar areas. However, transitions such as
at driveway turnouts will be limited to a six (6) percent maximum change.
3. Length of vertical curves (measured in feet) will be a minimum of three times
the design speed (measured in mph). Grade breaks may be used if the total
change is less than 0.2% for any design speed. Longer curves may be
required for larger grade differences at higher speeds.
4. The maximum degree of curvature for a horizontal curve shall be 8o00'. The
Town may require milder curves or super elevation. Super elevation will vary
with design speed but shall not exceed a 0.06 ft. per ft. transition rate.
5. Curb and drop inlets will be constructed in a manner safe for bicycles and
pedestrians.
M. Roadway Design. The minimum right-of-way requirements and roadway design
standards are summarized in the following Table No. 2 and Table No. 3. Pavement
width includes curbs. The Town may require the construction of bicycle paths in
lieu of or in addition to on-street bicycle lanes requiring wider sections.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.15
Table No. 2 - Right-of-Way Dimensions
Table No. 3 - Minimum Road Design Standards
Section 4.7 Block Planning.
A. A block shall not be more than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in
length unless the Council considers it necessary to increase it to secure efficient use
of land.
1. Blocks which are over six hundred sixty (660) feet in length may be required
to have crosswalks.
2. Longer blocks may be provided when fronting on major streets in order to
reduce the number of intersections.
Street Classifications Right-of-Way Width Pavement Width
Principal Arterial (Figure 3) 100 ft. 70 ft.
Minor Arterial (Figure 4) 84 ft. 56 ft.
Collector (Figure 5) 60 ft. 44 ft.
Local Street (Figure 6) 50 ft. 42 ft.
Local Street (Figure 6A) 60 ft. 42 ft.
Local Street (Figure 7) 60 ft. 42 ft.
Cul-de-sac (Figure 8) 54 ft. 50 radius
Note: Pavement width measured back-of-curb to back-of-curb.
Design Speed (mph) 50 45 40 35 30 25
Min. Radius of Horizontal
Curves w/o Superelevations (ft)
1,800(2) 1,200(2) 800 500 300 200
Min. Length of Tangent between
Reverse Curves (ft)
300(1) 250(1) 225(1) 200(1) 150(1) 100(1)
Min. Length of Tangent between
Curves - Same Direction (ft)
1,000 800 600 500 400 300
Min. Vertical Curve (ft) 150(3) 140(3) 120(3) 110(3) 90(3) 75(3)
Passing Sight Distance (ft)
(per AASHTO)
1,800 1,500 1,200 1,000 800 600
Right Angle Intersection Sight
Distance (ft) (per AASHTO)
800 600 300 150 150 100
Min. Tangent Length
Approaching Intersections (ft)
300 250 200 175 150 100
Key:
(1) Equals the superelevation runoff length + tangent runout length.
(2) Superelevation required at design speed 45mph and above.
(3) Equals minimum length. May be greater based on AASHTO calculation.
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.16 Article 4: Design Standards
B. A block shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth. The
Council may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth if` conditions justify it.
Section 4.8 Lot Planning.
A. Single-family residential lots shall not have a depth to width ratio greater than three
to one (3:1) for the usable area, except those lots located on a knuckle or end of a
cul-de-sac street may have a four to one (4:1) ratio. Special lot designs that do not
meet this requirement may be permitted through the TND process on a case-by-case
basis.
B. Each lot shall be accessible to the street which it fronts; including grading, when
necessary, to ensure access. All proposed lots must be buildable without the need of
a variance, waiver or further discretionary approvals from the Town. Prior to final
plat approval the Town may require additional documentation, including but not
limited to engineered concept plans, for lots with questionable development ability.
The area of a lot shall be exclusive of any area designated for streets or easements.
C. Corner lots shall generally be designed larger to accommodate the increased setback
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
D. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines insofar as practical, except where other treatment may be justified
in the opinion of the Town Engineer.
E. Each irregular shaped lot shall have a minimum width at the front and rear setback
lines of forty (40) feet. No lot shall be less than one hundred (100) feet in depth;
except that smaller lots may be permitted through the TND process on a case-bycase
basis.
F. Residential lots extending through the block and having frontage on two parallel
streets which are both local streets or one of which is a local street and the other is a
collector street shall not be permitted; except where justified in the opinion of the
Town Engineer.
G. Lots shall be laid out in a manner to provide positive drainage away from all
buildings.
Section 4.9 Easement Planning.
A. If the utilities are to be located in the street right-of-way, then public utility
easements shall be eight (8) feet along each side of the street and around a cul-de-sac,
provided that said street right-of-way meets Town standards. The Town may
stipulate grading and surface preparation of the easements.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.17
B. Easements will be required for all private utilities outside of the street right-of-way
and shall be placed along lot lines as required by the utility companies.
C. Where a stream, wash or important surface drainage course abuts or crosses a
development, dedication of a drainage easement of a width sufficient to permit
widening, deepening, relocating, or protecting and maintaining said water course
shall be required. All drainage easement widths shall be approved by the Town
Engineer and the Graham County Flood Control District based upon the
hydrological analysis of a 100 year frequency storm.
D. All retention and detention areas shall be in tracts with drainage easements.
E. Land within a drainageway or within an easement for major power transmission
(tower) lines or pipelines shall not be considered a part of the useable lot area.
Section 4.10 Street Naming.
A. The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of the names of all streets within the
corporate limits of the Town of Thatcher. Street names shall comply with the
overall Town of Thatcher street naming system.
B. Street names should be consistent with the natural alignment and extension of
existing named streets.
C. The developer shall propose the street names at the preliminary plat submittal stage
and the names shall be recommended by the Commission and approved by Council.
D. Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections and be in place by the time
the street pavement is ready for use. Specifications for design, construction,
location, and installation shall conform to Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (M.U.T.C.D.) standards.
Section 4.11 Drainage.
A. Proper and adequate provisions shall be made for disposal of storm water; this shall
apply equally to grading of private properties and to public streets. Existing major
water courses shall be maintained as drainage ways. Drainage shall meet the
requirements of the Drainage Policy of the Town of Thatcher. Streets may be
used for drainage conveyance only.
B. Post development flows cannot exceed pre-development flows in peak runoff,
volume, or velocity and may not concentrate sheet flows without downstream offsite
control.
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.18 Article 4: Design Standards
C. Drywells are discouraged. If drywells are necessary they shall be spaced as far a part
as possible and only fifty (50%) percent of the percolation capacity can be used in
calculating the required number of drywells to be utilized. In addition a maintenance
plan shall be prepared that provides for routine inspection and maintenance to the
approval of the Town Engineer. The Town will not accept sumps for maintenance.
D. All retention basins shall be designed to drain within thirty-six (36) hours of a major
storm event.
E. Minimum side slope of a drainage retention or detention basin shall be 4:1 if basin is
calculated as open space (see Sec 4.3 B). An acceptable method of transporting
water from the street into the basin shall be provided so as to preserve the integrity
of the basin walls and floor.
F. Unless diversion of water is required to conform to a comprehensive drainage plan
for a drainage district, off-site runoff shall be received and discharged at the locations
which existed prior to development and as nearly as possible in the same manner
which existed prior to development. Should diversion be required, sufficient work
shall be done upstream and/or downstream to provide all affected properties at least
the same level of flood protection that existed prior to the diversion. The
developers Engineer shall determine any changes in backwater that will be caused by
the proposed developments and any effects the backwater might cause.
Section 4.12 Sanitary Sewage Disposal.
A. All subdivisions within the Town of Thatchers sewer service area shall install
sewer collection lines and service lines to each lot within the subdivision, located
in the street or within a separate sewer easement, prior to paving the street. All
dwelling units shall be required to connect to the Towns sewer collection
system. If there is no sewer main available, to the subdivision boundary, to serve
the subdivision at the time of building permit issuance, an alternative sewage
disposal system may be installed in addition to the sewer collection and service
line.
B. All subdivisions not in the Towns sewer service area shall submit a sewer service
plan acceptable to the Towns Engineer, Graham County Health Department,
and the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ).
C. Septic tanks shall be approved by Graham County Health Department and
A.D.E.Q.
D. Public sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with plans, profiles and
specifications approved by the Town Engineer, A.D.E.Q., and Graham County
Health Department. The installation shall be accomplished under generally
accepted construction techniques in accordance with the applicable Town of
Thatcher and A.D.E.Q. Standards.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.19
E. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall
be placed to the right-of-way line or the public utility easement whichever is
greater.
F. Sanitary sewer lines shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide
service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.
Section 4.13 Water System.
A. Each lot or building unit shall be supplied with potable water in sufficient volume
and pressure for domestic use and fire protection purposes. Design and
construction of any and all facilities relating to the supply, storage, transmission,
treatment and distribution of potable water within or outside of any subdivision shall
be accomplished under generally accepted construction techniques in accordance
with the applicable Town of Thatcher Standard and meet with the written approval
of the Town Engineer, Thatcher Fire Department and A.D.E.Q.
B. All design and construction must meet all applicable Town and A.D.E.Q.
specifications and requirements in force at the time of plan review and approval. If
it is necessary for the Town to apply specifications or requirements not in force at
the time of plan review, but necessary to achieve the orderly and proper
development of any portion of the public water system, the Town reserves the right
to enforce such specifications and requirements to insure and protect the public
welfare.
C. The developer of a subdivision may be required by the Town of Thatcher to supply
to the public water system an amount of new water supply and/or storage facilities
to offset the demand on the existing or planned water system imposed by owners of
property or building units within the subdivision.
D. Lots with water wells require a RP backflow valve at the connection to the public
water system. A backflow valve maintenance program is also required. Water wells
can only be connected to the public water system with the Town Engineer approval.
E. Where it is necessary to extend a water main from an existing adequate main to the
subdivision, the subdivider will be required to pay the full cost of the line extension.
F. Water specifications and requirements relating to fire protection are established by
the Town Engineer and Thatcher Fire Department. At a minimum fire protection
must be provided in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted by the
Town of Thatcher.
G. Line Sizing: Minimum size lines for water lines shall be six (6) inches without
hydrants and eight (8) inches with hydrants. Minimum eight (8) inch lines shall be
required on dead-end hydrant lines longer than three hundred (300) feet.
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.20 Article 4: Design Standards
H. Valves: There shall be a minimum of three (3) valves at crosses, two (2) valves at tees
and one (1) valve at each fire hydrant tee. Shutdown valving shall be arranged such
that no more than four (4) valves are required to make a shutdown in any section of
waterline. No more than thirty (30) homes or two (2) fire hydrants shall be out of
service during a water line shutdown.
I. Services:
1. Minimum one (1) inch service tap and service pipe shall be permitted with a
three-quarter () inch meter and shall serve only one (1) property. A
minimum one (1) inch service tap, pipe and meter, servicing only one (1)
property, shall be required on all long cul-de-sac runs, fire sprinkled
residences, and all commercial and industrial developments.
2. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities
shall be placed to the right-of-way line or the public utility easement
whichever is greater.
J. Fire Hydrants: Maximum spacing between fire hydrants shall be five hundred (500)
feet in single residential areas and two hundred (200) feet in all other areas.
Installation shall be accomplished under generally accepted construction techniques
in accordance with the applicable Town of Thatcher Standard and the International
Fire Code as designated by the Town Engineer and the Thatcher Fire Department.
K. Water distribution lines shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide
service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.
L. Water sampling points shall be provided at locations designated by the Town
Engineer.
M. No vertical construction or structure shall be permitted within the subdivision until
fire protection for the subdivision is operable.
Section 4.14 Public Utilities.
A. All electric lines, except those of greater than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500)
KVA capacity, and all telephone lines, cable television lines, and other
communication and utility lines necessary to serve the subdivision shall be installed
underground; within a public utility easement (PUE). The developer of the property
shall be responsible for the costs of the underground construction in accordance
with the underground policy of the serving utility.
B. When as a result of the subdivision development, it is necessary to relocate, renew or
expand existing facilities within or adjacent to the platted area, the developer shall
make the necessary arrangements with the serving utility for these installations to be
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.21
placed underground at the time of development of the property as part of the
required off-site and on-site improvements.
C. The developer shall arrange with the serving utility for, and be responsible for, the
cost of underground service lines to approved street light locations.
D. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be
placed to the right-of-way line or the public utility easement whichever is greater.
E. Underground utilities shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide
service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.
F. The above regulations shall be the minimum standards regardless of the utility
companys standards. The developer will need to refer to the specific Design
Criteria & Specifications established by the utility companies; the more restrictive
regulation shall apply.
G. The subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this
section and shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the public utility
companies involved for the installation of underground facilities. Letters from each
of the public utility companies indicating that they will serve the subdivision and
arrangements have been made shall be submitted to the Town at the time the final
subdivision plat is filed.
Section 4.15 Outdoor Lighting
A. Where required and/or permitted all outdoor light fixtures shall be fully shielded (full
cut-off) and shall meet the requirements of Article 16 of the Towns Zoning
Ordinance and the State of Arizona Light Pollution Ordinance contained in the
Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.) 49-1101 et seq. The term fully shielded means
the fixture shall be shielded so that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly
from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane
running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. Further, the
light sources must be shielded in a manner that the bulb or light source from the
fixture is not visible from an adjoining property or from the street view.
B. Outdoor light fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for
illumination or advertisement for: recreational areas, walkways within open space
areas, parking lot lighting, and street lighting shall comply with these provisions and
the Town of Thatcher Zoning Ordinance and shall be installed in conjunction with,
and as part of, the subdivision improvements.
C. Street lights shall be installed at all intersections along arterial streets, collector
streets, and along all streets within the subdivision. Within the subdivision street
lights should be installed and spaced in a manner that will light the street and
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.22 Article 4: Design Standards
sidewalks along the street but should not be spaced more than five hundred (500)
feet apart.
D. Where street lights are required along State Highways the installation shall be limited
to American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(A.A.S.H.T.O.) standards.
E. Other areas where outdoor lighting should be installed include parks, open space
areas, parking lots, walkway lighting and other public areas of the subdivision as
approved by the Town. The Town encourages the use of solar to power the outdoor
lighting fixtures for these areas within subdivisions. Motion sensor/detector light
fixtures are encouraged to be mounted under and recessed into the parking shade
canopy/structures.
F. All utilities are to be underground, and underground conduit shall be provided by the
subdivider.
Section 4.16 Small Subdivision Street Standards
A. A small subdivision, as defined in the Glossary of this Ordinance, shall be processed
in the same manner as any other subdivision (see Article 3 for processing details).
The Town Engineer, on a case-by-case basis, may determine that some of the
submittal requirements may not be necessary and could therefore be waived.
B. 3 or Less Lots. For a minor land division and/or lot split, as defined in the
Glossary of this Ordinance, the Town may administratively approve in accordance
with Section 3.10 of this Ordinance the minor land division and/or lot split with the
following reduced access improvement standards:
1. For one (1) or two (2) lots, the access should be a twenty-five (25) foot
easement with a twenty-five (25) foot all-weather road.
2. For three (3) lots, the access shall be a fifty (50) foot dedicated ingress/egress
access and public utility easement with a twenty-eight (28) foot wide gravel
all-weather access road.
3. On-site drainage improvements.
C. 4 - 5 Lots. For small subdivisions with four (4) or five (5) lots the Town Council
may approve the subdivision with the following alternative and/or reduced street
improvement standards:
1. The dedication of a fifty (50) foot ingress/egress access and public utility
easement.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 4: Design Standards Page 4.23
2. The construction of a twenty-eight (28) foot wide paved access road with
thickened edge. The required drainage report may determine the need for a
different curb and gutter.
3. On-site drainage improvements.
D. 6 - 15 Lots. For small subdivisions with six (6) or more lots the Town Council may
approve the subdivision with the following alternative and/or reduced street
improvement standards:
1. The dedication of a fifty (50) foot roadway and public utility easement.
2. The construction of a twenty-six (26) foot wide paved access road with a two
(2) foot wide modified ribbon curb. The required drainage report may
determine the need for a different curb and gutter.
3. Sidewalk on one (1) side of the street.
4. On-site drainage improvements.
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.24 Article 4: Design Standards
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 5: Improvement Requirements Page 5.1
CHAPTER 152, ARTICLE 5: Improvement Requirements
Section 5.0 General Requirements.
A. Developer Responsibilities. The developer shall be responsible for all costs,
including review fees, for the installation of the improvements as a condition of
zoning and/or preliminary plat which shall include, at least but not limited to, the
following improvements:
1. Sanitary Sewer Systems
2. Water Supply Systems
3. Grading/Drainage/Storm Drains
4. Streets (public and private) and Access Ways
5. Alleys (where applicable and approved)
6. Utilities (electric, telephone, cable television, gas)
7. Traffic Signals, Street Lights (where applicable and approved)
8. Monuments and Signage
9. Landscaping and Streetscape
10. Sidewalks, Bicycle and Multi-use Pathways
B. Streets and Public Easements.
1. All streets and public easements within the boundary lines of the subdivision
shall be improved to cross-sections, grades, and standards outlined in this
Ordinance. If there are extenuating circumstances the Town may approve
modifications.
2. Where there are existing Town streets adjacent to the subdivision, the
subdivision streets shall be improved to the intercepting paving line of such
existing streets; or to a matching line determined by the Town Engineer.
Transition paving, including turn lanes, shall be installed as required by the
Town Engineer.
3. In the case where there is an unimproved street or roadway easement
between the subdivision and the improved Town street system, the
developer shall at the time of, and as part of, the subdivision improvements
be required to make interim street improvements as required by the Town
to sufficiently and appropriately connect the proposed subdivision to the
Town street system.
4. Any interim roadway shall have sufficient culverts and drainage facilities to
allow a 25-year frequency storm to pass under the road section and a 100-
year frequency storm to pass over the road section at a depth not to exceed
six (6) inches of water. Dead-end streets extending two hundred (200) feet
or more and dead-end interim roads shall be graded and have an asphalt
surface with a temporary unobstructed minimum fifty (50) foot radius
turning circle.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.2 Article 5: Improvement Requirements
C. Utilities. The developer shall be responsible to make the necessary arrangements
with each of the serving utility companies involved for the installation of the
underground facilities, including payment of all deposits, fees and miscellaneous
expenses. Letters from each of the serving utility companies indicating that said
arrangements have been made shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at the
time the Improvement Plans and Final Plat are submitted. Utility improvement
plans shall be submitted to the Town of Thatcher as part of the improvement plan
submittal. The Town will log in the submitted plans and forward them to the
appropriate departments and utility companies for review.
D. Monuments. Monuments shall be a steel pin or pipe at least eighteen (18) inches in
length and set in a reasonably permanent manner for all points of reference on the
outside boundary at each lot corner or at all points of curvature or tangency of the
Subdivision.
1. Survey monuments shall be required at all street intersections and at the
point of curvature and point of tangency of all curves as approved by the
Town Engineer when streets are paved. Brass caps punched by a Registered
Land Surveyor set inside cast-iron hand holes embedded in concrete with a
lid indicating SURVEY will be set at intersections, section corners, and
quarter section corners.
E. Phased Development. All public or private infrastructure, utilities and streets for
each phase, of an approved multi-phased development, shall be designed,
constructed and function independently (stand-alone) to avoid negative
consequences in the event future phases are not built.
Section 5.1 Submittal Requirements.
A. General.
1. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to have an Arizona Registered
Professional Engineer, in the correct discipline, prepare a complete set of
engineering plans and reports for construction of all required improvements
and an Arizona Registered Landscape Architect an Arizona Certified
Nurseryman or other approved professional prepare a complete set of
landscape and open space plans. Survey information must be prepared by
and stamped by an Arizona Registered Land Surveyor. All plans and reports
submitted to the Town shall be dated, signed and stamped/sealed by the
professional who prepared them. Such plans shall be based on the approved
preliminary plat and be prepared in conjunction with the final plat and in
accordance, with all applicable Town, County, or State standards.
2. All improvement plans submitted to the Town of Thatcher for approval
must be submitted in duplicate as blue-lines on a standard 24x 36 paper.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 5: Improvement Requirements Page 5.3
The scales chosen for plans shall be such that existing features, proposed
construction and any other information to be provided will be depicted in a
clear, uncluttered, and concise manner.
3. Water and sewer improvement plans may be submitted shown on the same
set of plans. The water and sewer improvement plans must also be shown
on the paving plans. A signature block for Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality (A.D.E.Q.) shall be provided on the front page of the
sewer improvement plans and the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans
(S.W.P.P.P.). The water improvement plans shall have in addition to the
ADEQ signature block an additional signature block for the Water Provider.
It shall be the developers responsibility to obtain approval signatures from
A.D.E.Q and the Water Provider.
4. Separate grading and drainage plans shall be submitted.
B. Improvement Plan Submittal Requirements.
1. Initial Submittal with Final Plat: Two (2) hard copies plus one (1)
electronic file of the following plans and reports, along with the required
fees, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator:
a. Improvement plan review fees (paid to Town & utility companies)
b. Final Plat review fee (paid to Town)
c. Final Plat
d. Water and Sewer Improvement Plans
e. Paving, Grading, and Drainage Improvement Plans
f. Landscape and Open Space Improvement Plans
g. Dry Utility Improvement Plans  for Utility Design (submitted
directly to utility companies serving the development)
h. Final Drainage Report
i. Final Geotechnical/Soils Report (only if revised from original)
j. Final Traffic Report (only if revised from original)
k. Boundary Closure
l. Subdivision Deed Restrictions or Covenants, Conditions and
Restrictions (CC&Rs), if any
2. The final plat shall be in recordable form showing all information including
dedication statement, signature blocks, and other notations as necessary. The
Graham County Recorder signature block shall be included on the first page
of the Final Plat.
3. Subsequent submittals of improvement plans and reports will require that the
redline comments be submitted in addition to the same number of sets as in
the initial submittal requirements.
4. An approval signature block shall be included on the front page of all
improvement plans.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.4 Article 5: Improvement Requirements
5. Final Submittal: The following information, documents and material shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator (see Town of Thatcher Submittal
Requirement Checklist for specific number of sets or copies):
a. Engineers Cost Estimate
b. Improvement Plan mylar cover sheet
c. Final Plat (paper prints)
d. Electronic copy of the final plat
e. Electronic copy of the final landscape and open space plan
f. Most current Title Report showing current owner
g. Assurance of construction (refer to Sec.5.3 for specifics)
h. Electronic copy of the final plat and plat closure
6. Town Recordation Submittal: The following fees, documents and plans
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator after the Town Engineer has
approved the improvements plans and the Town Council has approved the
Final Plat (see Town of Thatcher Fee Schedule and Submittal Requirement Checklist for
specific fees and number of sets or copies):
a. Recording fees (for Final Plat and CC&Rs)
b. Original, signed, Covenants, Conditions & Restrictions
c. Mylar, (not ammonia process) for County Records
d. Mylar, not less than 3 mil, for Town Records
e. Approved Improvement Plans (paper prints)
C. Water Service Requirements.
1. Prior to the recordation of any final subdivision plat affecting all or any
portion of the property, the developer shall obtain written commitment from
the Water Provider stating that they will serve the subdivision.
2. In accordance with water service agreements to be entered into between the
Water Provider and the developer prior to the delivery of water to the
property, the developer, will construct, to all applicable standards, the
necessary water infrastructure to serve the property, which shall include such
water treatment, storage, recharge, pumping and delivery systems as may be
necessary for the Water Provider to remain designated as having an Assured
Water Supply for the property. Upon completion of the construction
warranty period the developer will convey the completed and accepted water
service infrastructure to the Water Provider for operation and maintenance.
Upon conveyance by the developer, and acceptance by the Water Provider of
the water service infrastructure, the Water Provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, operate and maintain such infrastructure.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 5: Improvement Requirements Page 5.5
D. Landscape and Open Space Plan Submittal Requirements
1. Preliminary Landscape Plan: A preliminary landscape and open space
plan, prepared by an Arizona Registered Landscape Architect, a Certified
Nurseryman or other qualified professional, shall be submitted as part of the
Step 2: Preliminary Plat Application as referenced in Article 3 of this
Ordinance, and shall at a minimum contain the following:
a. Identify the location of proposed park(s) and open space areas, the
proposed amenities and different types of uses (i.e. passive, active,
landscaping, retention/detention etc).
b. Identify the location of all existing and proposed species and
inorganic ground covers, sidewalks, paths, fencing, walls, benches,
ramadas, fountains, and waterways. For fencing and walls, provide a
preliminary graphic representation as to what is intended relative to
the fencing and wall themes.
c. Right-of-way landscaping is required and shall be shown on the
Landscape Plan. The entire area of the right-of-way, between street
property line and back of curb (B.O.C.) and/or pavement except for
approved driveways, sidewalks and pathways, shall be landscaped.
d. Include a plant palette, in list form, on the landscape plans that call
out all proposed plant species and inorganic ground covers.
e. Identify existing and proposed lots, streets, fences, walls, wells, or
other features as may be applicable.
f. Identify the line of sight requirements of the Town, County and
State.
g. Identify the name of the developer, project engineer, and landscape
architect/professional on the plan.
2. Final Landscape Plan: A final landscape plan shall be prepared by an
Arizona Registered Landscape Architect, a Certified Nurseryman or other
qualified professional, and shall be submitted as part of the Step 5:
Improvement Plans and Final Plat Approval as referenced in Article 3
of this Ordinance, and shall at a minimum contain the following:
a. Final Irrigation Plan.
b. Identify the specific park and open space areas and include a list of all
amenities (type and quantity). Provide cut-sheets or the
manufactures information for all play equipment, furniture, lighting
and signage and for each type of use (i.e. passive, active, landscaping
etc).
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.6 Article 5: Improvement Requirements
c. Plant Location: Identify the location of all retained and proposed
species and inorganic ground covers, sidewalks, paths, fencing, walls,
benches, ramadas, fountains, and waterways. For fencing and walls,
provide a final graphic representation as to what is intended relative
to the fencing and wall themes.
d. Right-of-way landscaping is required and shall be shown on the
Landscape Plan. The entire area of the right-of-way, between street
property line and back of curb (B.O.C.) and/or pavement except for
approved driveways, sidewalk and pathways, shall be landscaped.
e. Plant Species: Include the approved preliminary landscape plan plant
palette, in list form, on the landscape plans that call out all proposed
plant species and inorganic ground covers.
f. Plant Sizes: Identify the specific sizes of all proposed plant and
inorganic ground covers. This information shall be included within
the plant palette list on the landscape plan.
g. Plant Quantities: Identify the exact quantities for each species of
tree, shrub and ground cover per each size and species. This
information shall be included within the plant palette list on the
landscape plan.
h. Paths, Trails, Sidewalks: Identify the material type, width and depth
of the surfacing of all proposed paths, trails and walks.
i. Walls, Fencing, Signage: Identify the type and location of any
proposed perimeter subdivision walls/fencing and the entry signage.
Indicate exact material types for all fencing and walls and entry
signage proposed.
j. Identify existing lots, streets, fences, walls, wells, or other features as
may be applicable.
k. Identify the line of sight requirements of the Town, County and
State.
l. Identify the name of the developer, project engineer, and landscape
architect/professional on the plan.
E. Report Submittal Requirements
1. Preliminary Drainage Report: A preliminary drainage report shall be
submitted as part of the Step 2: Preliminary Plat Application, as
referenced in Article 3 of this Ordinance, and shall at a minimum contain the
following information:
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 5: Improvement Requirements Page 5.7
a. Delineation of the boundaries of on-site and off-site drainage areas.
Information about adjacent property, such as significant differences
in elevation, walls, drainage structures, buildings with their floor
elevations etc. shall be provided.
b. Identify the drainage pattern for all existing and proposed streets and
building sites. Label the different critical points and where
inlets/outlets are to be located.
c. Justify the runoff factor (C-factor) used in the computations.
d. Describe offsite flows from adjacent properties onto the property to
be developed. Drainage area, calculated peak flows, velocity and
other pertinent runoff data must be presented. If the flow is in a
defined channel, the channel must be improved. Special
consideration for joint use of open channels as a recreational amenity
is to be given on each individual project. The runoff from areas
outside the development may be realigned through the new
development.
e. Indicate the retention/detention volume required, and provided.
Indicate the method for draining basins in thirty-six (36) hours, and
who is responsible for maintenance.
f. Show location of all drainage easements.
2. Final Drainage Report: A final drainage report shall be submitted as a part
of the Step 5: Improvement Plan and Final Plat Approval for all
developments (see Town of Thatcher Submittal Requirement Checklist for
number of copies). The report shall be a complete report and not an
addendum to the preliminary drainage report. The format shall be as
previously described and include the following additional information:
a. Place inlets and/or scuppers wherever the flow exceeds the street
capacity. The inlets and/or scuppers are to be analyzed separately
and catch basin computations shall be submitted.
b. Size the storm drains and culverts and submit design computations.
c. Final retention/detention basins calculations including 36-hour
percolation, or evaporation rates.
d. Final channel flow calculations considering the impacts of
landscaping and other joint use impacts on the cross-section and
Mannings coefficients.
e. Adjusted calculations for pre and post development conditions.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.8 Article 5: Improvement Requirements
3. Geotechnical Report: A geotechnical/soils report shall be submitted as
part of the Step 2: Preliminary Plat Application, as referenced in Article
3 of this Ordinance, and shall at a minimum contain the following
information:
a. Identifies any special geotechnical hazards, and develops
recommendations regarding the hazards, grading, foundations and
pavement.
b. The geotechnical hazards portion shall consider at a minimum
expansive soils, soil creep, landsliding, and groundwater.
c. The grading and foundations portion of the report shall include data
regarding the distribution and engineering characteristics of the
various soil materials; data about groundwater levels; percolation test;
an opinion regarding the geotechnical feasibility of the development
as planned; recommendations about any needed mitigation measures
for geotechnical hazards, grading criteria and foundation design
criteria and any other pertinent information.
d. The pavement design portion shall include data regarding the
distribution of various subgrade materials and for each, design test
such as R-value. The design procedure and all assumptions used to
determine the pavement section shall be presented. The selected
design procedure per the traffic and geotechnical report shall not
result in a lesser pavement section than the minimum allowed in
Article 4 of this Ordinance.
4. Preliminary Traffic Report: All traffic analysis information shall be
prepared by an Arizona Registered Professional Engineer with adequate
experience in transportation engineering. A preliminary traffic report shall be
submitted as part of the Step 2: Preliminary Plat Application, as
referenced in Article 3 of this Ordinance, and shall at a minimum contain the
following information:
a. A project trip generation report that provides an analysis of the
number of trips generated by the development during a weekday in a
one-hour A.M. and P.M. peak hour and daily traffic. Trip generation
shall be developed utilizing the Institute of Transportation Engineers
Trip Generation Manual.
b. An analysis of the non-vehicular modes of transportation (e.g.
sidewalks, multi-use pathways and trails) proposed for the
development and their impact on the trips generated by the
development.
5. Final Traffic Report: If the number of peak hour trips generated by the
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 5: Improvement Requirements Page 5.9
development is greater than 100 trips, a final traffic study shall be provided.
The Town Engineer may require a final traffic study to be provided for
projects with a peak hour trip generation of less than 100 trips because of
safe access concerns. The final traffic study shall include the following
information:
a. Introduction which outlines the land use, site and study boundaries,
and existing and proposed site uses.
b. Project trip generation estimates (A.M., P.M., and A.D.T.).
c. Project access and internal circulation evaluation.
d. Trip distribution.
e. Trip assignment.
f. Existing and projected traffic volumes.
g. Capacity analysis of all impacted public/private street intersections
and access points.
h. Level of service with a minimum service of Level 'C'.
i. Evaluation of existing and existing-plus project conditions, as well as
cumulative and cumulative-plus project conditions.
j. Project impacts and mitigation measures (recommendations to
include the proposed recommended improvements, volume/capacity
analysis at critical points, traffic volume proportions for funding of
improvements),
k. Other special requirements, as determined by the Town Engineer.
6. All of these reports shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer or
consultant experts designated by the Town Engineer.
Section 5.2 Improvement Plan Review Process.
A. The project Engineer shall submit dry utilities improvement plans (i.e. gas, electric
and telecommunications) to the Town Engineer as well as to the utility providers
serving the development. Design and/or review fees, for all utilities, shall be paid to
the respective utility companies (per utility company fees and policies). All fees for
review of the improvement plan(s), reports, and other submittals shall be paid by the
developer (see Town of Thatcher Fee Schedule for specific fees).
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.10 Article 5: Improvement Requirements
B. The Town staff will review the submittal for accuracy, completeness, compliance
with conditions made by the Town Council and conformance with all Town Codes.
C. Redline comments, including dry utilities preliminary design plan, will be returned
to the Developers Engineer and Landscape Architect of record for corrections,
additions, revisions and in the case of the dry utilities plan for conflict checks.
D. Subsequent submittals of the improvement plans and reports shall also include the
latest redline set of plans/comments. It shall be the developers responsibility to
resubmit the dry utilities preliminary design plan after it has been checked by the
developers Engineer for potential conflicts.
E. Within sixty (60) days from the date of Town Council approval, and prior to the
recording of the Final Plat and Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs),
the following items must be submitted:
1. A project approval letter, signed by the Town Engineer, stating that all of the
subdivision improvement plans and reports have been approved by the
Town.
2. A project approval letter, signed by the Zoning Administrator, stating that
any and all required agreements between the Town and developer have been
executed.
3. A letter of agreement from the serving utilities stating the availability of
utilities and the approval of improvement plans for the subdivision.
4. The required Financial Assurance for Construction.
F. If the engineering plans have not been approved within sixty (60) days, solely due to
reasons on the part of the developer, the Council may require that the final plat be
resubmitted.
Section 5.3 Assurances of Construction.
A. Agreement by Developer
1. The subdivision improvements in an approved development may be
constructed in practical increments in accordance with a Council approved
Phasing Plan subject to provisions for satisfactory drainage, traffic,
circulation, utilities, landscaping and other elements of the total development
plan.
2. The improvements shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the Town Engineer, State agencies, and utility providers and shall be
completed within an agreed specific time period.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 5: Improvement Requirements Page 5.11
3. The developer shall give adequate Financial Assurance for Construction for
each phase in accordance with this Ordinance and to the satisfaction of the
Town Engineer and Town Attorney.
4. Once a construction permit has been issued for improvements work shall
proceed without interruption until the Town Engineer accepts the
improvements.
5. Any work shown on approved plans that has been abandoned for a period of
one hundred eighty (180) days, or not completed by the developer in
accordance with an agreed upon time period, may be completed by the Town
which may recover the construction costs from the developer.
6. When in the opinion of the Town and the developer it is in the best interest
of both parties to delay installation of development required improvements
to coincide with adjacent work the Town Council may elect to accept
payment of the estimated cost of said improvements in-lieu of construction
by the developer. The timing of this payment will be specified in a Council
approved Phasing Plan.
B. Financial Assurances of Construction
1. The Town Council shall require that the developer provide cash, a
performance bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, or funds in escrow at the
time of application for final subdivision approval in the amount sufficient to
secure to the Town the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication
of the required improvements. All assurances other than currency of the
United States will be accepted only if made by or through a lending
institution, insurance or surety company or title company regulated by the
State of Arizona and made payable to the Town of Thatcher, Arizona. The
amount of the financial guarantee shall be no less than one hundred (100%)
percent of the cost of the installation and materials necessary to complete the
subdivision, depending on conditions.
2. Such financial guarantee shall comply with all statutory requirements and
shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and
manner of execution, as set forth in this Ordinance. The periods within
which required improvements must be completed shall be incorporated in
the financial guarantee and shall not, in any event, exceed two (2) years from
the date of final approval. The Town shall require that ten (10) percent of the
gross total cost of public improvements be retained by the Town for the
duration of the warranty period which begins from the Date of Acceptance
of said improvements by the Town Engineer.
3. Whenever it is deemed appropriate or necessary by the Town Engineer and
the Town Council to defer, for an additional two (2) year period, the
construction of any required public improvements, because of incompatible
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.12 Article 5: Improvement Requirements
grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for
other suitable reasons, the developer shall provide renewed assurances based
on updated costs as determined by the Town Engineer to secure completion
of the required public improvements.
Section 5.4 Construction and Inspection.
A. All stormwater and street improvements whether public or private shall be
constructed to the latest standards and specifications adopted by the Town, or
standard specifications of the utility provider; whichever is greater. All other
improvements whether public or private shall be constructed to the latest Town of
Thatcher standards.
B. All improvements shall be constructed with the inspection and approval of the Town
Engineer. All construction shall require a Town construction permit and a County
dust control permit. Construction shall not begin until a permit has been issued by
the Town for the construction and a dust control permit has been issued for the site
by the Graham County Health Department.
C. A preconstruction meeting must be scheduled, by the developer, to include all dry
utilities before any trenching or conduit installation is permitted.
D. Public utilities must be installed either in public dedicated rights-of-way or public
utility easements (PUEs) or easements dedicated specifically by the landowner for
such usage and maintenance.
E. All utility companies, public and private, must inspect all trenches, pipes, lines and
conduit installation prior to backfill.
F. Shading material shall be per the individual utility company standards and all backfill
shall be compacted to ninety-five (95) percent or better if required by the
geotechnical/soils report.
G. All underground utilities to be installed in streets and private access ways, shall be
constructed prior to the surfacing of such street or private access way.
H. The developer shall provide for an Arizona Registered Engineer to be present on the
site to assess compliance with the plans and specifications for each element of
construction.
I. The Town Engineer shall be notified forty-eight (48) hours prior to any construction
on the project site.
J. The Town Engineer shall be notified upon completion of all underground utilities
within the street right-of-ways and prior to any street preparation work. Interim asbuilt
plans of the utilities and all passing tests results shall be submitted for review.
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Article 5: Improvement Requirements Page 5.13
Upon review and approval of the supplied information, the developer may proceed
with the installation of street improvements.
K. The developer's engineer shall request the Town Engineer to perform inspections of
the subgrade base prior to placement of the overlaying materials. In addition the
Town Engineer will perform periodic inspections throughout the course of the
construction. These inspections or approvals do not signify that the Town has
accepted any of the improvements for maintenance.
L. The developer's engineer shall submit monthly progress reports to the Town
Engineer throughout the construction. The monthly progress reports shall include
the results of all tests taken during the month.
M. Testing during the construction phase of the project shall be performed as required
by the Town Engineer and the involved utility companies policies.
Section 5.5 Subdivision Improvement Acceptance.
A. General: Upon completion of all subdivision improvements and installation of
monumentation the Town Engineer will perform a final inspection, a review of the
final reports, and a review of the as-built drawings.
B. Final Inspection: At completion of the project a final inspection shall be requested
with the Town Engineer. At the time of request for the final inspection the set of
mylars and an electronic copy of the as-built drawings shall be submitted along
with a final engineers report and warranty statement to the Town Engineer. The
as-built drawings shall be certified and contain the following statement:
I certify that the construction of the public improvements
and the as-built plan preparation were performed by me or
under my direct control and supervision. The construction
details as shown on the as-builts are accurate and complete
to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Arizona Registered Engineer Date & Registration Number
C. Final Report: A final report shall be submitted upon completion of the project.
The final report shall be compiled by the developers engineer and shall include the
following:
1. A brief statement of the testing on the project and a statement as to whether
the observations and tests indicate that the various materials in place comply
with the plans and specifications.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.14 Article 5: Improvement Requirements
2. A summary of all field density test and compaction tests on trench backfill,
on street subgrade and base material and on any fill material.
3. Asphalt and pavement mix design and all results of Marshall, gradation,
asphalt content and compaction tests.
4. All concrete mix designs and all test results on air content, slump, unit
weight, compressive strength at seven (7) and twenty-eight (28) days.
5. All line pressure, bacteria and manhole test information.
6. Any other tests or information that may be required as a part of the
specifications or that may add to the integrity of the report.
D. Procedure: The following procedure will be followed for final acceptance of the
improvements:
1. The Town Engineer shall make a final inspection of all public improvements
in the project. The developer will be notified of any items that are not in
conformance with the Town specifications, and shall bring the items into
conformance.
2. The as-built plans and final report will be reviewed by the Town Engineer.
Any additional information needed will be noted and the plans will be
returned to the developer for revision and resubmittal as mylars.
3. When the public improvements have passed the final inspection, the asbuilt
plans and final report have been stamped and approved and the
warranty statement provided, the Town Engineer shall make a written
recommendation to the Town Council to accept the public improvements
for maintenance.
E. Warranty Period on Public Improvements: The warranty period begins on the
day that the Town Council approves and accepts the public improvements. At a
minimum a warranty period of two (2) year for all utilities, roadway pavement and
structure, landscaping and other public improvements shall apply to all subdivision
improvements; however the warranty period may extend beyond that time period as
determined by the Town Engineer. During the warranty period the developer is
responsible for repair work to any of the public improvements. The Town Engineer
will periodically inspect the public improvements and will notify the developer of the
necessary repair work. The developer is responsible for having the repair work
completed prior to the end of the warranty period. Upon completion of the
warranty period and acceptable repair of any necessary warranty items the remainder
of the financial assurances retained by the Town will be released.
(End of Article)
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Glossary Page G.1
Glossary
A. General Terms. For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Subdivision Ordinance,
certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
1. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative
forms; words used in the singular include the plural; and words in the plural include
the singular.
2. The word shall is mandatory.
3. The word may is permissive.
4. The word person includes an individual, tenant, lessee, firm, co-partnership, joint
venture, corporations, associations, estate, trust, receiver, or and any other group or
combination acting as a singular entity, including the federal government, another
Town, county, or school district, except as exempt by law.
5. The following words or terms when applied in this Ordinance may be used
interchangeably unless contrary to the circumstances: lot or parcel; and building
applies to the word structure.
B. Specific Terms. The following additional words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this
Ordinance, have the following meanings:
Abut. To physically touch or border upon or to share a common boundary, property line, or rightof-
way. Parcels having only one common corner are not considered as abutting parcels.
Access or Access Way. The place, means, or ways by which pedestrians, vehicles, or both shall
have safe, adequate, and usable ingress/egress to a property or use. A private access is an access not
in public ownership and controlled by means of deed, dedication, or easement.
Accessory Use. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and is conducted on the same lot with such
the principal use or building.
Adjoining Lot or Land. A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line with
another lot or parcel of land.
Administrative Decision. Any decision on a development application made by the Zoning
Administrator or his/her authorized representative pursuant to this Ordinance.
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator for the Town of Thatcher, Arizona.
A
Town of Thatcher
Page G.2 Glossary
Alley. A passage or way open to public travel, affording generally a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting lots or upon which secondary and service entrances of buildings abut, and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
A.L.T.A. American Land Title Association.
Applicant. A person submitting an application for development or other action.
Approval, Conditional. An affirmative action by the Council indicating that approval will be
forthcoming upon satisfaction of certain specified stipulations.
Approval, Preliminary. Unconditional approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Council as
evidenced in its meeting minutes and noted upon prints of the Plat; constitutes authorization to
proceed with final Engineering Plans and Final Plat preparation.
Approval, Final. Unconditional approval of the Final Plat by the Council as evidenced by
certification on the Plat by the Mayor and the Clerk of the Council; constitutes authorization to
record a plat.
A.R.S. The abbreviation for the Arizona Revised Statutes.
Berm. An earthen mound, either natural or man-made.
Bicycle Lane. A paved area located within a street right-of-way and between the curbs that is
designated for bicycle or other non-motorized traffic.
Bicycle Trail. A paved or improved surfaced trail, located outside of a street right-of-way, utilized
for bicycle, pedestrian or other non-motorized traffic. Public utility maintenance vehicles may be
permitted use if joint access is allowed.
Bicycle Path. A paved area located within a street right-of-way but not between curbs that is
designated for bicycle or other non-motorized traffic.
Block. A piece or parcel of land or group of lots entirely surrounded by public or private streets or
rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way, streams, canals, washes, parks, or a combination thereof of
creating a physical barrier of sufficient magnitude as to interrupt the continuity of development.
Buildable. A lot or parcel that has the area, shape, slope, street frontage, or other attribute in order
for a permitted use, based on the lot or parcels Zoning District, to be developed, without the need
for any variance from the Town Zoning Ordinance.
Buildable Area. The portion of a lot that is within the envelope formed by the required setbacks.
B
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Glossary Page G.3
24 Clustered Lots
50% Open Space
24 Conventional Lots
No Open Space
Building Setback Line. The required minimum distance, as prescribed by the Zoning Ordinance,
between the property line and the closest point of any building or structure other than those
projections allowed by the Zoning Ordinance.
Bus Stops (School). Areas designated by the School District(s), serving the Town of Thatcher, as
needed for the convenience and safety of the students and public per Arizona Administrative Code
(A.A.C.) R17-9-104.
Chord. A straight line joining two points on a curve.
Cluster Development / Cluster Residential.
A development design technique that
concentrates development/buildings in specific
areas on a site, rather than distributing them
evenly, thereby allowing the remaining land to
be retained as natural open space for the
preservation of sensitive lands, parks, and
public open space areas.
Commission. The Town of Thatcher Planning and Zoning Commission.
Common Ownership. Ownership by one or more individuals in any form of ownership.
Common Access. A commonly shared or used pedestrian or vehicular way that connects or serves
two (2) or more properties.
Condominium. Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership with the
remainder designated for common ownership by the owners of the separate portions. Real estate is
not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit
owners.
Conservation Easement. A conservation easement is a permanent open space easement granted
to the Town or to a public land trust to prohibit development of the property, including roads and
utilities, and to protect archaeological sites, ecologically significant lands, scenic highways, hiking
trails, biking trails, equestrian trails, and to preserve the land for the scenic enjoyment of the general
public.
Conventional Development. Development other than a Traditional Neighborhood Development
(TND) or a Cluster Development.
County. Graham County, Arizona.
Cut. The removal of soil, rock, or other materials from a location which shapes and lowers the
grade at the location.
C
Town of Thatcher
Page G.4 Glossary
Dedication. The conveyance of land by its owner to the Town for any general or public use.
Density Transfer. Permitted unused allowable densities in one area to be used in another area of
the same development. (Examples: within a subdivision clustering of homes on smaller lots to
retain larger open space areas; within the floodplain area to cluster homes at a higher elevation to
retain undisturbed floodplains.).
Developer (See also Subdivider). A person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, or entity that desires to improve or otherwise engage in any development of property
within the Town of Thatcher, including the owner of the property and any representatives acting on
behalf of the owner.
Development. The utilization of land for public or private purposes.
Drainage (terms specifically related to drainage).
1. 10-year, Peak Discharge. A storm based on the 10-year event, at a certain duration
(6 or 24-hour rainfall values shown on the most current precipitation maps for the
area, prepared by the ADOT method).
2. Backwater. The elevation profile of standing or flowing water upstream of a
constriction, whether natural or man-made.
3. Basin. A man-made or improved natural low point on a site constructed to capture
storm water for the purpose of retaining or detaining it.
4. Basin, Detention. A stormwater storage facility that temporarily stores surface
runoff and releases it at a controlled rate through a positive outlet. A detention basin
and park may be joined to serve both recreational needs and as a stormwater storage
facility.
5. Basin, Retention. A stormwater storage facility that stores surface runoff. Stored
water is infiltrated into the subsurface or released to the downstream drainage system
or watercourse (via gravity outlet or pump), or evaporated after the storm event. A
retention basin and park may be joined to serve both recreational needs and as a
stormwater storage facility.
6. Detention. For the purposes of this Ordinance, detention is the act of capturing
and slowing stormwater runoff in a basin then discharging the water at release rate
that is less than or equal to pre-development flows. Only offsite drainage and predevelopment
onsite drainage are allowed to be detained for later release into a
downstream channel or storm sewer.
7. Direct Onsite Runoff. That portion of the rainfall which falls within the entire
D
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Glossary Page G.5
limits of the proposed subdivision and which flows across the land or enters streams
promptly after the rainfall.
8. Drainage, 100-Year Storm, Peak Discharge. Local drainage resulting from a
storm which has a 1% chance of occurring annually, based upon the methods given
in Hydrologic Design for Highway Drainage in Arizona, published by the Arizona
Department of Transportation, Highway Division.
9. Drainage, Local. Water which accumulated as a result of local storms and flows
over land not included in a floodplain. This shall include sheetflow and such flow as
may be concentrated in local drainage systems with or without defined channels,
excluding delineated floodplains.
10. Drainage Way. Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, swale, or similar
depression into which surface water flows.
11. Dry Well. An underground structure installed in the bottom of a basin to expedite
the percolation of captured storm water into the soil.
12. Freeboard. The vertical clearance between the water surface and the soffit
(underside of a bridge deck or the top point of the inside diameter of a pipe) for
culverts carrying storm water.
13. Offsite Drainage. The storm surface waters emanating from higher lands outside
the limits of the proposed subdivision and draining through the site of the proposed
subdivision.
14. Post-development Conditions. The physical state of a site in terms of its ability to
hold, shed, or channelize storm water after development  for quantity, quality, and
flow rate.
15. Pre-development Conditions. The physical state of a site in terms of its ability to
hold, shed, or channelize storm water prior to development--for quantity, quality,
and flow rate.
16. Retention. The act of capturing and holding in a basin the additional direct onsite
runoff caused by post-development conditions. This captured water may not be
discharged into a downstream channel or storm sewer; instead, it must diminish by
evaporation or soil percolation.
17. Spillway. An erosion-resistant structure installed at a low point on a basins walls to
provide controlled overflow during a storm event larger than the 100 year, 24 hour
storm event.
18. Sump. A basin that only retains the storm water it captures. It does not have an
outlet and looses water only through evaporation or soil percolation.
Town of Thatcher
Page G.6 Glossary
Easement. A grant by a property owner of the use of land, by the general public, a corporation, or
a certain person or persons for the specific uses and purposes designated.
Exception. Any parcel of land that is not owned by the developer or not included in the recorded
plat. All such exceptions must be noted on the final plat as not a part of this subdivision.
Figure. Any graphic representation noted as Figure within this Ordinance that is used to
illustrate and exemplify certain standards and regulations contained within the language of this
Ordinance. If a figure and text of the Ordinance conflict, the written text of the Ordinance shall
control.
Fill. Soil, rock or other material, deposited at a location by man that raises the grade at that
location.
Flood (terms specifically related to floods/flooding).
1. 50-year Flood. A flood that has a 2% chance of occurring based upon the criteria
established by the Arizona Department of Water Resources.
2. 100-year Flood. A flood that has a 1% chance of occurring based upon the criteria
established by the Arizona Department of Water Resources.
3. Base Flood. The flood having a one-percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
4. Delineated Floodplain. Shall be that area delineated and mapped as a floodplain,
as approved by the Council and as shown on the Town Official Zoning District
Maps. At no time shall it be less than that delineated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
5. Flood or Flooding. A temporary inundation of land not normally covered by water
due to unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
or a rise in flow or stage of any stream or watercourse that result in water
overtopping its banks and adjacent areas that are not normally covered by water.
6. Flood Hazard Zone. Any land area partially or wholly within a delineated
floodplain susceptible to flood related damage as designated on the Flood
Management Maps. Such flood hazard zones may include, but not be limited to,
areas highly susceptible to erosion, stream meander sensitivity, moveable bed, scour,
wave action, and subsidence.
E
F
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Glossary Page G.7
7. Floodplain. The relatively flat areas or low lands adjoining the channel of a
watercourse, or areas where drainage is or may be restricted by man-made structures
which have been or may be covered partially or wholly by flood water, but shall
compose an area not less than that area confined by the Fifty (50) Year Flood and
shall not exceed that area confined by the One hundred (100) Year Flood.
8. Floodplain Administrator. The Graham County Floodplain Administrator.
9. Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
necessary in order to discharge the one-hundred (100) year flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
10. Floodway Fringe. The area of the floodplain on either side of the floodway where
encroachment may be permitted.
General Plan. A comprehensive plan pursuant to A.R.S. 9-461.05, providing for the future growth
and improvement of the Town of Thatcher and for the general location of streets, schools and
recreation areas, public building sites, and other physical development, and including any part of
such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan, or parts thereof.
Grade, Finished. The final elevation of the ground surface after development in conformance with
the approved grading plans.
Grade, Natural. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before man-made
alterations.
Health Department. Graham County Health Department.
G
H
Town of Thatcher
Page G.8 Glossary
Improvements. Required installations, pursuant to this Subdivision Ordinance and any zoning
conditions, including but not limited to: grading, sewer, water, utilities, streets, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, trails, alleys, street lights, traffic control devices and landscaping; as a condition to the
approval and signing of the final plat, before recordation.
Improvement Plans. A set of plans setting forth the profiles, cross-sections, details, specifications,
and instructions and procedures to be followed in the construction of public or private
improvements in the Town of Thatcher that are prepared and bear the seal of an Arizona -
Registered Land Surveyor, Engineer, Architect or Landscape Architect in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat, and zoning conditions, and in compliance with standards of design and
construction that are to be approved by the Town Engineer, other Town Departments, the
applicable County Departments, and all applicable utilities.
Improvement Standards. A set of regulations and figures setting forth the details, specifications
and instructions to be followed in the planning, design and construction of public improvements in
the Town of Thatcher, as required by the Town.
Irrigation Facilities. Includes laterals, ditches, conduits, pipes, gates, pumps and all equipment
necessary for the supply, delivery and drainage of irrigation water and the construction, operation
and maintenance of such.
Landscaping. Shall consist of any of the following or combinations thereof: material such as, but
not limited to, organic and inorganic ground covers, vegetation and irrigation, hardscape, walls or
fences that may be calculated as open space but excluding paving (refer to the definition of Open
Space).
Lot. A single piece of property located in a recorded subdivision. A lot also includes a parcel of
land, shown in the records of the Graham County Assessors Office, divided to be used separately
from other parcels of property by description, as on a recorded survey map, or by metes and
bounds, for purposes of sale, lease, or separate use in a legal manner pursuant to all state, county,
and Town requirements for the development and proposed use of that property.
Lot Area. The total area within the boundary lines of a lot.
Lot Depth. The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear
lot lines; and for triangular shaped lots, the shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line
I
J
K
L
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Glossary Page G.9
chord
setback line
lot width
Lot B
Lot A
lot width
setback line
chord
and a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a
length of not less than ten (10) feet.
Lots, Hillside. Any lots, or portions hereof which will have structures built upon, where the terrain
has an average cross-slope of fifteen (15) percent or greater.
Lot Line. A line of record bounding a lot that divides one (1) lot from another lot or from a public
or private street or any other public space.
Lot Line, Front. In the case of an interior lot: a line separating the lot from the street right-of-way.
In the case of a corner lot: the narrowest of the two (2) lot lines adjoining a street right-of-way.
Lot Line, Rear. A lot line that is opposite to and most distant from the front lot line; except in the
case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a lot line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to
and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot Split. The division or re-division of improved or unimproved land or established lots, the area
of which is two and one-half (2) acres or less in size, into two (2) or three (3) tracts, parcels of land
or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or conveyance (refer to the definition
of Minor Land Division if greater than 2 acres in size).
Lot, Through. A lot that fronts upon two (2) parallel streets, or that fronts upon two (2) streets
that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot (also known as a double frontage lot). On such lot,
both lot lines are front, except that where a non-access easement has been established on such a lot,
the front lot line shall be considered as that lot line most distant from the lot line containing the
non-access easement.
Lot Width.
1. For rectangular lots, lots having side lot lines not parallel, and lots
on the outside of the curve of a street, the distance between side
lot lines measured at the required minimum front yard setback line
on a line parallel to the street or street chord.
2. For lots on the inside of the curve of a street, the
distance between side lot lines measured at the
required minimum front yard setback line on a
line parallel to the street or street chord.
Master Plan Development. A master plan for the development of a community or other large
land area, the platting of which is expected to be undertaken in progressive stages, that provides
M
Town of Thatcher
Page G.10 Glossary
information and graphics meeting the requirements of this Ordinance for the purpose of
implementing an integrated development scheme for all phases of the proposed development.
Minor Land Division. The division of improved or unimproved land, the area of which is greater
than two and one-half (2) acres and either requires creating a road and/or the land does not
constitute a subdivision, as defined herein or by Arizona Revised Statutes, due to the size of the
original parcel or number of lots being created for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale,
lease, or conveyance (refer to the definition of Lot Split if less than 2 acres in size).
Net Acres. The total acreage of a tract or parcel of land exclusive of the area existing or required
for arterial or collector street right-of-way dedications and school/public site reservations. When
calculating residential net acres within a Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) any
commercial and industrial zoned land must be excluded in addition to those uses listed above.
Open Space. Any parcel or area of land or water unimproved or improved and set aside, dedicated,
designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of
owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
Open Space, Common. Land within or related to a development, and such area is owned in
common by all property owners in that development, which is designed and intended for the
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and may include such
complimentary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate.
Open Space, Private. Common open space held in private ownership, the use of which is
normally limited to the occupants of a single dwelling or building.
Open Space, Public. An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a municipality,
municipal agency, school district, state or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
Open Space, Usable. Land that can be actively used by people. This could include landscaped or
hardscaped plazas, paseos and promenades, fountains and sitting areas meant to provide an open
park like atmosphere. Also playgrounds, golf courses, bicycle trails (but not bike lanes), pedestrian
trails (not residential sidewalks), and trail heads. Usable open space does not include parking areas
and vacant or undeveloped lots.
Owner. The person or persons holding title by deed to land, or holding title as vendees under land
contract, or holding any other title of record.
N
O
P
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Glossary Page G.11
Pedestrian Way. A public walk provided entirely through a block from street to street and/or
providing access to a school, park, recreation area, or a shopping center.
Plat. A map that provides for changes in land use or ownership.
Plat, Final. A final map of all of a subdivision, including supporting data, in substantial
conformance to an approved preliminary plat and all conditions placed upon it by the Commission
or Council, prepared by a registered land surveyor, in accordance with this Ordinance and the
Arizona Revised Statutes.
Plat, Preliminary. A preliminary map, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision
design, prepared by a registered civil engineer and a registered land surveyor, in accordance with this
Ordinance and the Arizona Revised Statutes. A preliminary site plan for a condominium
development shall be considered a preliminary plat.
Plat, Recorded. A Final Plat bearing all of the certificates of approval required by this Ordinance
and the Arizona Revised Statutes and duly recorded in the Graham County Recorder's Office.
Preliminary Approval. Affirmative action on a preliminary plat, noted upon prints of the plat,
indicating that approval of a final plat will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of specified conditions;
and which constitutes authorization to submit final engineering plans and the final plat.
Private Access Way. A private way of access dedicated as a tract to one (1) or more lots or air
spaces, which is owned and maintained by an individual or group of individuals and has been
improved in accordance with Town standards and plans approved by the Town Engineer. A private
access way is intended to apply where its use is logically consistent with a desire for neighborhood
identification and control of access, and where special design concepts may be involved, such as
within Traditional Neighborhood Developments and condominiums.
Protected Development Rights Plan. A final subdivision plat that meets all the requirements of
this Ordinance and A.R.S. 9-463.01, and which has been recorded with the County Recorder shall
constitute a Protected Development Rights Plan.
Recorder. The Recorder of Graham Councty.
Replat.
1. A plat for the purpose of reverting previously subdivided acreage to unsubdivided
acreage, or;
Q
R
Town of Thatcher
Page G.12 Glossary
2. A plat for the purpose of vacating rights of way previously dedicated to the public
and abandoned under procedures prescribed by the City Code, or:
3. A plat for the purpose of vacating or redescribing lot or parcel boundaries previously
recorded.
Roadway. That portion of a road or alley right-of-way that is improved for vehicular traffic and is
narrower in width than the right-of-way.
Roadway Easement. A recorded conveyance to the public over a described area for roadway
related uses.
Sketch Plan. A preliminary presentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan showing, at a
minimum, the proposed streets and alleys of sufficient accuracy to be used for discussion purposes
and identification of any items of controversy or issues of concern. Sketch plans may be drawn on
an aerial photo or satellite map and shall be drawn in relation to existing and planned development
and the streets immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision or site.
Small Subdivision. A subdivision of more than three (3) lots but less than or equal to fifteen (15)
lots with none of the lots being less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size and where
alternative street standards and/or public improvements may be approved by the Town.
Streets. Any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, bridge,
viaduct, or easement for public vehicular access, or a street shown in a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law, or a street in a plat duly filed and recorded in the Graham County Recorder's
Office. Street includes all land within the street right-of-way, whether improved or unimproved, and
includes such improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking spaces,
bridges and viaducts, bike lanes, pedestrian facilities, utility areas, and other such design features. A
public street must be accepted for maintenance, after construction in accordance with approved
plans, by the Town Council prior to acknowledgment that said street is a public street.
Street, Arterial. A street so designated on the Traffic Circulation Plan as a principal arterial street
or minor arterial street as classified in the Thatcher General Plan whose primary function is to carry
traffic between and through major traffic generators, have signalized intersections and restricted
parking.
Street, Collector. A street so designated on the Traffic Circulation Plan in the Thatcher General
Plan whose primary function is to carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets and whose
secondary function is to provide access to abutting properties.
Street, Cul-de-sac Street. A local street having one end permanently terminated in a vehicular
turnaround, or an equally convenient form of turning, and backing areas as may be recommended by
the Town Engineer.
S
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Glossary Page G.13
Street, Frontage. A local street parallel and adjacent to an arterial street that provides access to
abutting property, intercepts other local streets and controls access to the arterial street.
Street, Local. A local street permits direct access to abutting lands, traffic movements within
neighborhoods, and connections to the collector and arterial street system.
Street, Major. A principal traffic route for contiguous streets that is also a means of access to
arterial streets.
Street, Private. Any road or street that is not publicly owned and maintained providing access to
lots or units over a common parcel, primarily by the owners or occupants of the common parcel,
and necessary service and emergency vehicles, but from which the public may be excluded.
Streetscape. A design term referring to all the elements between the buildings on either side of the
street that, as a group, define its character, including building frontage/faade, street paving,
landscaping (including trees and other plantings), sidewalks, street furniture (benches, kiosks, trash
receptacles, fountains etc.) signs, awnings and colonnades, and street lighting.
Subdivider (see also Developer). The individual, firm, corporation, or partnership, association,
limited liability company, syndicate, trust or other legal entity that files the application and initiates
proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and
statutes of the State of Arizona; except that an individual serving as representative for such legal
entity is not a developer; and said developer need not be the owner of the property as defined by
this Ordinance. The Town Council may itself prepare or have prepared a plat for the subdivision of
land under municipal ownership.
Subdivision.
1. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing, sale,
lease, or conveyance whether immediate or future, into four (4) or more lots, tracts
or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided
into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, any such property, the
boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into two
(2) or more parts. Subdivision also includes any condominium, cooperative,
community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing four (4) or more
parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of
exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon.
2. Subdivision does not include the following:
a. The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property
owners if such sale or exchange does not create additional lots.
b. The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes regulating the
partitioning of land held in common ownership.
Town of Thatcher
Page G.14 Glossary
c. The leasing of apartment, offices, stores or similar space within a building or
trailer park, nor mineral, oil, or gas leases.
Town. The Town of Thatcher.
Town Council. The Town of Thatcher Town Council.
Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND). A development in which flexibility can be
permitted in the zoning standards, in order to encourage more creativity and sustainable design,
thereby providing usable open spaces within and about the development and enhancing the
residential character of the Town.
Trail, Multi-Use. A hard surfaced trail designed for all types of non-motorized use. These trails
should be constructed of either concrete or an all-weather surface such as rubberized asphalt, or
similar material.
Trail, Unpaved. A designated trail designed to accommodate primarily equestrians, off-road
bicycles, and pedestrian users.
Utility Services. Service to the public of water, sewer, electric, gas, communications, cable
television, drainage, flood control, or other facilities, owned and operated by any person, firm,
corporation, municipal department or board, duly authorized by State or Municipal regulations. The
foregoing shall be deemed to include facilities and appurtenances to the above uses but shall not
include public utility treatment and generating plants or offices.
Utility, Public. Any agency under public franchise or ownership, or under certificate of
convenience and necessity that provides the public with electric, gas, heat, communication, rail
transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service.
Water Supply, Assurance (100 Years). A written statement from Arizona Department of Water
Resources, that states the water supply and flows are adequate and in accordance with Town and
State requirements and provide evidence that it meets the Arizona Department of Water Resources
requirements for a one hundred (100) year assured supply.
T
U
V
W
X
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Glossary Page G.15
Zoning. The dividing of the Town into districts or zones and the establishment of regulations of
governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings within each zone or district.
Zoning Administrator. The staff/official responsible for the processing of applications required
by this Ordinance and for the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
Zoning Clearance. The approval by the Zoning Administrator of an application and/or plat that is
in conformance with this Ordinance.
(End of Glossary)
Y
Z
Town of Thatcher
Page G.16 Glossary
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Subdivision Ordinance - June 2013
Appendix A: (insert document name) Page A.1
Appendix A:
(For Future Use)
Town of Thatcher
Page A.2 Appendix A: (insert document name)
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Town of Thatcher
Zoning Ordinance
Approved June 2013  Last modified June 2019
Zoning Ordinance  Updated June 2019
Acknowledgments
The Town of Thatcher would like to thank the various individuals and working groups for taking the
time to provide suggestions and acknowledge their input in the drafting of this Ordinance.
Town Council Bob Rivera, Mayor
Bill Mulleneaux, Vice Mayor
Aaron Allen, Council Member
D. Wayne Griffin, Council Member
Donald Innes, Council Member
Ken Larson, Council Member
Joy Martin, Council Member
Planning & Zoning Commission Ramon Morales, Chairman
Mike Ajeman, Vice Chairman
Jerry Hoopes, Commissioner
Eddy Carlton, Commissioner
David Griffin, Commissioner
Pat Nelson, Commissioner
Bret Whitmer, Commissioner
Town Project Team Terry Hinton, Town Manager
Heath Brown, Town Engineer
Matt Clifford, Town Attorney
Project Consultants Contract Planning Service, Inc.
Livability Law Group
Ordinance Updates:
1. Ordinance No. 177-2015 (passed 7/2015): Added two (2) additional Conditional Uses in the C-2
Zoning District  amending Section 7.3D
2. Ordinance No. 180-2017 (passed 3/2017): Modified to allow drive-thru facilities in the C-1 Zoning
District  amending Sections 1.9 & 7.2
3. Ordinance No. 181-2017 (passed 6/2017): Modified the notification requirements for public
meetings  amending Section 3.2A
4. Ordinance No. 184-2019 (passed 6/2019): Added an R-2 Zoning District and modified text relating
to Cargo Containers, Fences and Walls and Underground Utilities - amending portions of Sections
3.2.B, 4.1, 6, 13.8C, 13.9, 13.17 and some terms in the glossary
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Table of Content Page i
TABLE OF CONTENT
Chapter 153, Article 1: Title, Purpose and Scope
Section 1.0 Short Title .................................................................................................................... 1.1
Section 1.1 Authority ...................................................................................................................... 1.1
Section 1.2 Purpose of Ordinance and Intent of its Application ............................................ 1.1
Section 1.3 Applicability ................................................................................................................. 1.1
Section 1.4 Conformance with the General Plan ....................................................................... 1.2
Section 1.5 Interpretation .............................................................................................................. 1.2
Section 1.6 Compliance .................................................................................................................. 1.3
Section 1.7 Fees ............................................................................................................................... 1.3
Section 1.8 Enforcement ............................................................................................................... 1.3
Section 1.9 Violations and Penalties ............................................................................................. 1.4
Section 1.10 Severability ................................................................................................................... 1.4
Chapter 153, Article 2: Administration
Section 2.0 Town Council .............................................................................................................. 2.1
Section 2.1 Planning and Zoning Commission .......................................................................... 2.1
Section 2.2 Board of Adjustment ................................................................................................. 2.4
Section 2.3 Zoning Administrator ................................................................................................ 2.6
Section 2.4 Building Official .......................................................................................................... 2.7
Chapter 153, Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
Section 3.0 Decision Matrix Summary ......................................................................................... 3.1
Section 3.1 General Procedural Requirements ........................................................................... 3.2
A. Application Process ...................................................................................... 3.2
B. Application Submittal ................................................................................... 3.2
C. Notification Requirements .......................................................................... 3.2
D. Citizen Review Process ................................................................................ 3.3
E. Public Meeting/Public Hearing .................................................................. 3.3
F. Records ........................................................................................................... 3.4
G. Reconsideration of Denied Applications .................................................. 3.4
H. Appeals ........................................................................................................... 3.5
Section 3.2 Notification Requirements ........................................................................................ 3.5
A. Notice for Public Meetings .......................................................................... 3.5
B. Notice for Public Hearings .......................................................................... 3.5
C. Notice of Appeals ......................................................................................... 3.5
D. No Notification Required ............................................................................ 3.5
Section 3.3 Rezoning Requests and Zoning Text Amendments ............................................. 3.5
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 3.5
B. Initiation of a Zoning Map Change (Rezoning) ....................................... 3.6
C. Initiation of Ordinance Text Amendment ................................................ 3.6
D. Submittal Requirements ............................................................................... 3.6
E. Procedures ..................................................................................................... 3.7
F. Protest ............................................................................................................. 3.8
G. Reversion of Zoning ..................................................................................... 3.8
Section 3.4 Use Permits ................................................................................................................. 3.8
Town of Thatcher
Page ii Table of Content
A. General Requirements .................................................................................. 3.8
B. Administrative Use Permits ......................................................................... 3.9
C. Conditional Use Permits .............................................................................. 3.9
D. Temporary Use Permit .............................................................................. 3.11
Section 3.5 Variances ................................................................................................................... 3.13
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................ 3.13
B. Application .................................................................................................. 3.13
C. Variance Requests ...................................................................................... 3.13
D. Appeal of Decision .................................................................................... 3.13
E. Validity Limit .............................................................................................. 3.14
Section 3.6 Site Plan Review ....................................................................................................... 3.14
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................ 3.14
B. Application .................................................................................................. 3.14
C. Submittal Requirements ............................................................................ 3.15
D. Procedures .................................................................................................. 3.16
E. Scope of Action .......................................................................................... 3.16
Section 3.7 Appeals ...................................................................................................................... 3.17
A. Appeals of Board of Adjustment Decision ............................................ 3.17
B. Appeal of Zoning Administrator Interpretation ................................... 3.17
C. Appeal of Zoning Administrator Decisions .......................................... 3.18
D. Appeals of Dedications and Exactions ................................................... 3.18
Section 3.8 Specific Area Plans .................................................................................................. 3.18
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................ 3.18
B. Application .................................................................................................. 3.19
C. Procedures .................................................................................................. 3.19
D. Subsequent Applications ........................................................................... 3.19
Section 3.9 General Plan Amendments .................................................................................... 3.19
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................ 3.19
B. Application .................................................................................................. 3.19
C. Procedures .................................................................................................. 3.20
D. Approval Criteria ....................................................................................... 3.20
E. Burden of Proof ......................................................................................... 3.21
Chapter 153, Article 4: Zoning Districts and Map
Section 4.0 Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4.1
Section 4.1 Establishment of Zoning Districts .......................................................................... 4.1
Section 4.2 Zoning Map ................................................................................................................. 4.2
Section 4.3 District Boundaries ..................................................................................................... 4.3
Section 4.4 Establishing Town Zoning in Annexed Areas ....................................................... 4.3
Section 4.5 Regulations within Zones .......................................................................................... 4.4
Chapter 153, Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
Section 5.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................... 5.1
A. Purpose and Zones ....................................................................................... 5.1
B. Permitted Uses .............................................................................................. 5.1
C. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................... 5.1
D. Review Process .............................................................................................. 5.1
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Table of Content Page iii
E. Design and Development Standards .......................................................... 5.1
F. Compliance with Other Provisions ............................................................ 5.1
Section 5.1 R1-43 Agricultural Residential Zoning District ................................................. 5.2
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 5.2
B. Permitted Uses in the R1-43 Zoning District ....................................... 5.2
C. Administrative Uses in the R1-43 Zoning District .............................. 5.3
D. Conditional Uses in the R1-43 Zoning District ................................... 5.5
E. Temporary Uses in the R1-43 Zoning District .................................... 5.7
Section 5.2 R1-22 Low Density Residential Zoning District ............................................... 5.8
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 5.8
B. Permitted Uses in the R1-22 Zoning District ....................................... 5.8
C. Administrative Uses in the R1-22 Zoning District .............................. 5.9
D. Conditional Uses in the R1-22 Zoning District ................................ 5.11
E. Temporary Uses in the R1-22 Zoning District ................................. 5.11
Section 5.3 R1-10 Low Density Residential Zoning District ............................................ 5.12
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................ 5.12
B. Permitted Uses in the R1-10 Zoning District .................................... 5.12
C. Administrative Uses in the R1-10 Zoning District ........................... 5.13
D. Conditional Uses in the R1-10 Zoning District ................................ 5.15
E. Temporary Uses in the R1-10 Zoning District ................................. 5.16
Section 5.4 R1-8 Medium Density Residential Zoning District ........................................ 5.17
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................ 5.17
B. Permitted Uses in the R1-8 Zoning District ...................................... 5.17
C. Administrative Uses in the R1-8 Zoning District ............................. 5.18
D. Conditional Uses in the R1-8 Zoning District .................................. 5.20
E. Temporary Uses in the R1-8 Zoning District .................................... 5.21
Section 5.5 Design and Development Standards .................................................................... 5.22
A. Site Design Standards ................................................................................ 5.22
B. Architectural Design Guidelines .............................................................. 5.22
C. Development Standards ............................................................................ 5.23
Chapter 153, Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts
Section 6.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................... 6.1
A. Purpose and Zones ....................................................................................... 6.1
B. Permitted Uses .............................................................................................. 6.1
C. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................... 6.1
D. Review Process .............................................................................................. 6.1
E. Design and Development Standards .......................................................... 6.1
F. Compliance with Other Provisions ............................................................ 6.1
Section 6.1 R-2 Medium Density Residential Zoning District ............................................. 6.2
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 6.2
B. Permitted Uses in the R-2 Zoning District ........................................... 6.2
C. Administrative Uses in the R-2 Zoning District .................................. 6.3
Section 6.2 R-3 Medium Density Residential Zoning District ............................................. 6.3
A. Purpose .................................................................................................................. 6.3
B. Permitted Uses in the R-3 Zoning District ........................................... 6.3
Town of Thatcher
Page iv Table of Content
C. Administrative Uses in the R-3 Zoning District .................................. 6.4
D. Conditional Uses in the R-3 Zoning District ........................................ 6.5
Section 6.3 R-4 High Density Residential Zoning District ................................................... 6.7
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 6.7
B. Permitted Uses in the R-4 Zoning District ........................................... 6.7
C. Administrative Uses in the R-4 Zoning District .................................. 6.8
D. Conditional Uses in the R-4 Zoning District ........................................ 6.8
Section 6.4 Design and Development Standards ....................................................................... 6.9
A. Site Design Standards ................................................................................... 6.9
B. Architectural Design Guidelines .............................................................. 6.10
C. Development Standards ............................................................................ 6.11
Chapter 153, Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts
Section 7.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................... 7.1
A. Purpose and Zones ....................................................................................... 7.1
B. Permitted Uses .............................................................................................. 7.1
C. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................... 7.1
D. Review Process .............................................................................................. 7.1
E. Design and Development Standards .......................................................... 7.1
F. Compliance with Other Provisions ............................................................ 7.1
Section 7.1 NC Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District .............................................. 7.2
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 7.2
B. Permitted Uses in the NC Zoning District ........................................... 7.2
C. Administrative Uses in the NC Zoning District .................................. 7.3
D. Conditional Uses in the NC Zoning District ........................................ 7.3
Section 7.2 C-1 General Commercial Zoning District .......................................................... 7.3
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 7.3
B. Permitted Uses in the C-1 Zoning District ........................................... 7.3
C. Administrative Uses in the C-1 Zoning District .................................. 7.4
D. Conditional Uses in the C-1 Zoning District ....................................... 7.5
E. Temporary Uses in the C-1 Zoning District ......................................... 7.5
Section 7.3 C-2 Highway Commercial Zoning District ........................................................ 7.5
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 7.5
B. Permitted Uses in the C-2 Zoning District ........................................... 7.5
C. Administrative Uses in the C-2 Zoning District .................................. 7.7
D. Conditional Uses in the C-2 Zoning District ....................................... 7.7
E. Temporary Uses in the C-2 Zoning District ......................................... 7.7
Section 7.4 MU Mixed Use Zoning District ........................................................................... 7.7
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 7.7
B. Permitted Uses in the MU Zoning District .......................................... 7.8
C. Administrative Uses in the MU Zoning District .................................. 7.8
D. Conditional Uses in the MU Zoning District ....................................... 7.8
E. Temporary Uses in the MU Zoning District ........................................ 7.9
Section 7.5 Design and Development Standards ....................................................................... 7.9
A. Site Design Standards ................................................................................... 7.9
B. Architectural Design Guidelines .............................................................. 7.10
C. Development Standards ............................................................................ 7.11
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Table of Content Page v
Chapter 153, Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts
Section 8.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................... 8.1
A. Purpose and Zones ....................................................................................... 8.1
B. Permitted Uses .............................................................................................. 8.1
C. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................... 8.1
D. Review Process .............................................................................................. 8.1
E. Design and Development Standards .......................................................... 8.1
F. Compliance with Other Provisions ............................................................ 8.1
Section 8.1 I-1 Light Industrial Zoning District ..................................................................... 8.2
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 8.2
B. Permitted Uses in the I-1 Zoning District ............................................ 8.2
C. Administrative Uses in the I-1 Zoning District .................................... 8.3
D. Conditional Uses in the I-1 Zoning District ......................................... 8.4
Section 8.2 I-2 General Industrial Zoning District ................................................................ 8.5
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 8.5
B. Permitted Uses in the I-2 Zoning District ............................................ 8.5
C. Administrative Uses in the I-2 Zoning District .................................... 8.6
D. Conditional Uses in the I-2 Zoning District ......................................... 8.6
Section 8.3 Design and Development Standards ....................................................................... 8.8
A. Site Design Standards ................................................................................... 8.8
B. Architectural Design Guidelines ................................................................. 8.9
C. Development Standards ............................................................................... 8.9
Chapter 153, Article 9: MH Manufactured Home Zoning District
Section 9.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................... 9.1
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................... 9.1
B. General Provisions ....................................................................................... 9.1
C. Review Process .............................................................................................. 9.2
D. Permitted Uses .............................................................................................. 9.3
E. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................... 9.3
F. Design and Development Standards .......................................................... 9.3
G. Compliance with Other Provisions ............................................................ 9.3
Section 9.1 Manufactured Home Subdivision Lot Development ............................................ 9.3
A. Permitted Uses (subdivisions) ..................................................................... 9.3
B. Administrative Uses (subdivisions) ............................................................ 9.4
C. Conditional Uses (subdivisions) ................................................................. 9.5
Section 9.2 Manufactured Home Park (land-lease) Development .......................................... 9.5
A. Permitted Uses (park developments) ......................................................... 9.5
Section 9.3 Design and Development Standards ....................................................................... 9.6
A. Site Design Standards Subdivision Lot Developments ........................... 9.6
B. Site Design Standards Park (land-lease) Developments .......................... 9.7
C. Architectural Standards (all manufactured homes) .................................. 9.8
D. Open Space and Development Standards ................................................. 9.9
Section 9.4 Exceptions ................................................................................................................ 9.10
Town of Thatcher
Page vi Table of Content
Chapter 153, Article 10: OS Open Space Zoning District
Section 10.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................ 10.1
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................ 10.1
B. Permitted Uses ........................................................................................... 10.1
C. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................ 10.2
D. Review Process ........................................................................................... 10.3
E. Design and Development Standards ....................................................... 10.3
F. Compliance with Other Provisions ......................................................... 10.5
Chapter 153, Article 11: P-I Public - Institutional Zoning District
Section 11.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................ 11.1
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................ 11.1
B. Permitted Uses ........................................................................................... 11.1
C. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................ 11.1
D. Review Process ........................................................................................... 11.2
E. Design and Development Standards ....................................................... 11.3
F. Compliance with Other Provisions ......................................................... 11.5
Chapter 153, Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
Section 12.0 General Requirements ............................................................................................ 12.1
A. Purpose and Zones .................................................................................... 12.1
B. Application Process ................................................................................... 12.1
C. Permitted Uses ........................................................................................... 12.1
D. Compliance with Other Provisions ......................................................... 12.1
Section 12.1 TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay Zoning District . 12.1
A. Purpose and Intent .................................................................................... 12.1
B. General Provisions - TND Overlay Zoning District ........................... 12.2
C. TND Overlay Zoning Incentives ............................................................ 12.4
D. Permitted Uses ........................................................................................... 12.4
E. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................ 12.6
F. Submittal Requirements ............................................................................ 12.7
G. Design Standards for any TND Zoning District ................................ 12.11
H. Amendments to an Approved TND Overlay ..................................... 12.19
Section 12.2 RV Recreational Vehicle Overlay Zoning District ....................................... 12.20
A. Purpose ...................................................................................................... 12.20
B. Underlying Zoning Districts .................................................................. 12.20
C. Permitted Uses ......................................................................................... 12.20
D. Site Specifications .................................................................................... 12.20
Chapter 153, Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
Section 13.0 Purpose ..................................................................................................................... 13.1
Section 13.1 Use Restrictions ....................................................................................................... 13.1
A. Permitted Uses ........................................................................................... 13.1
B. Conditional Uses ........................................................................................ 13.1
C. Zoning Clearance ....................................................................................... 13.1
D. Building Permits ......................................................................................... 13.1
Section 13.2 Lots Divisions .......................................................................................................... 13.1
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Table of Content Page vii
Section 13.3 Lot Access Requirements ....................................................................................... 13.1
Section 13.4 Unsuitable Sites ........................................................................................................ 13.2
Section 13.5 Performance Standards ........................................................................................... 13.3
Section 13.6 Projections into Required Yards ........................................................................... 13.4
Section 13.7 Height Limitations ................................................................................................... 13.5
A. Building Height ................................................................................................. 13.5
B. Height Limitation on Corner Lots .......................................................... 13.5
Section 13.8 Accessory Building and Uses ................................................................................. 13.6
A. Customary Outbuildings ........................................................................... 13.6
B. Accessory Buildings ................................................................................... 13.6
C. Cargo Containers and Semi-trailers ......................................................... 13.7
D. Portable Carports ....................................................................................... 13.8
Section 13.9 Fences and Walls ..................................................................................................... 13.9
Section 13.10 Swimming Pools .................................................................................................... 13.10
Section 13.11 Home Occupations ............................................................................................... 13.10
Section 13.12 Outdoor Storage and Junk Automobiles ........................................................... 13.13
Section 13.13 Dumping and Disposal ......................................................................................... 13.14
Section 13.14 Restrictions on Keeping of Animals, Fowl or Rodents ................................... 13.14
Section 13.15 Medical Marijuana Uses ........................................................................................ 13.15
Section 13.16 Adult Oriented Businesses ................................................................................... 13.17
Section 13.17 Underground Utilities ........................................................................................... 13.18
Chapter 153, Article 14: Parking Regulations
Section 14.0 Purpose ..................................................................................................................... 14.1
Section 14.1 General Regulations ................................................................................................ 14.1
Section 14.2 Improvements .......................................................................................................... 14.2
Section 14.3 Parking Space and Maneuvering Dimensions ..................................................... 14.2
Section 14.4 Required Parking by Type of Use ......................................................................... 14.3
Chapter 153, Article 15: Sign Regulations
Section 15.0 Purpose ..................................................................................................................... 15.1
Section 15.1 Applicability and General Requirements ............................................................. 15.1
Section 15.2 Sign Measurements .................................................................................................. 15.2
Section 15.3 Permitted Signage by Zoning District .................................................................. 15.4
A. Single and Multiple Residence Zoning Districts ................................... 15.4
B. Commercial Zoning Districts ................................................................... 15.5
C. Industrial Zoning Districts ....................................................................... 15.9
D. Open Space and Public-Institutional Zoning Districts ...................... 15.10
Section 15.4 Temporary Signage ................................................................................................ 15.12
A. Banners, Pennants and Displays for Grand Openings ....................... 15.12
B. Special Event Banners and Community Signs ..................................... 15.12
C. Political Signs ............................................................................................ 15.13
D. Real Estate Signs ...................................................................................... 15.13
E. Construction and Future Development Signs ..................................... 15.13
F. Portable Signs ........................................................................................... 15.14
G. Yard Sale Signs ......................................................................................... 15.14
Section 15.5 Exceptions .............................................................................................................. 15.14
Town of Thatcher
Page viii Table of Content
A. Permits Not Required ............................................................................. 15.14
B. Exempted Signage ................................................................................... 15.15
Section 15.6 Prohibited, Unsafe and Illegal Signs ................................................................... 15.16
A. Prohibited Signs ....................................................................................... 15.16
B. Unsafe Signs ............................................................................................. 15.17
C. Illegal Signs ............................................................................................... 15.17
Section 15.7 Submittal and Permit Requirements ................................................................... 15.17
Chapter 153, Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
Section 16.0 Purpose and Intent .................................................................................................. 16.1
Section 16.1 Conformance and Applicability ............................................................................. 16.1
Section 16.2 Outdoor Lighting Areas and Lighting Uses ........................................................ 16.2
Section 16.3 Total Lighting Output and Shielding Requirements .......................................... 16.3
Section 16.4 Outdoor Advertising Signs ..................................................................................... 16.5
Section 16.5 Special Uses .............................................................................................................. 16.6
A. Outdoor Recreational Facilities ............................................................... 16.6
B. Outdoor Display Lots ............................................................................... 16.7
C. Agricultural Facilities ................................................................................. 16.8
D. Parking Lot Lighting .................................................................................. 16.8
Section 16.6 Submittal and Permit Requirements ..................................................................... 16.9
Section 16.7 Prohibited Outdoor Lighting ............................................................................... 16.10
Section 16.8 Temporary Exemption ......................................................................................... 16.10
Section 16.9 Nonconformance .................................................................................................. 16.11
Section 16.10 Alternative Materials and Appeals ...................................................................... 16.11
Section 16.11 Law Governing Conflicts ..................................................................................... 16.12
Chapter 153, Article 17: Landscape Regulations
Section 17.0 Purpose and Intent .................................................................................................. 17.1
Section 17.1 Plant Specifications ................................................................................................. 17.1
Section 17.2 Landscape Requirements for Specific Land Use ................................................ 17.2
A. Single Residence Zoning/Land Use ....................................................... 17.2
B. Multiple Residence Zoning/Land Use ................................................... 17.2
C. Commercial Zoning/Land Use ............................................................... 17.3
D. Industrial and Public-Institutional Zoning/Land Use ......................... 17.4
Section 17.3 R.O.W., Parking Lot and Retention Basin Landscaping ................................... 17.4
A. Specific Right-of-Way Landscaping Requirements ............................... 17.4
B. Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements ................................................. 17.6
C. Retention Basin Landscaping ................................................................... 17.7
D. Maintenance of Landscaping ................................................................... 17.7
Section 17.4 Landscape Plan Submittal Requirements ............................................................. 17.7
Chapter 153, Article 18: Wireless Communications
Section 18.0 Purpose ..................................................................................................................... 18.1
Section 18.1 Conformance with Applicable Codes ................................................................... 18.1
Section 18.2 Application and Submittal Requirements ............................................................ 18.1
Section 18.3 Use Permit and Findings ........................................................................................ 18.3
Section 18.4 Permit Terms, Limitations and Waivers ............................................................... 18.4
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Table of Content Page ix
Section 18.5 General Requirements ............................................................................................ 18.5
A. In Single Residence Zoning Districts ...................................................... 18.5
B. Support Structures ..................................................................................... 18.5
C. Height .......................................................................................................... 18.6
D. Setbacks and Exemptions ......................................................................... 18.7
E. Screening and Aesthetics .......................................................................... 18.8
F. Equipment Cabinets and Buildings ......................................................... 18.9
G. Building Codes and Safety Standards .................................................... 18.10
H. Noise .......................................................................................................... 18.10
I. Co-Location .............................................................................................. 18.10
Section 18.6 Specific Requirements for Satellite Dishes ........................................................ 18.11
Chapter 153, Article 19: Nonconforming Uses
Section 19.0 Purpose ..................................................................................................................... 19.1
Section 19.1 Limitation on Buildings .......................................................................................... 19.1
Section 19.2 Limitation on Uses .................................................................................................. 19.2
Section 19.3 Limitation on Lots ................................................................................................... 19.2
Section 19.4 Limitation on Signs ................................................................................................. 19.2
List of Tables
Table No. 1 Application Type and Decision Authority Summary ............................................ 3.1
Table No. 2 Open Space Requirements - Single Residence Zoning Districts ...................... 5.22
Table No. 3 Development Standards - Single Residence Zoning Districts ........................... 5.23
Table No. 4 Open Space Requirements - Multiple Residence Zoning Districts ..................... 6.9
Table No. 5 Development Standards - Multiple Residence Zoning Districts ....................... 6.10
Table No. 6 Open Space Requirements - Commercial Zoning Districts ................................. 7.9
Table No. 7 Development Standards - Commercial Zoning Districts ................................... 7.11
Table No. 8 Open Space Requirements - Industrial Zoning Districts ..................................... 8.8
Table No. 9 Development Standards - Industrial Zoning Districts ........................................ 8.10
Table No. 10 Open Space Requirements - Manufactured Home Zoning District ................... 9.9
Table No. 11 Development Standards - Manufactured Home Zoning District ..................... 9.10
Table No. 12 Development Standards - Open Space Zoning District ..................................... 10.4
Table No. 13 Development Standards - Public-Institutional Zoning District ........................ 11.5
Table No. 14 Land Use Mix for a TND Overlay Development .............................................. 12.3
Table No. 15 Required Parking Spaces ........................................................................................ 14.4
Table No. 16 Total Outdoor Light Output Lumen Caps .......................................................... 16.4
Table No. 17 Lamp Type and Shielding Standards .................................................................... 16.5
Table No. 18 Illuminated Sign Curfews ....................................................................................... 16.6
Table No. 19 Sports Facility and Display Lot Curfews .............................................................. 16.7
Table No. 20 Agricultural Facility Curfew ................................................................................... 16.8
Table No. 21 Maximum Height of WCF ...................................................................................... 18.7
Glossary ........................................................................................................................ G.1
Town of Thatcher
Page x Table of Content
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 1: Title, Purpose and Scope Page 1.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 1: Title, Purpose and Scope
Section 1.0 Short Title. These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the
Town of Thatcher Zoning Ordinance and will be referred to herein as this
Code, or this Ordinance. All appendices, tables, exhibits and/or maps within
this Ordinance are hereby adopted and shall be incorporated herein as a part of
this Ordinance.
Section 1.1 Authority. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in the Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S.)  9-462, et seq. and general
laws in order to conserve and promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the present and future citizens of the Town of Thatcher. The Town
of Thatcher may be referred to herein as the Town.
Section 1.2 Purpose of Ordinance and Intent of its Application.
A. To provide the minimum requirements for the implementation of the Town of
Thatcher General Plan (the General Plan) and to ensure consistency and
conformity between the General Plan Land Use designations and Zoning
Districts;
B. Maintain and enhance the appearance and function of both new and existing
development;
C. Promote an efficient use of land resources and ensure compatibility between land
uses;
D. Establish standards regulating the use and physical development of land;
E. Direct growth with priority to those areas where infrastructure and urban
services can be economically provided;
F. Provide for procedures that respond uniformly and consistently to development
proposals; and
G. Establish offices, boards, and commissions and define the power and duties of
each.
Section 1.3 Applicability.
A. The provisions of this Ordinance shall govern the development and the uses of
all buildings, structures, and land within the corporate limits of the Town of
Thatcher.
Town of Thatcher
Page 1.2 Article 1: Title, Purpose and Scope
B. Any use not described and included by this Ordinance as being a permitted use, a
use subject to conditions, or a use subject to a use permit within a specific zoning
district shall be prohibited and is a violation of this Ordinance unless the Town
of Thatcher Planning and Zoning Commission (the Commission) and Town
of Thatcher Town Council (the Town Council) determine the use is
substantially similar to other uses permitted in the zone.
C. No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and no building,
structure, or land shall be developed, and no permit, certificate or license shall be
issued for any building, structure, or land unless it is in conformity with all
applicable provisions of this Ordinance. Any permit, certificate or license issued
in conflict with the terms or provisions of this Ordinance is subject to
revocation, and/or work stoppage order, and any other remedy available as law.
D. All changes to distinguishing traits or primary features or the use of a building or
land, as evidenced by increased parking requirements, change of occupancy, or
other features, occurring to existing properties after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall be subject to all provisions of this Ordinance.
E. This Ordinance is intended to benefit the public as a whole and not any specific
person or class of persons. Although through the implementation, administration
and enforcement of this Ordinance, benefits and detriments will be enjoyed or
suffered by specific individuals, such is merely a by-product of the overall benefit
to the whole community. Therefore, unintentional breaches of the obligations of
administration and enforcement imposed on the Town shall not be enforceable
in tort, nor create a case of action against the Town.
Section 1.4 Conformance with the General Plan. This Ordinance is
intended to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Town of
Thatcher General Plan and is hereby deemed to be in conformance with the
adopted General Plan. Any amendments to or actions pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be in conformance with the General Plan and relevant laws, as it
may be amended from time to time.
Section 1.5 Interpretation.
A. The standards and restrictions established by this Ordinance shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the General Plan,
and for the interpretation and administration of the zoning regulations,
standards, restrictions, uses, procedures, enforcement, fees,
administration, and all other areas addressed herein.
B. This Ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any existing
provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those zoning and building
ordinances specifically repealed by this Ordinance, and providing that they are
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 1: Title, Purpose and Scope Page 1.3
not in conflict with this Ordinance. In the event of a conflict, the provisions of
this Ordinance shall govern. This Ordinance also is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any private agreements between persons, such as
easements, deeds, covenants, except that if this Ordinance imposes higher
standards or a greater restriction on land, buildings or structures than an
otherwise applicable provision of a law, ordinance, or a private agreement, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
C. Where other laws, ordinances, or private restrictions are more restrictive, the
Town cannot enforce the more restrictive laws, ordinances, or private
restrictions as a part of this Ordinance.
D. This Ordinance, upon its adoption, amends the text of all other zoning
ordinances previously adopted by the Town of Thatcher, Arizona.
Section 1.6 Compliance.
A. No building permit or other permit required by this Ordinance may be lawfully
issued nor shall a Certificate of Occupancy be granted until the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee has given authorization indicating all
requirements of this Ordinance, all conditions and stipulations of approval, and
any other specific project related requirements have been met.
B. Except as specifically provided to the contrary in this Ordinance, each review
and approval required by this Ordinance shall be independent of every other
review and approval, and no review or approval shall be deemed to waive or
satisfy any other requirement set forth herein.
C. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Ordinance or any other
Town ordinance or code specify different requirements, the more restrictive shall
govern. Where there is conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall apply.
Section 1.7 Fees. The Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Thatcher may
from time to time establish, and set by resolution, administrative fees considered
necessary to enforce this Ordinance and for the administration and processing
applications for development. The developer/applicant shall, at the time of
filing, pay to the Town those established fees. These fees shall be nonrefundable.
Section 1.8 Enforcement.
A. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of this
Ordinance and his/her designated representative shall be responsible for the
Town of Thatcher
Page 1.4 Article 1: Title, Purpose and Scope
enforcement of this Ordinance to further the promotion of the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall in no case grant permission for the issuance of
any permit for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition,
conversion, movement, use or occupancy of any building, structure, lot, or parcel
if the Zoning Administrator determines that the building, structure, lot or parcel
as proposed to be constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, used, or
moved, would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, unless
directed to issue such permit by the Board of Adjustment after interpretation of
the ordinance or the granting of a variance.
Section 1.9 Violations and Penalties.
A. Violation. Any building or structure erected or maintained or any use of
property in violation of this Ordinance shall be declared unlawful and a public
nuisance, and the Town Attorney shall immediately commence action, or
proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner
provided by law; and shall take such other actions to grant such relief as will
abate or remove such building or structure or use of any property in violation of
this Ordinance. It shall be the right and duty of every citizen to participate and
assist the Town officials in the enforcement of the regulations of this Ordinance.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this code which is classified as a
Class 1 misdemeanor, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine not
to exceed $2500, by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, by a
term of probation not to exceed three years, or by any combination of the
fine, imprisonment and probation.
Section 1.10 Severability.
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of
this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any
provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building, or other structure,
such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other
property, building or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
(End of Article)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 2: Administration Page 2.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 2: Administration
Section 2.0 Town Council. The Mayor of the Town of Thatcher (the Mayor)
and the Town Council shall have the following powers and duties, pursuant to
the terms of this Ordinance (refer to Table 1 Decision Matrix Summary):
A. To hear, review and act upon applications, after considering recommendations of
the Commission, on zoning applications, conditional use permits, and temporary
use permits, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. To initiate, hear, review and adopt amendments to the Zoning District Map after
recommendation by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
C. To initiate, hear, review and adopt amendments to the text of this Ordinance
after the recommendation by the Commission, in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
D. To initiate, adopt, and amend the General Plan; including the text, maps and
exhibits, and all elements of the General Plan, after recommendation by the
Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
E. To hear, review and act upon applications, after considering recommendations of
the Commission, on subdivision applications and protected development rights
plans in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
F. To take such action not expressly delegated exclusively to the Zoning
Administrator, the Commission, or the Board of Adjustment as the Town
Council may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this
Ordinance and the General Plan.
Section 2.1 Planning and Zoning Commission.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established, pursuant to Arizona Revised
Statutes A.R.S. 9-461.01 et seq., a planning agency known as the Town of
Thatcher Planning and Zoning Commission (the Commission).
B. Powers. The Commission is the planning agency for the Town and has the
powers to enable it to fulfill its planning function, in accordance with the
Arizona Revised Statutes. The Commission shall provide an advisory function to
assist the Town Council in making decisions pertaining to amendments to the
General Plan and this Ordinance, and applications for development approval. In
no event is the Commission authorized to render a final decision; except as
otherwise authorized in this section of the Ordinance.
Town of Thatcher
Page 2.2 Article 2: Administration
C. Duties. In addition to any authority granted to the Commission by Arizona law,
this Ordinance or by other ordinances of the Town, the Commission shall have
the following duties (refer to Table 1 Decision Matrix Summary):
1. To hold public hearings when necessary or when required by law.
2. To initiate, hear, review, and make recommendations to the Town
Council regarding applications for amendments to the General Plan or
Area Specific Plans, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
On a biennial basis, review the implementation progress and make
recommendations to the Town Council on necessary updates or
refinements to the General Plan.
3. To make recommendations to the Town Council on all matters
concerning or relating to the creation of Zoning Ordinances, the Zoning
District Map, the boundaries thereof, the appropriate regulations to be
enforced therein, and amendments of this Ordinance, and to undertake
any other activities within the scope of the planning and zoning power.
4. To initiate, hear and review applications for amendments to either the
Zoning District Map and/or the text of this Ordinance.
5. To hear, review and make recommendations to the Town Council on
applications for conditional use permits and temporary use permits.
6. To serve as the advisory body to the Town Council on such matters as
applications for protected development rights plans, subdivision
preliminary and final plats, and any subdivision regulation exceptions, in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the provisions of
the Towns Subdivision Ordinance.
7. To confer and advise with other town, city, county, regional, or state
planning agencies and commissions.
D. Membership. The Commission shall be composed of a total of seven (7)
members, all residents and taxpayers of the Town, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the Town Council.
E. Term of Office. The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be
four (4) years, with the terms of members so staggered that the terms of no more
than three (3) members shall expire on July 1st in any one (1) year. The
incumbent Commissioner shall continue to serve, after their term of office has
expired, until a successor has been appointed. In the event of a death,
resignation, or removal from the Commission, a resident appointed by the Town
Council shall fill the vacancy, for the un-expired term.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 2: Administration Page 2.3
F. Nonattendance. When a Commission member has three (3) successive
unexcused or unexplained absences from any regular or special meeting it shall
be grounds for termination of that Commission member at the will and pleasure
of the Mayor without the necessity of a hearing or notice, and such action shall
be final and the position shall thereupon be declared vacant.
G. Organization.
1. Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from among its own members who shall serve for one (1)
year until their successors are elected and qualified. The Chairperson
shall preside at all meetings and shall take such actions as necessary to
preserve order and the integrity of all proceedings before the
Commission. The Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths
and to take evidence. The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of
the Chairperson in the latters absence or disability.
2. Meetings. Meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public.
Public input shall be permitted in public meetings on matters before the
Commission. The minutes of the meeting shall reflect the "ayes" and
"nays" cast on a particular measure and shall reflect the vote of each
member present. The minutes shall be kept and filed in the office of the
Town Clerk as a public record. Special meetings may be called by the
Chairperson or in his absence by the Vice Chairperson. In addition, any
three (3) members of the Commission may make written request to the
Chairperson for a special meeting in such a manner and form as may be
provided in the Commission rules
3. Quorum. Four (4) members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. No matter may be considered by
the Commission unless there are four (4) or more members present who
are eligible/qualified to vote on the matter. The affirmative vote of at
least the majority of the quorum present and voting shall be required to
pass a motion. If a member has a conflict of interest, he/she shall
declare said conflict of interest prior to the presentation and shall abstain
from all discussion and deliberation on the matter in question.
4. Rules and Regulations. The Commission may make and publish by-laws
to govern its proceedings and to provide for its meetings. The by-laws
are to be reviewed by the Town Attorney and approved by the Town
Council.
H. Compensation. All members shall serve without pay. However, Commission
members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with
their duties upon authorization or ratification by the Commission and approval
of such expenditures by the Town Council.
Town of Thatcher
Page 2.4 Article 2: Administration
Section 2.2 Board of Adjustment.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established, pursuant to Arizona Revised
Statutes A.R.S. 9-462.06 et seq., a Zoning Board of Adjustment to be known as
the Town of Thatcher Zoning Board of Adjustment (the Board).
B. Powers and Duties. In addition to any authority granted to the Board of
Adjustment by Arizona law, the Board shall have the following powers and
duties (refer to Table 1 Decision Matrix Summary):
1. To hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged that there is an error in
an order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Administrator in
the interpretation of this Ordinance. This power shall include the power
to reverse, affirm, or modify, wholly or partly, any order, requirement or
decision of the Zoning Administrator properly appealed to the Board,
and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as is
necessary.
2. To hear and decide requests for variances from the terms of this Zoning
Ordinance, only if, because of special circumstances applicable to the
property, including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings,
the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance will deprive such property
of privileges enjoyed by other properties of the same classification in the
same Zoning District. Any variance granted is subject to such conditions
as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant
of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other
properties in the same Zoning District where such property is located.
3. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance may only be granted, upon
the presentation of evidence demonstrating satisfaction of the specific
requirements established by State Statutes as follows:
a. There exists special circumstances or conditions regarding the
land or building for which the variance or adjustment is sought,
which do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the
same zoning district;
b. The above special circumstances or conditions are preexisting
and are not created or self-imposed;
c. The variance is necessary for the preservation of substantial
property rights. Without a variance the property cannot be used
for purposes otherwise allowed in the same zoning district and
the variance or adjustment, as granted, is the minimum
adjustment that will accomplish this purpose; and
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 2: Administration Page 2.5
d. The granting of the adjustment will not be materially detrimental
to persons residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent
property, or to the neighborhood or the public welfare.
4. The Board of Adjustment may not:
a. Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning
classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms
of the zoning ordinance, provided the restrictions in this
paragraph shall not affect the authority to grant variances
pursuant to State Statutes.
b. Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the
property are self-imposed by the property owner
C. Membership. The Board shall be composed of a total of seven (7) members
who shall be residents and taxpayers of the Town of Thatcher. The Board
members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Town
Council, provided however, that the Town Council shall serve as the Board of
Adjustment until such time as the Council shall determine a need for a separate
Board.
D. Term of Office. Whenever the Town Council is not serving as the Board, the
term of office of the members of the Board shall be for a period of four (4) years
each, with the terms of members staggered so that the terms of no more than
three (3) members shall expire in any one (1) year. The terms of all members
shall extend, after their term of office has expired, until their successors are
qualified. In the event of a death, resignation, or removal from the Board, the
Town Council shall fill the vacancy for the un-expired term.
E. Nonattendance. When a Board member has three (3) successive unexcused or
unexplained absences from any regular meeting shall be grounds for termination
of that Board member at the will and pleasure of the Town Council without the
necessity of a hearing or notice, and such action shall be final.
F. Organization of Board of Adjustment.
1. Officers. Whenever the Town Council is serving as the Board, the
Mayor and Vice Mayor shall serve as the Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson respectively. Otherwise, the Board shall elect a Chairperson
and a Vice Chairperson from among its own members, who shall serve
for one (1) year until their successors are elected and qualified. The
Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and shall take such actions as
necessary to preserve order and the integrity of all proceedings before the
Board. The Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and
take evidence. The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the
Chairperson in the latters absence or disability. Vacancies created by any
cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by a new election.
Town of Thatcher
Page 2.6 Article 2: Administration
2. Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment will be called as needed
by the Chair of the Board. Meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public and public input shall be taken at the discretion of the Chairman.
The minutes of the proceedings, showing the votes of each member and
records of it examinations and other official actions, shall be kept and
filed in the office of the Town Clerk as a public record.
3. Quorum. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. No matter may be considered by the Board
unless there are four (4) or more members present who are
eligible/qualified to vote on the matter. The affirmative vote of at least
the majority of the quorum present and voting shall be required to pass a
motion. If a member has a conflict of interest he/she shall declare said
conflict of interest prior to the presentation and shall abstain from all
discussion and deliberation on the matter in question.
4. Rules and Regulations. The Board may adopt all rules and procedures
necessary or convenient for the conduct of its business. These rules are
to be reviewed by the Town Attorney and approved by the Town
Council.
G. Compensation. All members shall serve without pay. However, Board
members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with
their duties upon authorization or ratification by the Board and approval of such
expenditures by the Town Council.
Section 2.3 Zoning Administrator.
A. Establishment. The staff position of Zoning Administrator is hereby
established for the general and specific administration of this Ordinance and
serves under the direction of the Town Manager.
B. Powers. The Zoning Administrator is the Town official established pursuant to
A.R.S.  9-462.05. The Zoning Administrator is charged with the responsibility
of administration of the General Plan and this Ordinance and the supervision of
the enforcement of this Ordinance.
C. Duties of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall have
the following duties (refer to Table 1 Decision Matrix Summary):
1. To establish rules and procedures consistent with this Ordinance for its
implementation.
2. Accomplish all administrative actions required by this Ordinance,
including the giving of notice, scheduling of hearings, preparation of
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 2: Administration Page 2.7
reports, receiving and processing appeals, and the acceptance and
accounting of fees, as provided in other provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Interpret this Ordinance to the public, town departments, and other
branches of government, under the direction of the Town Manager and
general or specific policies established by the Town Council.
4. Represent the Town in conference and preliminary discussions with
property owners and provide non-legal advice to applicants requesting
assistance.
5. Determine the location of any district boundary shown on the Zoning
Map adopted as part of this Ordinance when such location is in dispute.
6. To provide advice, recommendations and staff assistance to the
Commission, the Board, and the Town Council with respect to
applications, requests for approvals, permits and meetings required by
this Ordinance.
7. To review and either approve or reject applications for Administrative
Use Permits, Site Plan Reviews and Minor Land Splits and to prescribe in
connection with said applications such conditions as deemed necessary in
order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this Ordinance.
8. The Zoning Administrator may, due to the complexity of any matter,
unless otherwise noted herein, refer a permit application to the
Commission for recommendation.
9. Determine other permitted uses and conditional uses consistent with the
purpose of each specific Zoning District.
D. Limitations of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may
not make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning classification or zoning
district, or make any changes in the terms of the Zoning Ordinance; provided
that the restriction in this paragraph should not affect those duties as listed in
Section 2.3 (C).
Section 2.4 Building Official. The Building Official for the Town of Thatcher,
working in concert with and under the supervision of the Zoning Administrator,
shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
A. Duties of the Building Official. In conjunction with the enforcement of this
Ordinance the Building Official shall have the following duties:
1. To assure that any development or use proceed only in accordance to the
terms, conditions, or requirements as established by the Board, the
Town of Thatcher
Page 2.8 Article 2: Administration
Commission, and/or the Town Council as a term, condition, or
requirement of development and/or permit approval.
2. To direct such inspections, observations and analysis of any and all
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of
buildings, structures or land within the Town as is necessary to secure
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. No building shall be
occupied until such time as the Zoning Administrator has issued a letter
of compliance with this Ordinance or countersigned the Certificate of
Occupancy as issued by the Building Official.
3. Make investigations in connection with any matter referred to in this
Ordinance and render written reports when requested by the Town
Council, or when the interests of the Town so require.
4. To issue such notices or orders as may be necessary for the purpose of
enforcing compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
5. To take such action as is necessary for the enforcement of this Ordinance
with respect to any violations of this Ordinance.
B. Limitations of the Building Official. The Building Official may not make any
changes in the uses permitted in any Zoning Classification or Zoning District, or
make any changes in the terms of this Ordinance.
(End of Article)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
Section 3.0 Decision Matrix Summary.
A. The following table describes the decision-making authority and the appeal
authority for the applications processed and the approvals that may be granted
under this Ordinance.
Table No. 1  Application Type and Decision Authority Summary
Application Type
Decision
Body
Notification
Requirements
Citizen
Review
Required
Zoning
Administrator
P & Z
Commission
Town Council
Board of
Adjustments
General Plan Amendments /
General Plan Annual Review H/M N R R D
Specific Area Plan Requests H, L Y R R D
Rezoning Requests H, L Y R R D
Zoning Text Amendments H, L Y R R D
Site Plan Review N N D A
Conditional Use Permits H, L N R R D
Temporary Use Permits M, L N R R D
Administrative Use Permits N N D A A
Appeal Zoning Administrator
Interpretations N N D
Variances Requests H, L N R D
Minor Land Splits N N D A
Preliminary Plats M Y R R D
Final Plats M N R R D
Subdivision Regulation Exceptions M N R R D
Protected Development Rights Plans M N R R D
Key: M = Public Meeting Notice
H = Public Hearing Notice
L = Letter by 1st class mail
N = No
Y = Yes
R = Reviews and recommends action to decision-making body
D = Decision-making body
A = Appeal authority
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.2 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
Section 3.1 General Procedural Requirements.
A. Application Process. The specific procedures followed in reviewing the
various applications have the following three common elements:
1. Submittal of a completed Town application to the Zoning Administrator
along with all requested information and the required fees.
2. Review and recommendation of the request to the decision making body.
3. Actions by the authorized decision body to approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the application.
B. Application Submittal. To allow an opportunity for staff input and proper
evaluation, all requests for Zoning Administrator, Commission, Board and/or
Town Council action shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. In order to
have an application accepted by the Zoning Administrator the applicant shall
progress through the following steps:
1. Pre-application Conference. This preliminary meeting with the Zoning
Administrator is required for annexations, general plan and specific area
plan requests, rezoning and zoning ordinance text amendments, use
permits, variance requests, subdivisions, and site plan review; but is not
required for individual single family dwelling applications. A preapplication
meeting may also be held if requested by the prospective
applicant for any proposal.
a. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a
sketch plan at the time of the pre-application conference. A
sketch plan shall, at a minimum, depict the boundaries of the
property being considered and a tentative development proposal
for the property.
2. Formal Submittal. The applicant shall submit a completed Town
application, all the requested information and/or studies and reports, and
the required application fees to the Zoning Administrator. Depending
upon the specifics of the application, additional materials and/or studies
may be required by the Town at its discretion to adequately review the
application. Only complete applications and submittal packages shall be
accepted. Applications must be signed by the property owner or the
property owners authorized representative, except that applications
initiated by the Town must be signed by the Zoning Administrator.
C. Notification Requirements. When the Zoning Administrator determines that
a development application/submittal package is complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause public notification to be made if so required. (refer to
Section 3.0 and Section 3.2 of this Ordinance).
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.3
D. Citizen Review Process. Prior to a public hearing on any application for a
rezoning of property, amendment of the text of this Ordinance or creation of a
specific area plan, a citizen review process complying with A.R.S. 9-462.03 shall
be conducted. Additionally, the Town requires that a citizen review meeting be
conducted prior to the public meeting on any application for a preliminary plat.
The purpose of the citizen review meeting is to provide a reasonable opportunity
for the applicant, adjacent landowners, and other potentially affected citizens an
opportunity to ask questions and express any issues or concerns that they may
have on proposed applications for rezoning of property, adoption of specific
plans, adoption of zoning code text amendments or approvals of preliminary
plats.
1. Rezoning, Specific Plan Applications, and Preliminary Plats: The
applicant shall provide the Town with all the necessary material,
including letters, envelopes and postage to mail notices of the citizen
review meeting to all property owners within 1000 feet of the property
boundary subject to the application and any other parties or entities as
deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator. The Town will mail the
meeting notice at least five (5) days prior to the meeting. The notice shall
state the date, time, and place of the meeting and shall include a general
explanation of the application. The applicant shall be responsible for
conducting the meeting and furnishing the Town with accurate minutes
of the meeting and a list of all individuals in attendance within five (5)
business days from the conclusion of the meeting. The Town shall have
a staff member in attendance and shall report the results of the
neighborhood meeting to the Commission and/or Town Council at such
time as they take action on the rezoning or specific plan application.
2. Zoning Ordinance Text Amendments: The citizen review session for
proposed text amendments shall be conducted by the Commission
during a Work-Study Session. Said work-study session shall be held at
least five (5) days prior to the Commissions Regular Session where the
item has been scheduled for public hearing. The form of notice to be
used will vary according to the type of text amendment proposed and the
appropriate method of notice shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator. The method of notice may include, but is not limited to,
publication in a local newspaper, posting at official Town posting
locations, or posting on the Towns web site. The notice shall state the
date, time, and place of the meeting and shall include a general
explanation of the proposed text amendment. Notice shall be given to
landowners and other potentially affected citizens at least ten (10) days
prior to the Commissions Work-Study Session. The Commission shall
report to the Town Council, along with their recommendation, the issues
and concerns raised during the citizen review input and discussion
session.
E. Public Meeting/Public Hearing. A public meeting or a public hearing shall
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.4 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
be held before the appropriate decision-making body. The purpose for these
public meetings is to provide a means for the Commission, Board and/or Town
Council to receive input from the public on an application. The reviewing body
may take any action on the application that is consistent with the notice given,
including approval of the application, conditional approval of the application or
denial of the application. The reviewing body may allow amendments to the
application if the effect of the amendments is to allow a less intense change than
that requested on the original application, to reduce the impact of the
development, or to reduce the amount of land involved from that indicated in
the hearing notices. The reviewing body shall not, in any case, permit a greater
amount of development, or a use falling in a different general use category, or a
larger land area than indicated in the original application, or a greater variance
than was indicated in the notice. The decision-making body shall render a
decision on the application based on consideration of the following evidence and
analysis including, but not limited to, all of the following:
1. Conformance with this Ordinance, and adopted Town standards and
policies;
.
2. Compliance with the General Plan and other adopted Specific Area
Plans;
3. Staff recommendations and Commission recommendations, if applicable;
4. Outside reviewing agency input;
5. Public input and testimony received during the Citizen Review session, at
the Commission hearing and during the public hearing; and
6. Overall effects of the proposal on the neighborhood, area, and
community-at-large.
F. Records. The Town shall provide for summary minutes giving a reflection of
the matters discussed and decisions made during a public hearing or meeting to
be written and retained as part of the public record. Other materials and
correspondence submitted prior to or at the public hearing or meeting shall be
retained as part of the record. All such public records shall be open for
inspection at reasonable times per the Towns public records request procedure.
Public records are to be retained in accordance with A.R.S. public retention
requirements.
G. Reconsideration of Denied Applications. In the event that an application is
denied by the Town Council, the Commission shall not reconsider the
application nor consider another application for the same amendment of the
Zoning Ordinance applying to the property described in the original application,
for at least six (6) months from the date of the denial, provided however, if
within a six-month period there has been a bona fide change of ownership to the
property for which the application was made, or a change in circumstances, then
the new owner shall be permitted to apply for a zoning change.Appeals. Any
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.5
person, entity, or group aggrieved by a decision under this Ordinance may be
party to an appeal hearing as provided by in Section 3.7 of this Ordinance.
Section 3.2 Notification Requirements.
A. Notice for Public Meetings. For those applications requiring only a public
meeting, the notification for the public meeting shall be by posting of the agenda
at Town Hall at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting in accordance
with Arizona open meeting law. In addition, the Town shall send a notification
letter by first class mail, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public meeting, to all
real property owners within 300 feet of the property for which the public
meeting has been scheduled. Any changes to Arizona Law notice requirements
shall have control over this provision in the manner of providing notice.
B. Notice for Public Hearings. For those applications requiring a public hearing,
the notification for the public hearing shall be in accordance with A.R.S. 9-
462.04 and 9-462.06. In addition the Town shall send a notification letter by
first class mail, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing, to all real
property owners within 300 feet of the property for which the public hearing has
been scheduled. Public hearings for General Plan Amendments have additional
notification requirements per A.R.S. 9-461.06. The applicant shall be
responsible for the costs associated with the public notices for public hearings.
Any changes to Arizona Law notice requirements shall have control over this
provision in the manner of providing notice.
C. Notice of Appeals. Notice of an appeal of a decision made at a public meeting
or public hearing shall be provided in the same manner as the original meeting or
hearing. The party seeking the appeal shall be responsible for the costs
associated with the public notification.
D. No Notification Required. There are several types of applications that do not
require notification, per Arizona Law or by Section 3.0 of this Ordinance.
E. When multiple applications are under review for the same project, the Town may
simultaneously issue notice for multiple applications. Such notice may be given
in the initial posting and of the initial hearing and any subsequent hearing.
Section 3.3 Rezoning Requests and Zoning Text Amendments.
A. Purpose. In accordance with the provisions of Arizona Law, the Town Council
may amend the Official Zoning Map and/or adopt text amendments to this
Ordinance. All applications for rezoning and zoning text amendments shall
follow the general procedural requirements as delineated in Section 3.1 of this
Ordinance.
B. Initiation of a Zoning Map Change (Rezoning). An application for a change
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.6 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
in zoning district boundaries (rezoning) may be initiated by a owner of real
property within the Town and/or by that owners authorized representative.
The property owner must provide proof of ownership and shall provide written
authorization for such applications. The Commission or the Town Council, by
its own motion at a public meeting, may also initiate such amendments. When
the rezoning application filed by a private property owner includes other
property, in addition to that owned by the petitioner, the application shall include
the signatures of the real property owners representing at least seventy-five
(75%) percent of the land in the area proposed to be changed.
C. Initiation of Ordinance Text Amendment. Any person may request an
amendment of the text of this Ordinance. The application must state the exact
section of this Ordinance proposed for amendment, the proposed substitute
wording, and the reasons for requesting the amendment. Graphic material
should also be submitted to assist in understanding the benefits of the
amendment.
D. Submittal Requirements. All zoning map changes (rezoning) applications shall
comply with the submittal requirements as presented in the rezoning application
and as outlined below:
1. A map showing the particular property or properties for which the
rezoning application is being requested and the adjacent properties,
buildings and structures, land uses, and public streets and ways within a
radius of three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries thereof.
2. A detailed land use/development plan at a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1=100 ft.), which at a minimum shall include the
following:
a. A site plan drawn to scale and in such a manner as to indicate
clearly and precisely what is planned for the subject property,
including the location and arrangement of all proposed uses.
b. The location, arrangement and dimensions of all proposed lots.
c. Topography, showing existing and proposed grades and drainage
systems, and natural and manmade features, with indications as to
which are being retained and which are to be altered or removed.
d. All buildings and structures existing and proposed.
e. Proposed block layout, street system, street dedications,
improvements and utility plans.
f. The traffic and pedestrian circulation systems, including the
locations and widths of all streets, driveways, entrances to parking
areas and parking structures, walkways and bicycle paths.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.7
g. Off-street parking facilities, including the number of spaces and
dimensions of parking areas, loading bays, service access drives,
and landscaping for the parking areas.
h. The amount of open space provided, the location and type of
open space, the proposed reservation for parks, parkways,
playgrounds, recreation areas, pedestrian access and other open
space areas.
i. Proposed landscaping including; size, type and location; the
native vegetation that will be salvaged; walls and fences; outdoor
lighting; signs; and outdoor storage and activities.
3. The Town reserves the right to waive certain submittal requirements if
found to be unnecessary for a particular application. Conversely, the
Town reserves the right to require additional information, material, and
the submission of relevant studies to assist in the adequate review the
request.
E. Procedures. The Commission, in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S.
9-462.04, shall conduct a public hearing. Notification of the public hearing shall
be provided as set forth in A.R.S. 9-462.04 and Section 3.2 of this Ordinance.
1. The Commission shall render a decision in the form of a written
recommendation for: 1) approval, 2) approval with conditions, or 3)
denial of the petitioned rezoning or zoning text amendment. The
recommendation shall then be forwarded to the Mayor and Town
Council unless withdrawn in writing by the applicant.
2. The Town Council shall: 1) approve, 2) approve with conditions, or 3)
deny the rezoning or zoning text amendment request. Approval of a
petition to rezone land may not be enacted as an emergency measure and
the rezoning shall not become effective for at least thirty (30) days after
Town Council approval.
3. When an application for rezoning is accompanied by an application for a
conditional use permit or subdivision plat approval, both applications
may be processed and reviewed concurrently. If the proposed rezoning
is not in compliance with the General Plan - Land Use Plan, an
application for an amendment to the Land Use Plan shall be submitted
by the applicant in accordance with A.R.S. 9-461.06, the General Plan,
and Section 3.9 of this Ordinance.
F. Protest. As prescribed by A.R.S.  9-462.04, a super majority consisting of threefourths
(3/4) of Town Council votes shall be required if a protest petition is filed
in accordance with said statute. The protest petition shall be filed in writing with
the Town Clerk at or before noon on the date of the Town Council hearing.
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.8 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
G. Reversion of Zoning. The Town may approve a change of zone conditioned
upon a schedule for development of the specific use or uses for which rezoning
is requested. If at the expiration of this period the property has not been
improved for the use for which it was conditionally approved, the Town, after
notification by certified mail to the owner and applicant who requested the
rezoning, may schedule a public hearing before the Town Council to take
administrative action to extend, remove or determine compliance with the
schedule for development or take legislative action to cause the property to
revert to its former zoning classification.
Section 3.4 Use Permits.
A. General Requirements. Land uses permitted by use permit are identified under
the Zoning District regulations of this Ordinance. Generally, these uses require
special consideration to ensure that they can be designed, located and operated in
a manner that will not interfere with the use and enjoyment of surrounding
properties. There are three types of use permits; Administrative Use Permits,
Conditional Use Permits, and Temporary Use Permits.
1. No use requiring a Use Permit may be commenced until a Use Permit is
obtained.
2. Applications for Conditional Use Permits and Temporary Use Permits
shall follow the general procedural requirements as delineated in Section
3.1 of this Ordinance. A public hearing is required for a Conditional Use
Permit and a public meeting is required for a Temporary Use Permit with
both requiring approval by the Town Council.
3. Applications for Administrative Use Permits shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator. No public meeting or public hearing is required
for Administrative Use Permits. The Zoning Administrator shall review
the application for compliance with this Ordinance. The Zoning
Administrator shall approve, approve with modifications and/or
conditions, or deny the application and shall set forth the findings and
decision in writing. The written decision shall be mailed to the applicant
by First Class Mail within forty-five (45) days from the filing of the
application. Decisions of the Zoning Administrator on Administrative
Use Permits may be appealed to the Town Council. The Town Councils
decision shall be final. The Town Council shall have the authority to
uphold, modify, or overrule the decision of the Zoning Administrator.
4. Any use permit may be revoked by the approving body, for failure to
comply with the conditions of the use permit, after following the same
manner of notification and proceedings as required for the original
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.9
application. Revocation of a use permit may be initiated by the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Administrative Use Permits. Those uses that are enumerated as
administrative conditional uses in a zoning district, as set forth in this Ordinance,
shall be authorized by the Zoning Administrator.
1. Approval Criteria. As may be specified within each zoning district, uses
permitted subject to an Administrative Use Permit shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Zoning Administrator and only if
the applicant demonstrates that:
a. The proposed use will not be detrimental to health, safety, or
general welfare of persons living or working in the vicinity, to
adjacent property, to the neighborhood, or to the public in
general;
b. The proposed use conforms with the purposes, intent, and
policies of the General Plan and any applicable area,
neighborhood, or other plan adopted by the Town Council;
c. The proposed use conforms with the conditions, requirements,
or standards of this Ordinance and any other applicable local,
state, or federal requirements;
d. The proposed use, as conditioned, would not unreasonably
interfere with the use and enjoyment of nearby properties.
2. Validity Limit.
a. The Administrative Use Permit shall be valid for the use for
which the permit was granted for the length of time indicated on
the permit as long as the use is in compliance with the conditions
of approval and other applicable ordinances.
C. Conditional Use Permits. Conditional uses are those uses that are
generally compatible with the land uses permitted by right in a zoning district,
but require individual review of their location, design and configuration and the
imposition of conditions in order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a
particular location within a given zoning district. Those uses that are enumerated
as conditional uses in a zoning district, as set forth in this Ordinance, shall be
authorized by the Town Council.
1. Approval Criteria. As may be specified within each zoning district, uses
permitted subject to a conditional use permit shall be permitted only after
review and recommendation by the Commission and review and
approval by the Town Council, and only if the applicant demonstrates
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.10 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
that:
a. The proposed use will not be detrimental to health, safety, or
general welfare of persons living or working in the vicinity, to
adjacent property, to the neighborhood, or to the public in
general;
b. The proposed use conforms with the purposes, intents, and
policies of the General Plan and any applicable area,
neighborhood, or other plans adopted by the Town Council;
c. The proposed use conforms with the conditions, requirements,
or standards of this Ordinance and any other applicable local,
state, or federal requirements;
d. The proposed use, as conditioned, would not unreasonably
interfere with the use and enjoyment of nearby properties nor be
noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust,
smoke or gas;
e. The proposed use shall not be materially injurious to properties
or improvements nor diminish or impair property values in the
immediate vicinity;
f. The proposed use will be served by ingress and egress routes that
minimize traffic congestion, shall not burden the existing and
anticipated traffic conditions including parking facilities on
adjacent streets and land, and will be served by adequate public
utilities;
g. The proposed use shall not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted by right in the zoning district;
h. The proposed use is necessary or desirable or provides a service
or facility that contributes to the general well-being of the area;
and
i. The proposed use shall not create more adverse impacts on
existing uses in the surrounding areas than those that reasonably
might result from development of the site with a use permitted
by right in the zoning district.
2. Validity Limit.
a. Approval shall become effective immediately.
b. The Conditional Use Permit shall become null and void if the use
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.11
permit has not been exercised and the use established within
twelve (12) months of the approval date. A Conditional Use
Permit is exercised when the use has been established or when a
building permit has been issued, construction commenced, and
the building permit remains valid. A Conditional Use Permit
shall be granted for a specified period of time, determined by the
Town Council, as a term of conditions of the use permit.
c. If such use is abandoned or discontinued for a period of ninety
(90) consecutive days, it may not be re-established unless
reauthorized by the Town Council.
d. Amendments to Conditional Use Permits shall be processed in
the same manner as the original permit, except that minor
amendments may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Temporary Use Permits. The Temporary Use Permit is a mechanism by
which the Town may allow a use to be located within the Town on a short-term
basis and by which it may allow seasonal or transient uses not otherwise allowed.
Permissible temporary uses are those delineated within the individual zoning
districts of this Ordinance. All temporary use permit applications shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator not less than 35 days prior to the desired
start date of the Temporary Use Permit.
1. Approval Criteria. As may be specified within each zoning district, uses
permitted subject to a Temporary Use Permit shall be permitted only
after review and recommendation by the Commission and review and
approval by the Town Council. The Town Council shall have authority
to require such reasonable conditions as necessary to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare and to ensure that the use, value and
qualities of the neighborhood surrounding the proposed location will not
be adversely affected. Approval shall be based on the applicants ability
to demonstrate that:
a. The proposed use is for a temporary use and will not be
detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons
living or working in the vicinity, to any adjacent property, to the
neighborhood, or to the public in general;
b. The proposed use conforms with the conditions, requirements,
or standards required by this Ordinance and any other applicable
local, state, or federal requirements;
c. The proposed use, as conditioned, would not unreasonably
interfere with the use and enjoyment of nearby properties;
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.12 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
d. The location of the temporary use and any temporary structure is
such that adverse effects on surrounding properties will be
minimal with regards to the type of traffic generated, the amount
of traffic generated, or the impact upon the traffic circulation in
the area;
e. Adequate off-street parking will be provided to serve the use
without displacing the required off-street parking spaces or
loading areas of the principal permitted use on the site. The
entrance and exit drives will be designed to prevent traffic
hazards and nuisances;
f. Signage for temporary uses shall only be displayed within the time
frame for which the Temporary Use Permit is valid and only with
a sign permit issued in accordance with this Ordinance; and
g. Only one (1) Temporary Use Permit shall be permitted per parcel
or lot at any given time. Permanent structures shall not be
permitted under a temporary use permit.
2. Validity Limit.
a. The Temporary Use Permit shall be valid for the use for which
the permit was granted for the length of time indicated on the
permit as long as the use is in compliance with the conditions of
approval and other applicable ordinances.
b. A Temporary Use Permit for a temporary structure shall be
limited to a period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the
date of approval unless otherwise outlined in this Ordinance.
The Temporary Use Permit may be renewed provided that the
property owner submits satisfactory evidence to the Zoning
Administrator that the need for such temporary structure
continues to exist.
c. In no case, shall the termination date of a Temporary Use Permit
be automatically extended as a result of a delay on the applicants
part to comply with the conditions stipulated in the Temporary
Use Permit.
d. Time extensions for a Temporary Use Permit shall be processed
in the same manner as the original permit.
Section 3.5 Variances.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.13
A. Purpose. The Board of Adjustment may decide appeals of administrative
interpretations and decisions as well as authorize a departure from the zoning
regulation terms, but not to the permitted uses. Notification for variance
requests shall follow the requirements set forth in A.R.S. 9-462.06 and Section
3.1 of this Ordinance.
B. Application. A variance request shall be made by filing an application with the
Zoning Administrator and paying the required application fee. The application
shall be accompanied by a development plan showing such information as the
Zoning Administrator may reasonably require for purposes of this Ordinance.
The plans shall contain sufficient information for the Board to make a proper
decision on the matter. In all cases, the application shall address the following
hardship criteria:
1. There are existing special circumstances or conditions applicable to the
property referred to in the application, including its size, shape,
topography, location, or surroundings, to which the strict application of
this Ordinance will deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other
properties of the same classification in the same zoning district.
2. The above special circumstances or conditions are preexisting and are
not created or self-imposed by the owner or applicant.
3. The variance is necessary for the preservation of substantial property
rights. Without a variance the property cannot be used for purposes
otherwise allowed in this zoning district.
4. The variance authorization will not be materially detrimental to persons
residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent property, or to the
neighborhood or the public welfare.
C. Variance Requests. A variance is not a right. It may be granted to an applicant
only if the applicant establishes compliance with all hardship criteria established
in A.R.S. 9-462.06 and in Section 3.5 (B) of this Ordinance.
Pursuant to State Statutes, the Board may not:
1. Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning classification or
zoning district.
2. Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the property
are self-imposed by the property owner.
D. Appeal of Decision. Any person, entity, or group aggrieved by a decision under
this Ordinance may be party to an appeal hearing as provided by in Section 3.7
of this Ordinance
E. Validity Limit. Rights and privileges established by the granting of a variance
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.14 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
shall be exercised within six (6) months following the date of approval unless the
Board specifies a different time limit at the time the variance is granted. A
variance that is not exercised within the time limits specified shall become null
and void.
Section 3.6 Site Plan Review
A. Purpose. The purpose of the site plan review is to promote the safe, functional
and aesthetic development of property and to ensure that all new non-residential,
multiple residential, commercial and industrial structures and the associated;
utilities, streets, parking, circulation systems, lighting, signage, drainage and
landscaping are developed in conformance with the standards of this Ordinance.
The site plan review shall consider the proposed development and the
relationship of the project to adjacent developments and the community. No
building permit shall be issued until approved by the Zoning Administrator and
then such issuance shall only be in accordance with the plans and stipulations as
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Application.
1. Site Plan Review shall be required for all development and construction
within every zoning district within the Town of Thatcher; except for
interior tenant improvements:
2. Site Plan Review shall also be required for any public or quasi-public
facility, community facility, or places of public assembly regardless of the
zoning district in which they are proposed to be located.
3. If the proposed development requires a zoning change (rezoning) or a
Conditional Use Permit, the site plan shall be submitted with the
rezoning or use permit application and considered concurrently. For
proposed developments that do not require rezoning or a use permit, the
site plan must be approved prior to submittal for a building and/or
grading permit.
4. All applications shall be filed on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator and shall be accompanied by the required fee and all
required materials as outlined on the application. Depending upon the
specific development circumstances and at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator, additional materials and/or studies may be required by the
Town at its discretion to adequately review the application.
C. Submittal Requirements. The specific information/materials to be submitted
for a single residence Site Plan Review may be found on the application form
available from the Zoning Administrator. All Site Plan Review applications,
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.15
other than single residence, shall comply with the submittal requirements as
outlined below and as may be specified on the Site Plan Review application form:
1. A map showing the particular property or properties for which the Site
Plan Review application is being requested. This map shall indicate the
future land use designation for the site, a legal description of the site, and
the locations, dimensions and descriptions of all existing or proposed
easements. This map shall also show the adjacent properties, buildings
and structures, land uses, zoning designations, public streets and ways,
and private access ways.
2. A detailed land use/development plan at a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1=100 ft.), which at a minimum shall include the
following:
a. A site plan drawn to scale and in such a manner as to indicate
clearly and precisely what is planned for the subject property,
including but not limited to, the location and arrangement of all
proposed uses and structures, storage areas, service or loading
areas, service areas for mail delivery and trash enclosures, walls or
fences, freestanding signs and exterior lighting, parking areas, onsite
drainage areas, and landscape areas.
b. The location, arrangement and dimensions of all proposed lots if
applicable.
c. Topography, at no more than two (2) foot intervals, showing
existing and proposed grades and drainage systems, and natural
and manmade features with indication as to which are being
retained and which are to be altered or removed.
d. All buildings and structures existing and proposed; including the
percentage of the site covered by structures and percentage
covered by impervious surfaces.
e. Proposed street dedications, improvements and utility plans.
f. The traffic and pedestrian circulation systems, including the
location and width of all streets, driveways, entrances to parking
areas, walkways and bicycle paths.
g. Off-street parking facilities including the number of spaces and
dimensions of parking areas, loading bays, service access drives,
and landscaping for the parking areas.
h. The amount of open space provided, the location and type of
open space, the proposed reservation for parks, parkways,
playgrounds, recreation areas, pedestrian access and other open
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.16 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
space areas.
i. Proposed landscaping including; size, type and location; the
native vegetation that will be salvaged; walls and fences; outdoor
lighting; signs; and outdoor storage and activities.
3. Building drawings including floor plans and elevations of all principal and
accessory structures; noting exterior finish materials and color.
4. A Soils Report may be required.
5. A Hydrology and/or Drainage Report may be required.
6. The Town reserves the right to waive certain submittal requirements if
found to be unnecessary for a particular application. Conversely, the
Town reserves the right to require additional information, material, and
the submission of relevant studies to assist in the adequate review of the
request.
D. Procedures.
1. All projects subject to Site Plan Review must be reviewed and approved
by the Zoning Administrator, or by the Town Council if in conjunction
with a Rezoning or Conditional Use Permit, prior to submitting for
building plan review. All Site Plan Review applications, for which
Rezoning or a Conditional Use Permit is also required, shall be submitted
along with the appropriate applications and processed in accordance with
Section 3.1 of this Ordinance.
2. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may be
required to hold a neighborhood meeting if in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator the project may impact the adjacent neighborhood.
E. Scope of Action.
1. Approval shall become effective immediately if no other actions are
required. If the site plan review is in conjunction with a request for
rezoning, the approval of the petition to rezone the land may not be
enacted as an emergency measure, and the rezoning and the site plan
shall not become effective for at least 30 days after Town Council
approval.
2. A site plan approval pursuant to these provisions shall run with the land
and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or
structure for a period of two (2) years.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.17
3. Any amendments or modifications to an approved site plan shall be
processed in the same manner as the original application.
4. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued if development
activities do not conform to the approved site plan.
Section 3.7 Appeals
A. Appeals of Board of Adjustment Decision. A person aggrieved or affected by
a Board of Adjustment decision may file a complaint for special action in
Superior Court to review the Boards decision at any time within thirty (30) days
after the Board has rendered its decision.
B. Appeal of Zoning Administrator Interpretation. A person aggrieved by an
interpretation of this Ordinance made by the Zoning Administrator may appeal
said interpretation to the Board of Adjustment. In an appeal to the Board
regarding an administrative interpretation, the Boards review shall be limited to
determining whether the interpretation by the Zoning Administrator was in
accordance with the intents and requirements of this Ordinance. Accordingly,
the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order,
requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator.
1. Any person aggrieved or affected by an interpretation made by the
Zoning Administrator may appeal to the Board of Adjustment, by filing a
written request with the Zoning Administrator. Upon receiving a written
appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of
Adjustment all papers and pertinent data related to the appeal.
2. An appeal under this section must be filed within ten (10) working days
from the date that the Zoning Administrator notified the applicant, in
writing, of the decision. If no appeal is filed within the time specified,
the Zoning Administrators decision shall be final.
3. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal to the Board of Adjustment stays all
proceedings in the matter appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Board that, based on the facts stated, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon such certification,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order granted by the
Board or by a court of record on application and notice to the Zoning
Administrator. Proceedings shall not be stayed if the appeal requests
relief, which has previously been denied by the Board except pursuant to
a special action in Superior Court as provided for in state law
C. Appeal of Zoning Administrator Decisions.
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.18 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
1. Any person aggrieved or affected by a Zoning Administrators decision
on a Site Plan Review, Administrative Use Permit or a Minor Land Split,
may appeal to the Town Council by filing a written request with the
Zoning Administrator. Upon receiving a written appeal, the Zoning
Administrator shall transmit to the Town Council all papers and
pertinent data related to the appeal.
2. An appeal under this section must be filed within ten (10) working days
from the date that the Zoning Administrator notified the applicant, in
writing, of the decision. If no appeal is filed within the time specified the
Zoning Administrators decision shall be final.
3. The Town Council shall fix a time for the Appeal and give notice to the
interested parties and to the public as required by Section 3.2 of this
Ordinance.
4. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal to the Town Council stays all
proceedings in the matter appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Town Council that, based on the facts
stated, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon such
certification, proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order
granted by the Town Council or by a court of record on application and
notice to the Zoning Administrator. Proceedings shall not be stayed if
the appeal requests relief, which has previously been denied by the Town
Council except pursuant to a special action in Superior Court as provided
for in state law.
D. Appeals of Dedications and Exactions.
1. Appeals of a required dedication or exaction filed pursuant to A.R.S. 9-
500.12 and of a zoning regulations alleged to create a taking pursuant to
A.R.S.9-500.13 shall comply with the procedures of A.R.S.9-500.12G.
2. Appeals shall be filed only by a property owner or by a property owners
authorized representative. Appeals shall be filed on a form established by
the Zoning Administrator within thirty (30) days of the date of the final
action imposing the dedication or exaction or adopting or amending the
zoning regulation.
Section 3.8 Specific Area Plans
A. Purpose. In accordance with the provisions of Arizona Law, the Town Council
may approve and/or amend Specific Area Plans and regulations. Specific Area
Plans, and amendments thereto, may be initiated by Town Council, Commission,
the Zoning Administrator, or by the property owner or by the property owners
authorized representative.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.19
B. Application.
1. All applications shall be filed on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator and shall be accompanied by the required fee and all
required materials as outlined in this Ordinance and/or on the
application. Depending upon the specific circumstances of the plan or
amendment, additional materials and/or studies may be required by the
Town at its discretion to adequately review the application.
2. By resolution, the Town Council may establish a schedule prescribing
when and how frequently Specific Area Plans and regulations will be
considered.
C. Procedures. Application processing and public hearings for amendments to a
Specific Area Plan and its regulations shall be done in accordance with the A.R.S.
9-461.09 and this Ordinance.
D. Subsequent Applications. In the event that an application for, or an
amendment to, a Specific Area Plan and regulation is denied by the Town
Council or that the application is withdrawn after the Commission hearing, the
Town shall not accept another application for the same plan and/or amendment
within twelve (12) months of the original hearing unless agreed to by a super
majority three-fourths () vote of the Town Council.
Section 3.9 General Plan Amendments
A. Purpose. The General Plan is an evolving document that is designed to change
based on community needs. The purpose of a General Plan Amendment is to
facilitate reasonable changes in effort to maintain a livable and sustainable
environment that is sensitive to issues that impact where people live, learn, work
and play. In accordance with the provisions of Arizona Law, the Town Council
may update and amend the General Plan. Such amendments or changes may be
initiated by the Council, Commission, the Zoning Administrator or by a property
owner or the property owners authorized representative.
B. Application. All applications shall be filed on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator and shall be accompanied by the required fee and all required
materials as outlined in this Ordinance and/or on the application. Depending
upon the specifics circumstances of the amendment, additional materials and/or
studies may be required by the Town at its discretion to adequately review the
application.
C. Procedures. There are two (2) types of amendments to the General Plan: minor
amendments and major amendments. Any change to the maps or text of the
General Plan, is an amendment to the General Plan. Specific Area Plans are
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.20 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
amendments to the General Plan. Application processing and public hearings
for any type of General Plan Amendment shall be done in accordance with
A.R.S. 9-461.06, this Ordinance, and those provisions prescribed in the Town
of Thatcher General Plan.
1. A Major Amendment to the General Plan must be filed prior to June
30th of every calendar year in order to be heard at the one (1) Town
Council hearing designated each calendar year to review major
amendments to the General Plan. Any major amendment must first be
submitted for Commission review and recommendation. The Town
Council hearing will occur between October 1 and December 31 within
the calendar year the application was submitted. Major Amendments
shall require an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the
Council.
2. A Minor Amendment to the General Plan may be submitted
independently at any time or processed concurrently with a development
application or application for rezoning subject to Town policies and
procedures.
D. Approval Criteria. In determining whether the proposed General Plan
Amendment shall be approved, the Commission and Town Council shall assure
that the proposed amendment meets all of the following criteria:
1. The development pattern contained in the existing General Plan - Land
Use Plan does not adequately provide appropriate optional sites for the
use or change proposed in the amendment.
2. The amendment constitutes an overall improvement to the General Plan
and is not solely for the good or benefit of a particular landowner or
owners at a particular point in time.
3. The amendment will not adversely impact the community as a whole or a
portion of the community by:
a. Significantly altering acceptable existing land use patterns,
b. Requiring additional and more expensive improvements to roads,
sewer, or water delivery systems than are needed to support the
prevailing land uses and which, therefore, may impact
developments in other areas,
c. Adversely impacting existing or previously planned uses through
increased traffic generated by the proposal on existing systems, or
d. Affecting the livability of the area or the health and safety of the
residents.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals Page 3.21
4. The amendment is consistent with the General Plans overall intent,
vision, goals and objectives as well as being compliant with other adopted
plans, codes, and ordinances.
E. Burden of Proof. It shall be the burden of the party requesting the General
Plan Amendment to prove that the change constitutes an improvement to the
General Plan. It shall not be the burden of the Town to provide a reason that an
amendment should be denied.
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 3.22 Article 3: Application, Procedures and Appeals
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 4: Zoning Districts and Map Page 4.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 4: Zoning Districts and Map
Section 4.0 Purpose. The Town of Thatcher General Plan establishes land use
designations for Residential, Commercial, Mixed-Use, Employment,
Public/Institutional and Parks/Open Space. This Ordinance designates zoning
districts that classify and regulate the land uses within the zoning districts to:
A. Implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the Town of Thatcher General
Plan;
B. Conserve and promote the public health, safety and general welfare;
C. Encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town and to ensure
logical and orderly growth and development of the physical elements of the
Town;
D. Conserve and enhance the economic, social, cultural and aesthetic values of the
Town;
E. Protect, maintain, and improve the integrity and character of the established
neighborhoods, regulate new development, and improve the Towns overall
quality of life.
Section 4.1 Establishment of Zoning Districts.
A. Zoning Districts. In accordance with the authority granted in the A.R.S. 9-
462.01.B, the Town of Thatcher is divided into the following zoning districts and
overlay districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map accompanying this
Ordinance and incorporated herein by this reference:
1. Single Residence Zoning Districts: (Article 5)
R1-43 Agricultural Residential - minimum 1 acre/dwelling unit.
R1-22 Low Density - minimum 22,000 square feet/dwelling unit.
R1-10 Low Density - minimum 10,000 square feet/dwelling unit.
R1-8 Medium Density - minimum 8,000 square feet/dwelling unit.
2. Multiple Residence Zoning Districts: (Article 6)
R-2 Medium Density Residential
R-3 Medium Density Residential
R-4 High Density Residential
3. Commercial Zoning Districts: (Article 7)
NC Neighborhood Commercial
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.2 Article 4: Zoning Districts and Map
C-1 General Commercial
C-2 Highway Commercial
MU Mixed-Use
4. Industrial Zoning District: (Article 8)
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 General Industrial
5. MH Manufactured Home Zoning District (Article 9)
6. OS Open Space Zoning District (Article 10)
7. P-I Public-Institutional Zoning District (Article 11)
8. Overlay Zoning Districts: (Article 12)
TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay
RV Recreational Vehicle Overlay
B. Additional Districts. Additional zoning districts may be added from time to
time upon recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission to the
Town Council. Proposed changes to the zoning district regulations or the
Official Zoning Map, including the addition of new districts, may be submitted
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Administrator, Town Council,
or any other interested party.
Section 4.2 Zoning Map.
A. The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be designated on the
Town of Thatcher Zoning Map (the Official Zoning Map) and said map and
all notations, references and other information shown thereon, shall be included
in this Ordinance as if the matters and other information set forth by said map
were all fully described herein.
B. The Official Zoning Map, dated and signed by the Mayor and attested to by the
Town Clerk, shall be located in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall
be the final authority in determining current zoning status.
C. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map except in
conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance. Whenever
amendments or changes are made in zone boundaries, such amendments or
changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map when officially adopted by
the Town Council.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 4: Zoning Districts and Map Page 4.3
Section 4.3 District Boundaries.
A. Where uncertainty exists concerning the boundaries of any zoning district shown
on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Where the intended boundaries on the Official Zoning Map are
approximately street or alley lines or the centerlines thereof, said street or
alley lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundaries.
2. Where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines, said lot lines
shall be construed to be the zoning district boundaries.
3. Where the indicated zoning district boundaries are approximately
following the line of any stream or other waterway, the center of such
stream or waterway shall be construed to be the zoning district
boundaries.
4. Where zoning district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on
the Zoning Map, such dimensions shall govern. Where land has not
been subdivided into lots, the zoning district boundary shall be
determined by the use of the scale of measurement shown on the Official
Zoning Map.
5. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by the Town
Council as set forth in A.R.S. 9-240-B-3(e), the zoning districts adjoining
each side of such street, alley or public way shall be considered as
extended to the center of such vacation and all areas included in the
vacation shall then be subject to all appropriate regulations of those
zoning districts. Upon motion by the Town Council, such vacated public
way may be designated as all or part of adjacent districts.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to interpret and determine the
final decision regarding any dispute as to the boundary(ies) and/or location of
property(ies) within a zoning district or where other uncertainty exists regarding
the Official Zoning Map.
C. Conditions imposed by special ordinance in conjunction with amendments to the
Zoning Map may be referenced to separate files maintained in the office of the
Zoning Administrator and are hereby made a part of the Official Zoning Map.
Section 4.4 Establishing Town Zoning in Annexed Areas. Pursuant to
A.R.S. 9-462.04 (E), Thatcher may enact an ordinance authorizing county
zoning to continue in effect until the Town zoning is applied to land previously
zoned by the county and annexed by the Town, but in no event for longer than
six (6) months after the annexation
Town of Thatcher
Page 4.4 Article 4: Zoning Districts and Map
Section 4.5 Regulations Within Zones. Within each of the zones, the use,
location, height, and size of buildings and structures, the use of land and the size
of lots, yards, courts, and other open spaces and the density of population are
regulated as set forth in the following articles of this Ordinance.
(End of Article)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
Section 5.0 General Requirements.
A. Purpose and Zones. The Single Residence Districts are designed to provide for
a range of single-dwelling neighborhoods. The purpose of these districts is to
promote and preserve single-family residential land uses, protect the stability of
existing neighborhoods, encourage desirable new residential developments that
provide housing choices to complement the many lifestyles of Thatchers
residents. It is also the intent of these districts to accommodate the needs of
single residence neighborhoods by providing for associated, limited, nonresidential
uses. The Single Residence Zoning Districts are as follows:
1. R1-43 Agricultural Residential Zoning District
2. R1-22 Low Density Residential Zoning District
3. R1-10 Low Density Residential Zoning District
4. R1-8 Medium Density Residential Zoning District
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted by
right within the zoning district; all other uses are prohibited. Permitted uses are
subject to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be
issued for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the town has not issued
an approval.
C. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted
as a conditional use, temporary use or administrative use within the zoning
district and only after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit, a
Temporary Use Permit or an Administrative Use Permit in accordance with
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. All other uses are prohibited. Conditional uses
are subject to all other applicable standards of this Ordinance and those that may
be imposed by the decision-making body for the required use permit.
D. Review Process. Site plan review, by the Zoning Administrator, is required for
all single residence dwellings prior to the issuance of a building and/or grading
permit. Applications and submittal requirements for single residence
construction can be obtained from the Zoning Administrator. All nonresidential
construction within any single residence zoning district shall comply
with the submittal requirements outlined in Section 3.6 of this Ordinance. The
required fee shall accompany all applications.
E. Design and Development Standards. The site design standards, architectural
guidelines, and the individual development regulations required for each specific
single residence zoning district are outlined in Section 5.5, Table No. 2, and
Table No. 3 contained herein. These standards provide certainty to property
owners, developers, and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
F. Compliance with Other Provisions.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.2 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
1. Supplementary Requirements. The supplementary requirements in
Article 13 herein shall apply.
2. Parking Regulations. The parking regulations in Article 14 herein shall
apply.
3. Signs. All signage proposed shall comply with Article 15 herein.
4. Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with Article 16
herein.
Section 5.1 R1-43 Agricultural Residential Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to represent those areas of the
community that are set aside especially for families wishing to maintain a limited
and/or small-scale agrarian lifestyle (i.e. maintaining agricultural animals) in a
residential environment on lots with a minimum area of one (1) acre. In order to
protect the health of the zone's inhabitants and to prevent the emission of
excessive odor and dust, limitations as to the number of animals are imposed. It
will be expected that a certain amount of odor and dust associated with agrarian
uses will be present in this district. Individuals choosing to live in this zone
should expect to encounter these odors and dust on a regular basis.
B. Permitted Uses in the R1-43 Zoning District.
1. One (1) single-residence detached dwelling unit per lot of record.
2. Farms and/or ranches and related activities for the production of crops,
including vegetable garden plots and/or raising of livestock limited to
domestic use, family food production, and youth projects. Farm and
ranch uses shall be in compliance with the following standards:
a. Application of pesticides shall comply with the buffer
requirements of A.R.S. 3-365 as it relates to schools, daycares
and adjacent residential uses.
b. Animals must be contained and the containment must be within
the buildable area of the lot. Only temporary pasturing and
grazing activity may occur outside of the buildable area of the lot.
c. Ranch uses may include the following equine activities: boarding,
breeding, training, and the sale of animals owned by the rancher.
d. All activity and pasture areas shall be grassed, sprinkled or treated
with regularly tilled organic soil mix for dust suppression.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.3
e. All feeding areas, buildings and corrals used for the keeping,
housing or covering of livestock shall be located in the rear yard
and set back a distance of not less than forty feet (40') from any
residential dwelling.
3. Plant nurseries and greenhouses for the propagation, cultivation, and
distribution of plants on the premises; without retail sales.
4. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. The home contains six (6) or fewer residents, not including staff,
in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582;
c. No signage, graphics, display or other visual means of identifying
the group home shall be visible from the public sidewalk or
street;
d. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
5. Public utility buildings and facilities when necessary for serving the
surrounding territory; provided that no public business office and no
repair or storage facilities are maintained therein.
6. Public and private parks and playgrounds.
7. Public and private homeowners association owned recreational amenities
and facilities.
8. Home Occupation in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article
13 of this Ordinance.
9. Accessory structures and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
C. Administrative Uses in the R1-43 Zoning District.
1. Roadside produce stands offering for sale only garden and orchard
products produced on the premises.
2. Private or commercial apiaries in accordance with all applicable State
regulations.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.4 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
3. Model homes or temporary sales office pertaining to the sale of homes
being constructed in the immediate subdivision. In the review for a
model home or sales office, the Town may consider lighting, landscaping,
hours of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood impact.
Approval may be granted for a three (3) year period, or until all lots in
the subdivision are sold, whichever occurs first. The office shall be
removed upon completion of the development.
4. Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the construction of the
homes and public improvements within the immediate subdivision.
5. One (1) guesthouse may be permitted on the same lot as a principal
residence, provided the guesthouse complies with the following
standards:
a. The guesthouse must comply with the accessory building
development regulations as outlined in Article 13 and all other
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
b. A single common driveway shall serve both the principal
residence and the guesthouse.
c. The guesthouse may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross
square footage of the livable area of the primary structure.
d. The guesthouse must be connected to all of the primary
structure's electric, water and gas meters.
e. The guesthouse may not be used for any commercial or nonresidential
uses.
f. A guesthouse may not be used for rental purposes.
g. The guesthouse may be used by the same person and/or group
for not more than thirty (30) consecutive days and by the same
person and/or group not more than five (5) times per calendar
year; unless a Temporary Use Permit is obtained for a longer
duration and/or more times per year.
6. A single travel trailer or certified manufactured home, to be placed on a
lot for temporary dwelling, while the permanent residence is being
constructed on the same lot; with the following standards:
a. Shall not exceed one (1) year from the issuance date of permit.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.5
b. The manufactured home meets the most current HUD Code
standards, is certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, complies with
State of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations
and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and is in good physical
condition structurally and cosmetically.
c. The applicant has posted a five hundred (500) dollar bond with
the Town guaranteeing the removal of the temporary dwelling
(travel trailer or manufactured home) from the lot at the issuance
of the permanent residence certificate of occupancy or within one
(1) year whichever is less.
7. Amateur (ham) towers and antennas as approved in accordance with the
requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
D. Conditional Uses in the R1-43 Zoning District.
1. Quarters for farm workers or caretakers employed on the premises
subject to the following provisions:
a. The residential units for farm employees shall not be used for any
commercial or non-residential uses, leased to non-farm
employees and/or otherwise used for income purposes.
b. A recreational vehicle may be used for accessory agricultural
living purposes provided it is placed only within the buildable
area of the lot, and shall not be occupied for more than four (4)
months out of any twelve (12) month period.
2. Retail sales in conjunction with a plant nursery or greenhouse for the sale
of plants propagated or cultivated on the premise.
3. Retail operations such as, but not limited to, you-pick facilities, farmers
market, and butcher shop for the sale of farm/ranch products generally
produced on the premises provided the site has appropriate access,
parking, and public facilities.
4. Veterinarian hospitals and clinics for both large and small animals and
the associated corrals, pens and kennels used for the keeping of animals
while under veterinary care.
5. Wireless communication towers and antennas, in limited locations, as
approved in accordance with the requirements of Article 18 of this
Ordinance and provided they are not located in areas near or surrounded
by field crops where aerial spray applications may occur.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.6 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
6. Commercial riding stables, boarding stables, and/or commercial ranch
provided there is a minimum of ten (10) acres and only after it has been
found to be in compliance with the following standards:
a. There shall be no more than eight (8) agricultural animals/acre
with a total of no more than 100 animals/facility at any given
time under any circumstance.
b. An attendant must be in residence on the property of any
commercial ranch.
c. All livestock structures, containment areas of facilities used for
the stabling, storing, showing or training of livestock and for
temporary manure storage shall be set back a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from any property line and at least one hundred (100)
feet from any other residences. Normal setbacks apply to all
other structures and uses.
d. No shows or other activities that would generate more vehicular
traffic than is normal to an area with single-family residences are
permitted unless the site has immediate access to a major or
collector street. Occasional small shows may be allowed per
stipulations of the Conditional Use Permit. Adequate parking for
daily activities and additional parking, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator, must be provided for shows or other
special events.
e. All livestock turnout areas and pens shall be enclosed with fences
at least five feet in height. The design of these enclosures shall be
shown on drawings submitted with the conditional use permit
application.
f. A specific plan for the physical containment and location of
manure storage and/or disposal, which minimizes odor and fly
impacts on adjacent lots or parcels, must be provided. The
spreading and tilling of manure into the soil of the paddock,
pasture or arena areas may be considered manure disposal.
g. The applicant must provide a specific program for fly control in
barn and stable areas that minimizes the attraction and breeding
of flies.
h. All activity and pasture areas shall be grassed, sprinkled or treated
with regularly tilled organic soil mix for dust suppression.
i. With the exception of the principal residence and its accessory
structures, upon revocation of the commercial ranch conditional
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.7
use permit or abandonment of the operation, all structures shall
be removed.
j. Failure to maintain any of the standards described above is
grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit.
k. In the review for a commercial riding stables, boarding stables,
and/or commercial ranch, the Town may also consider lighting,
landscaping, hours of operation, signage, plan of operation, and
neighborhood impact.
7. Publicly owned or operated libraries, fire stations and police stations.
E. Temporary Uses in the R1-43 Zoning District.
1. A single manufactured home for temporary dwelling of the residents
parent(s) with the following standards:
a. All manufactured homes shall be required to meet the most
current HUD Code standards, be certified under the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, comply with State of Arizona Office of Manufactured
Housing regulations and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and
be in good physical condition structurally and cosmetically.
b. Upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the
manufactured home the Temporary Use Permit shall terminate.
2. A guesthouse for temporary dwelling of the residents parent(s) provided
that upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the guesthouse
the Temporary Use Permit shall terminate.
3. A recreational vehicle or travel trailer for temporary dwelling of the
residents parent(s) with the following standards:
a. The recreational vehicle or travel trailer shall be hooked up to the
Towns sanitary sewer system. The use of the units holding tank
is not permissible.
b. Upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the
recreational vehicle or travel trailer the Temporary Use Permit
shall terminate.
4. The use of a guesthouse by a person and/or group for more than thirty
(30) consecutive days and/or by the same person and/or group more
than five (5) times per calendar year.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.8 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
Section 5.2 R1-22 Low Density Residential Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for low density single
residence development on lots with a minimum area of twenty two thousand
(22,000) square feet and in areas where adequate public facilities and services are
available. The intent of this district is to encourage a large lot neighborhood
environment where more personal amenities can be provided privately on the
individual lots.
B. Permitted Uses in the R1-22 Zoning District.
1. One (1) single-residence detached dwelling unit per lot of record.
2. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. The home contains six (6) or fewer residents, not including staff,
in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582;
c. No signage, graphics, display or other visual means of identifying
the group home shall be visible from the public sidewalk or
street;
d. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
3. Flower and vegetable gardening, and orchards, provided that agribusiness
shall not be carried out upon the premises.
4. Animals that are considered customary household pets with the following
limitations:
a. Limited to a combined total of two (2) small animals (i.e. dogs,
cats, or other small mammals) exclusive of animals under the age
of four (4) months, provided that horses, cows, goats, and other
hoofed animals shall not be permitted only in compliance with
Article 13 of this Ordinance;
b. Up to twelve (12) birds provided they are kept within a fully
enclosed building or accessory structures, and which do not
create odor or sound that is detectable on an adjoining lot.
5. Public and private parks and playgrounds.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.9
6. Public and private homeowners association owned recreational amenities
and facilities.
7. Public and private utility installations for gas, electric, water, wastewater
or communications including booster stations and lift stations.
8. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
9. Home occupations in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article
13 of this Ordinance.
C. Administrative Uses in the R1-22 Zoning District.
1. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. The home contains more than six (6) residents, not including
staff, in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582;
c. No signage, graphics, display or other visual means of identifying
the group home shall be visible from the public sidewalk or
street;
d. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
e. Such home is licensed with, and administratively approved by the
Town, as to compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.
2. Child care, Home-based. Home-based child care shall comply with all
the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations for
licensing.
3. Model homes or temporary sales office pertaining to the sale of homes
being constructed in the immediate subdivision. In the review for a
model home or sales office, the Town may consider lighting, landscaping,
hours of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood impact.
Approval may be granted for a three (3) year period, or until all lots in
the subdivision are sold, whichever occurs first. The office shall be
removed upon completion of the development.
4. Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the construction of the
homes and public improvements within the immediate subdivision.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.10 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
5. Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus, auctions, holiday or
seasonal boutiques in association with a school or religious institution.
6. One (1) guesthouse may be permitted on the same lot as a principal
residence, provided the guesthouse complies with the following
standards:
a. The guesthouse must comply with the accessory building
development regulations as outlined in Article 13 and all other
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
b. A single common driveway shall serve both the principal
residence and the guesthouse.
c. The guesthouse may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross
square footage of the livable area of the primary structure.
d. The guesthouse must be connected to all of the primary
structure's electric, water and gas meters.
e. The guesthouse may not be used for any commercial or nonresidential
uses.
f. A guesthouse may not be used for rental purposes.
g. The guesthouse may be used by the same person and/or group
for not more than thirty (30) consecutive days and by the same
person and/or group not more than five (5) times per calendar
year; unless a Temporary Use Permit is obtained for a longer
duration and/or more times per year.
7. A single travel trailer or certified manufactured home, to be placed on a
lot for temporary dwelling, while the permanent residence is being
constructed on the same lot; with the following standards:
a. Shall not exceed one (1) year from the issuance date of permit.
b. The manufactured home meets the most current HUD Code
standards, is certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, complies with
State of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations
and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and is in good physical
condition structurally and cosmetically.
c. The applicant has posted a five hundred (500) dollar bond with
the Town guaranteeing the removal of the temporary dwelling
(travel trailer or manufactured home) from the lot at the issuance
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.11
of the permanent residence certificate of occupancy or within one
(1) year whichever is less.
8. Amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas as approved in accordance
with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
D. Conditional Uses in the R1-22 Zoning District.
1. Public schools (K-12).
2. Private schools, including charter schools, with a curriculum substantially
the same as customarily offered in public schools (K-12).
3. Religious institutions; including clergy housing.
4. Publicly owned or operated libraries, fire stations and police stations.
5. Wireless communication towers and antennas, in limited locations, as
approved in accordance with the requirements of Article 18 of this
Ordinance.
E. Temporary Uses in the R1-22 Zoning District.
1. A single manufactured home for temporary dwelling of the residents
parent(s) with the following standards:
a. All manufactured homes shall be required to meet the most
current HUD Code standards, be certified under the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, comply with State of Arizona Office of Manufactured
Housing regulations and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and
be in good physical condition structurally and cosmetically.
b. Upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the
manufactured home the Temporary Use Permit shall terminate.
2. A guesthouse for temporary dwelling of the residents parent(s) provided
that upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the guesthouse
the Temporary Use Permit shall terminate.
3. A recreational vehicle or travel trailer for temporary dwelling of the
residents parent(s) with the following standards:
a. The recreational vehicle or travel trailer shall be hooked up to the
Towns sanitary sewer system. The use of the units holding tank
is not permissible.
b. Upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.12 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
recreational vehicle or travel trailer the Temporary Use Permit
shall terminate.
4. The use of a guesthouse by a person and/or group for more than thirty
(30) consecutive days and/or by the same person and/or group more
than five (5) times per calendar year.
Section 5.3 R1-10 Low Density Residential Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to promote and preserve urban
single-residence development on lots with a minimum area of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. The intent of this district is to encourage a traditional
neighborhood environment.
B. Permitted Uses in the R1-10 Zoning District.
1. One (1) single-residence detached dwelling on any lot or parcel of record.
2. Public utility services and facilities when necessary for serving the
surrounding territory, and providing that no public business offices and
no repair or storage facilities are maintained therein.
3. Public and private parks and playgrounds.
4. Public and private homeowners association owned recreational amenities
and facilities.
5. Flower and vegetable gardening, provided that agri-business shall not be
carried on upon the premises and provided further that obnoxious
fertilizer shall not be stored and obnoxious soil renovation shall not be
carried out upon the premises.
6. Child care, Home-based. Home-based child care shall comply with all
the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations for
licensing.
7. Home occupations in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article
13 of this Ordinance.
8. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
9. Animals that are considered customary household pets with the following
limitations:
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.13
a. Limited to a combined total of two (2) small animals (i.e. dogs,
cats, or other small mammals) exclusive of animals under the age
of four (4) months, provided that horses, cows, goats, and other
hoofed animals shall not be permitted only in compliance with
regulations prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance;
b. Up to twelve (12) birds provided they are kept within a fully
enclosed building or accessory structures, and which do not
create odor or sound that is detectable on an adjoining lot.
10. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. The home contains six (6) or fewer residents, not including staff,
in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582;
c. No signage, graphics, display or other visual means of identifying
the group home shall be visible from the public sidewalk or
street;
d. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
C. Administrative Uses in the R1-10 Zoning District.
1. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. The home contains more than six (6) residents, not including
staff, in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582;
c. No signage, graphics, display or other visual means of identifying
the group home shall be visible from the public sidewalk or
street;
d. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
e. Such home is licensed with, and administratively approved by the
Town, as to compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.
2. Model homes or temporary sales office pertaining to the sale of homes
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.14 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
being constructed in the immediate subdivision. In the review for a
model home or sales office, the Town may consider lighting, landscaping,
hours of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood impact.
Approval may be granted for a three (3) year period, or until all lots in
the subdivision are sold, whichever occurs first. The office shall be
removed upon completion of the development.
3. Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the construction of the
homes and public improvements within the immediate subdivision.
4. Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus, auctions, holiday or
seasonal boutiques in association with a school or religious institution.
5. One (1) guesthouse may be permitted on the same lot as a principal
residence, provided the guesthouse complies with the following
standards:
a. The guesthouse must comply with the accessory building
development regulations as outlined in Article 13 and all other
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
b. A single common driveway shall serve both the principal
residence and the guesthouse.
c. The guesthouse may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross
square footage of the livable area of the primary structure.
d. The guesthouse must be connected to all of the primary
structure's electric, water and gas meters.
e. The guesthouse may not be used for any commercial or nonresidential
uses.
f. A guesthouse may not be used for rental purposes.
g. The guesthouse may be used by the same person and/or group
for not more than thirty (30) consecutive days and by the same
person and/or group not more than five (5) times per calendar
year; unless a Temporary Use Permit is obtained for a longer
duration and/or more times per year.
6. A single travel trailer or certified manufactured home, to be placed on a
lot for temporary dwelling, while the permanent residence is being
constructed on the same lot; with the following standards:
a. Shall not exceed one (1) year from the issuance date of permit.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.15
b. The manufactured home meets the most current HUD Code
standards, is certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, complies with
State of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations
and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and is in good physical
condition structurally and cosmetically.
c. The applicant has posted a five hundred (500) dollar bond with
the Town guaranteeing the removal of the temporary dwelling
(travel trailer or manufactured home) from the lot at the issuance
of the permanent residence certificate of occupancy or within one
(1) year whichever is less.
7. Amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas as approved in accordance
with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
D. Conditional Uses in the R1-10 Zoning District.
1. Public schools (K-12).
2. Private schools, including charter schools, with a curriculum substantially
the same as customarily offered in public schools (K-12).
3. Religious institutions; including clergy housing.
4. Publicly owned or operated libraries, fire stations and police stations.
5. Wireless communication towers and antennas, in limited locations, as
approved in accordance with the requirements of Article 18 of this
Ordinance.
6. Child care center, with no more than twenty (20) children total, in
compliance with all the State of Arizona Department of Health Services
regulations for licensing provided the lot meets the following standards:
a. The minimum area of the lot must be eleven thousand (11,000)
square feet or larger.
b. The lot must be a corner lot with the frontage of both roadways
being designated in the Thatcher General Plan  Transportation
Element as an arterial or collector roadway.
c. The building shall comply with all setback and development
standards of the residential zoning district.
d. The building shall be architecturally designed to be compatible in
character (style, windows, doors, materials, and mass) with the
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.16 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
surrounding residential neighborhood.
7. Commercial retail use provided the lot meets the following standards:
a. The minimum area of the lot must be eleven thousand (11,000)
square feet or larger.
b. The lot must be a corner lot with the frontage of both roadways
being designated in the Thatcher General Plan  Transportation
Element as an arterial or collector roadway.
c. The building shall comply with all setback and development
standards of the residential zoning district.
d. The building shall be architecturally designed to be compatible in
character (style, windows, doors, materials, and mass) with the
surrounding residential neighborhood
e. The maximum building size along with the permitted uses shall
be limited to those allowed in the NC Zoning District as
outlined in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
E. Temporary Uses in the R1-10 Zoning District.
1. A single manufactured home for temporary dwelling of the residents
parent(s) with the following standards:
a. All manufactured homes shall be required to meet the most
current HUD Code standards, be certified under the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, comply with State of Arizona Office of Manufactured
Housing regulations and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and
be in good physical condition structurally and cosmetically.
b. Upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the
manufactured home the Temporary Use Permit shall terminate.
2. A guesthouse for temporary dwelling of the residents parent(s) provided
that upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the guesthouse
the Temporary Use Permit shall terminate.
3. A recreational vehicle or travel trailer for temporary dwelling of the
residents parent(s) with the following standards:
a. The recreational vehicle or travel trailer shall be hooked up to the
Towns sanitary sewer system. The use of the units holding tank
is not permissible.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.17
b. Upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the
recreational vehicle or travel trailer the Temporary Use Permit
shall terminate.
4. The use of a guesthouse by a person and/or group for more than thirty
(30) consecutive days and/or by the same person and/or group more
than five (5) times per calendar year.
Section 5.4 R1-8 Medium Density Residential Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to promote and preserve urban
single-residence development on lots with a minimum area of eight thousand
(8,000) square feet. The intent of this district is to encourage a traditional
neighborhood environment with affordable housing opportunities.
B. Permitted Uses in the R1-8 Zoning District.
1. One (1) single-residence dwelling on any lot or parcel of record
2. Public utility services and facilities when necessary for serving the
surrounding territory, and providing that no public business offices and
no repair or storage facilities are maintained therein
3. Public and private parks and playgrounds.
4. Public and private homeowners association owned recreational amenities
and facilities.
5. Flower and vegetable gardening, provided that agri-business shall not be
carried on upon the premises and provided further that obnoxious
fertilizer shall not be stored and obnoxious soil renovation shall not be
carried out upon the premises.
6. Child care, Home-based. Home-based child care shall comply with all
the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations for
licensing.
7. Home occupations in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article
13 of this Ordinance.
8. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
9. Animals that are considered customary household pets with the following
limitations:
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.18 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
a. Limited to a combined total of two (2) small animals (i.e. dogs,
cats, or other small mammals) exclusive of animals under the age
of four (4) months, provided that horses, cows, goats, and other
hoofed animals shall not be permitted only in compliance with
regulations prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance;
b. Up to twelve (12) birds provided they are kept within a fully
enclosed building or accessory structures, and which do not
create odor or sound that is detectable on an adjoining lot.
10. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. The home contains six (6) or fewer residents, not including staff,
in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582;
c. No signage, graphics, display or other visual means of identifying
the group home shall be visible from the public sidewalk or
street;
d. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
C. Administrative Uses in the R1-8 Zoning District.
1. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. The home contains more than six (6) residents, not including
staff, in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582;
c. No signage, graphics, display or other visual means of identifying
the group home shall be visible from the public sidewalk or
street;
d. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
e. Such home is licensed with, and administratively approved by the
Town, as to compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.
2. Model homes or temporary sales office pertaining to the sale of homes
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.19
being constructed in the immediate subdivision. In the review for a
model home or sales office, the Town may consider lighting, landscaping,
hours of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood impact.
Approval may be granted for a three (3) year period, or until all lots in
the subdivision are sold, whichever occurs first. The office shall be
removed upon completion of the development.
3. Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the construction of the
homes and public improvements within the immediate subdivision.
4. Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus, auctions, holiday or
seasonal boutiques in association with a school or religious institution.
5. One (1) guest house may be permitted on the same lot as a principal
residence, provided the guest house complies with the following
standards:
a. The guesthouse must comply with the accessory building
development regulations as outlined in Article 13 and all other
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
b. A single common driveway shall serve both the principal
residence and the guesthouse.
c. The guesthouse may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross
square footage of the livable area of the primary structure.
d. The guesthouse must be connected to all of the primary
structure's electric, water and gas meters.
e. The guesthouse may not be used for any commercial or nonresidential
uses.
f. A guesthouse may not be used for rental purposes.
g. The guesthouse may be used by the same person and/or group
for not more than thirty (30) consecutive days and by the same
person and/or group not more than five (5) times per calendar
year; unless a Temporary Use Permit is obtained for a longer
duration and/or more times per year.
6. A single travel trailer or certified manufactured home, to be placed on a
lot for temporary dwelling, while the permanent residence is being
constructed on the same lot; with the following standards:
a. Shall not exceed one (1) year from the issuance date of permit.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.20 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
b. The manufactured home meets the most current HUD Code
standards, is certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, complies with
State of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations
and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and is in good physical
condition structurally and cosmetically.
c. The applicant has posted a five hundred (500) dollar bond with
the Town guaranteeing the removal of the temporary dwelling
(travel trailer or manufactured home) from the lot at the issuance
of the permanent residence certificate of occupancy or within one
(1) year whichever is less.
7. Amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas as approved in accordance
with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
D. Conditional Uses in the R1-8 Zoning District.
1. Public schools (K-12).
2. Private schools, including charter schools, with a curriculum substantially
the same as customarily offered in public schools (K-12).
3. Religious institutions; including clergy housing.
4. Publicly owned or operated libraries, fire stations and police stations.
5. Wireless communication towers and antennas, in limited locations, as
approved in accordance with the requirements of Article 18 of this
Ordinance.
6. Child care center, with no more than twenty (20) children total, in
compliance with all the State of Arizona Department of Health Services
regulations for licensing provided the lot meets the following standards:
a. The minimum area of the lot must be nine thousand (9,000)
square feet or larger.
b. The lot must be a corner lot with the frontage of both roadways
being designated in the Thatcher General Plan  Transportation
Element as an arterial or collector roadway.
c. The building shall comply with all setback and development
standards of the residential zoning district.
d. The building shall be architecturally designed to be compatible in
character (style, windows, doors, materials, and mass) with the
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.21
surrounding residential neighborhood.
7. Commercial retail use provided the lot meets the following standards:
a. The minimum area of the lot must be nine thousand (9,000)
square feet or larger.
b. The lot must be a corner lot with the frontage of both roadways
being designated in the Thatcher General Plan  Transportation
Element as an arterial or collector roadway.
c. The building shall comply with all setback and development
standards of the residential zoning district.
d. The maximum building size along with the permitted uses shall
be limited to those allowed in the NC Zoning District as
outlined in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
E. Temporary Uses in the R1-8 Zoning District.
1. A single manufactured home for temporary dwelling of the residents
parent(s) with the following standards:
a. All manufactured homes shall be required to meet the most
current HUD Code standards, be certified under the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, comply with State of Arizona Office of Manufactured
Housing regulations and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and
be in good physical condition structurally and cosmetically.
b. Upon the death of the residents parent(s) that lived in the
manufactured home the Temporary Use Permit shall terminate.
2. A guesthouse for temporary dwelling of the residents parent(s) provided
that upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the guesthouse
the Temporary Use Permit shall terminate.
3. A recreational vehicle or travel trailer for temporary dwelling of the
residents parent(s) with the following standards:
a. The recreational vehicle or travel trailer shall be hooked up to the
Towns sanitary sewer system. The use of the units holding tank
is not permissible.
b. Upon the death of the residents parent(s) that live in the
recreational vehicle or travel trailer the Temporary Use Permit
shall terminate.
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.22 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
4. The use of a guesthouse by a person and/or group for more than thirty
(30) consecutive days and/or by the same person and/or group more
than five (5) times per calendar year.
Section 5.5 Design and Development Standards
A. Site Design Standards. Housing should foster a sense of neighborhood
through shared open space and a sense of community through linkage with
surrounding neighborhoods.
1. All new residential developments (subdivisions) shall be subject to all
requirements set forth in the Thatcher Subdivision Ordinance.
2. All residential developments, at the time of subdivision development and
on a subdivision basis shall provide the minimum net acreage of open
space as delineated in Table No. 2 herein.
3. All residential lots shall provide an improved vehicular connection to the
adjacent public street, or approved private streets, in accordance with
regulations prescribed in Article 14 of this Ordinance.
B. Architectural Design Guidelines.
1. The residence shall have a permanent foundation.
2. The design and materials of any garage or carport shall be compatible
with the design and materials of the main structure.
3. Front porches and courtyards are strongly encouraged.
4. The residential structure should have a strong relationship to the
neighborhood street. A walkway from the street to the front entry is
required.
5. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment is prohibited; except for solar
panels and solar water heaters. Mechanical equipment, propane tanks,
Table No. 2
Open Space Requirements - Single Residence Districts
Zoning District Open Space Percentage
R1-43 5%
R1-22 10%
R1-10 12%
R1-8 15%
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts Page 5.23
coolers, water filters and similar utility equipment shall be installed at
ground level or wall mounted and should be screened from public view.
6. All exterior elevations of a residential structure should provide
architectural detailing; not just the front elevation.
7. All buildings shall harmonize architecturally with the residential character
of the neighborhood.
8. The use of metal or corrugated metal as the primary building material is
strongly discouraged; it may however be used as an architectural accent
or decorative element.
9. The building materials shall be durable and be of substantial quality. The
Town strongly encourages new buildings to meet Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design (LEED) certification standards and building
sites to utilize Low Impact Development (LID) technologies.
C. Development Standards. The table, that follows, specifies the minimum lot
sizes, minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage percentages, maximum
building heights, and minimum yard setbacks allowed within the different single
residence zoning districts.
Table No. 3
Development Standards - Single Residence Zoning District
Zoning District R1-43 R1-22 R1-10 R1-8
Lot Area (square feet) 43,560 22,000 10,000 8,000
Lot Width (feet) 150 120 100 80
Lot Coverage (percentage) 25% 30% 35% 40%
Building Height (stories/feet) 2/30 2/30 2/30 2/30
Front Yard Setback (feet) 30 25 25 20
Side Yard Setback (feet) 15 10 10 10
Street-Side Yard Setback
(feet) 30 25 25 20
Rear Yard Setback (feet) 30 25 25 25
Key:
1. Building height shall be measured from approved finished grade.
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 5.24 Article 5: Single Residence Zoning Districts
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts Page 6.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts
Section 6.0 General Requirements.
A. Purpose and Zones. The Multiple Residence Districts are designed to provide
for a range of different types and densities of multiple residential developments
in locations that are suitable and appropriate, taking into consideration existing
conditions, future land use needs, and the availability of public services. It is
intended that these districts accommodate a variety of dwelling types, including
apartments, townhouses, patio homes, duplexes, and condominiums as well as
providing for associated, limited, non-residential uses. The Multiple Residence
Districts are as follows:
1. R-2 Medium Density Residential Zoning District
2. R-3 Medium Density Residential Zoning District
3. R-4 High Density Residential Zoning District
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted by
right within the zoning district; all other uses are prohibited. Permitted uses are
subject to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be
issued for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the town has not issued
an approval.
C. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted
as a conditional use, temporary use or administrative use within the zoning
district and only after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit, a
Temporary Use Permit or an Administrative Use Permit in accordance with
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. All other uses are prohibited. Conditional uses
are subject to all other applicable standards of this Ordinance and those that may
be imposed by the decision-making body for the required use permit.
D. Review Process. All new development (residential and non-residential) shall
require Site Plan Review, by the Zoning Administrator, prior to the applicants
submittal for building and/or grading permits. All applications for site plan
review shall comply with the submittal requirements outlined in Section 3.6 of
this Ordinance. The required fees shall accompany all applications.
E. Design and Development Standards. The site design standards, architectural
guidelines, and the individual development regulations required for each specific
multiple residence zoning district are outlined in Section 6.3, Table No. 4, and
Table No. 5 contained herein. These standards provide certainty to property
owners, developers, and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
F. Compliance with Other Provisions.
1. Supplementary Requirements. The supplementary requirements in
Article 13 herein shall apply.
Town of Thatcher
Page 6.2 Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts
2. Parking Regulations. The parking regulations in Article 14 herein shall
apply.
3. Signs. All signage proposed shall comply with Article 15 herein.
4. Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with Article 16
herein.
5. Landscape Regulations. The landscape regulations in Article 17 herein
shall apply.
Section 6.1 R-2 Medium Density Residential Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for the development
of either single-residence or duplex units on lots with a minimum area of eightthousand
(8000) square feet. The intent of this district is to encourage a
traditional neighborhood environment with a variety of housing opportunities.
B. Permitted Uses in the R-2 Zoning District.
1. Single-residence dwellings
2. Duplex dwellings
3. Two single-family detached dwellings on one lot, provided that both
structures comply with all of the setbacks for a primary dwelling and that
the two structures are architecturally compatible, including materials,
roofing and paint.
4. Child care, Home-based. Home-based child care shall comply with all the
State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations for licensing.
5. Accessory structures and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
6. Home occupation in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article 13
of this Ordinance.
7. Animals that are considered customary household pets with the following
limitations:
a. Limited to a combined total of two (2) small animals (i.e. dogs,
cats, or other small mammals) exclusive of animals under the age
of four (4) months
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts Page 6.3
C. Administrative Uses in the R-2 Zoning District.
1. A single travel trailer or certified manufactured home, to be placed on a
lot for temporary dwelling, while the permanent residence is being
constructed on the same lot; with the following standards:
a. Shall not exceed one (1) year from the issuance date of permit.
b. The manufactured home meets the most current HUD Code
standards, is certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, complies with
State of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations
and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and is in good physical
condition structurally and cosmetically.
c. The applicant has posted a five hundred (500) dollar bond with
the Town guaranteeing the removal of the temporary dwelling
(travel trailer or manufactured home) from the lot at the issuance
of the permanent residence certificate of occupancy or within one
(1) year whichever is less.
Section 6.2 R-3 Medium Density Residential Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for small scale
development on lots with a minimum area of eight-thousand (8000) square feet
and a maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre for the development of
single or duplex units on an individual lot, townhome development, small-scale
apartments, as well as serving infill needs. The R-3may serve as a transitional
district between single residence and higher density multiple residential
development or commercial districts. The intent of this district is to preserve
and encourage the development of a variety of attached housing units while
maintaining a small scale neighborhood feel.
B. Permitted Uses in the R-3 Zoning District.
1. Single-residence dwellings.
2. Multiple residential developments including small-scale apartments,
duplexes, townhouses, and patio homes.
3. Child care, Home-based. Home-based child care shall comply with all the
State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations for licensing.
Town of Thatcher
Page 6.4 Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts
4. Bed and breakfast operations provided that the following standards shall
apply:
a. No more than four (4) bedrooms per residence may be used for
the business.
b. No more than two (2) adult persons per room.
c. One (1) off-street, non-tandem parking space per bedroom.
5. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. No such home contains more than twenty (20) residents, not
including staff, in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582.
c. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
d. Such home is licensed with, and administratively approved by the
Town, as to compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.
6. Public and private utility installations, but not including business offices,
repair or storage facilities, wastewater treatment plants, booster stations,
and generating plants.
7. Public and private parks and playgrounds
8. Public and private homeowners association owned recreational amenities
and facilities
9. Accessory structures and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
10. Home occupation in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article 13
of this Ordinance.
C. Administrative Uses in the R-3 Zoning District.
1. Office for leasing of on-site dwelling units.
2. Temporary sales office pertaining to the sale of dwelling units being
constructed in the immediate development. In the review for a model
home or sales office, the Town may consider lighting, landscaping, hours
of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood impact.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts Page 6.5
Approval may be granted for a three (3) year period, or until all units in
the development are sold, whichever occurs first. The office shall be
removed upon completion of the development.
3. Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the construction of the
dwelling units in the development and the required on-site and off-site
public improvements for the development.
4. Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus, auctions, holiday or
seasonal boutiques in association with a school or religious institution.
5. A single travel trailer or certified manufactured home, to be placed on a
lot for temporary dwelling, while the permanent residence is being
constructed on the same lot; with the following standards:
a. Shall only apply to R-3 zoned property that is being developed
for an approved single residence use.
b. Shall not exceed one (1) year from the issuance date of permit.
c. The manufactured home meets the most current HUD Code
standards, is certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, complies with
State of Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations
and all the provisions of this Ordinance, and is in good physical
condition structurally and cosmetically.
d. The applicant has posted a five hundred (500) dollar bond with
the Town guaranteeing the removal of the temporary dwelling
(travel trailer or manufactured home) from the lot at the issuance
of the permanent residence certificate of occupancy or within one
(1) year whichever is less.
D. Conditional Uses in the R-3 Zoning District.
1. Public schools (K-12).
2. Private schools, charter schools, or boarding school with a curriculum
substantially the same as customarily offered in public schools (K-12).
3. Public or private university or university related use.
4. Religious institutions; including clergy housing.
5. Assisted living facilities, nursing homes, congregate care facilities,
convalescent homes and homes for the aged provided that the following
standards shall apply:
Town of Thatcher
Page 6.6 Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts
a. A minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet of useable outdoor
open space shall be required per bed and may be calculated as
part of the overall open space required for the development.
b. The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services.
6. Child care center, with no more than twenty (20) children total, in
compliance with all the State of Arizona Department of Health Services
regulations for licensing provided the lot meets the following standards;
a. The minimum area of the lot must be ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or larger.
b. The lot must be a corner lot with the frontage of both roadways
being designated in the Thatcher General Plan  Transportation
Element as an arterial or collector roadway.
c. The building shall comply with all setback and development
standards of the residential zoning district.
d. The building shall be architecturally designed to be compatible in
character (style, windows, doors, materials, and mass) with the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
7. Commercial retail use provided the lot meets the following standards:
a. The minimum area of the lot must be ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or larger.
b. The lot must be a corner lot with the frontage of both roadways
being designated in the Thatcher General Plan  Transportation
Element as an arterial or collector roadway.
c. The required off-street parking spaces should be located in the
rear or to the side of the structures rather than in the front..
d. The building shall be architecturally designed to be compatible in
character (style, windows, doors, materials, and mass) with the
surrounding residential neighborhood
e. The maximum building size along with the permitted uses shall
be limited to those allowed in the NC Zoning District as well
as the development standards as outlined in Article 7 of this
Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts Page 6.7
Section 6.3 R-4 High Density Residential Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide a balance of housing
opportunities to serve the needs of both the year round residents and the
university students through a variety of building types that are high density
attached residential developments in locations where adequate public facilities
and services are available. It is intended that this district accommodate multistory
residential developments incorporating unique design and exceptional
amenities with a minimum lot size of eight-thousand (8000) square feet and a
maximum of twenty-four (24) dwelling units per acre.
B. Permitted Uses in the R-4 Zoning District.
1. Multiple residential developments.
2. Assisted living facilities, nursing homes, congregate care facilities,
convalescent homes and homes for the aged provided that the following
standards shall apply:
a. A minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet of useable outdoor
open space shall be required per bed and may be calculated as
part of the overall open space required for the development.
b. The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services.
3. Group care homes for the elderly and handicapped, provided that:
a. No such home is located on a lot that is within one thousand-two
hundred (1,200) feet of another group home for the handicapped
and elderly care;
b. No such home contains more than twenty (20) residents, not
including staff, in accordance with A.R.S. 36-582;
c. No signage, graphics, display or other visual means of identifying
the group home shall be visible from the public sidewalk or
street;
d. Such home is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services;
e. Such home is licensed with, and administratively approved by the
Town, as to compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.
4. Public and private parks and playgrounds.
Town of Thatcher
Page 6.8 Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts
5. Public and private homeowners association owned recreational amenities
and facilities.
6. Public and private utility installations for gas, electric, water, wastewater
or communications including booster stations and lift stations.
7. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
8. Home occupations in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article
13 of this Ordinance.
C. Administrative Uses in the R-4 Zoning District.
1. Office for leasing of on-site dwelling units.
2. Temporary sales office pertaining to the sale of dwelling units being
constructed in the immediate development. In the review for a model
home or sales office, the Town may consider lighting, landscaping, hours
of operation, signage, parking, duration, and neighborhood impact.
Approval may be granted for a three (3) year period, or until all units in
the development are sold, whichever occurs first. The office shall be
removed upon completion of the development.
3. Temporary construction site trailer pertinent to the construction of the
dwelling units in the development and the required on-site and off-site
public improvements for the development.
4. Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus, auctions, holiday or
seasonal boutiques in association with a school or religious institution.
D. Conditional Uses in the R-4 Zoning District.
1. Public schools (K-12).
2. Private schools, charter schools, or boarding schools with a curriculum
substantially the same as customarily offered in public schools (K-12).
3. Public or private university or university related use including dormitories
and fraternity/sorority housing.
4. Religious institutions; including clergy housing.
5. Resorts, but not hotels or motels, provided that the following standards
shall apply:
a. Each development shall have a minimum area of twenty (20)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts Page 6.9
acres.
b. Each development shall provide a restaurant on-site.
c. The resort shall provide outside recreational amenities, such as
but not limited to, golf, horseback riding, tennis or swimming.
d. The resort development may include meeting rooms or a
conference center, health club and spa facilities, beauty and retail
shops accessible only from within the primary resort building.
Section 6.4 Design and Development Standards.
A. Site Design Standards.
1. Multiple residential developments and buildings should complement and
enhance the built environment of the surrounding residential structures
and neighborhood through the creative and imaginative application of
architecture, landscape and site design standards.
2. All new residential developments (subdivisions) shall be subject to all
requirements set forth in the Thatcher Subdivision Ordinance.
3. All developments shall provide an improved vehicular connection to the
adjacent public street, or approved private streets, in accordance with
regulations prescribed in Article 14 of this Ordinance.
4. Parking areas adjacent to the required front yard are encouraged to be
screened by a decorative wall or landscape berm or combination thereof
to a height not to exceed three (3) feet in order to adequately screen the
parked vehicles.
5. All multiple residential buildings are encouraged to provide covered
parking in accordance with Chapter 14 of this Ordinance. The covered
parking canopy should provide motion sensor/detector light fixtures
placed under the parking shade canopy for security purposes. Solar
panels may be used in place of a traditional parking canopy.
6. Community trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened with
a six (6) foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse areas shall be located
such that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or parking area,
or cannot be viewed from a public street.
7. All multiple residence developments having more than ten (10) dwelling
units shall include recreational amenities for the residents use. Examples
of such amenities include, but are not limited to, swimming pool, fitness
Town of Thatcher
Page 6.10 Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts
center, sport court, or a ramada with tables, chairs, and barbeque grills.
The area utilized by the recreational amenity may be calculated as part of
the overall open space required for the development.
8. Every unit is encouraged to be developed with either a private patio or
balcony a minimum of seventy (70) square feet in size. If this private
useable outdoor open space is provided it may be calculated as part of
the overall open space required for the development.
9. All new multiple residential developments, including but not limited to;
apartments and condominiums shall be required to provide open space,
provide buffering to adjacent developments, and provide landscaping.
10. Open space shall be required for each development, as delineated in
Table No. 4 herein. Open space does not include parking areas.
11. Open space may be left as landscaped open space or may be developed
with recreational amenities for the use and enjoyment of the residents.
B. Architectural Design Guidelines.
1. The residential structure should have a strong relationship to the
neighborhood street. A walkway from the street to the front entry is
strongly encouraged.
2. All multi-story buildings are encouraged to incorporate 360 architecture.
A variety of massing and building heights and stepping rooflines is
strongly encouraged. Straight rooflines should be minimized by using
offsets, differing heights, stepping, or different orientations to produce
more variety within a development. Roof material shall not be wood
shake shingles.
3. Mechanical equipment and similar utility devices, whether ground level or
roof mounted, shall be screened from public view and designed to appear
as an integral part of the building; except for solar panels. The
mechanical equipment screening shall be included in the overall building
height. Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective.
Electrical meters, service components, and SES cabinets should be
screened from public view or designed to appear as an integral part of the
building.
Table No. 4
Open Space Requirements - Multiple Residence Districts
Zoning District Open Space Percentage
R-2 10%
R-3 5%
R-4 10%
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 6: Multiple Residence Zoning Districts Page 6.11
4. Reflective building materials are prohibited. Mirrored surfaces or any
treatment that changes ordinary glass into a mirrored surface are
prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including roof materials, shall be
chemically treated to be non-reflective.
5. The use of metal or corrugated metal as the primary building material is
strongly discouraged; it may however be used as an architectural accent
or decorative element.
6. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low
maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding
developments. The Town strongly encourages all new buildings to meet
LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certification
standards and building sites to utilize Low Impact Development (LID)
technologies.
7. All buildings shall harmonize architecturally with the residential character
of the neighborhood.
C. Development Standards. The table, which follows, specifies the minimum lot
size, minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage percentages, maximum building
heights, and minimum yard setbacks allowed within the different multiple
residence zoning districts.
Table No. 5
Development Standards - Multiple Residence Zoning Districts
Zoning District R-2 R-3 R-4
Lot Area (square feet) 8,000 8,000 8,000
Lot Width (feet) 80(a) 80(a) 80(a)
Lot Coverage (percentage) 50% 50% 60%
Building Height (stories/feet) 2/30 2/30 3/45
Front Yard Setback (feet) 20 25 20
Side Yard Setback (feet) 10 10 15
Street-Side Yard Setback (feet) 20 25 20
Rear Yard Setback (feet) 25 25 20(b)
Key:
(a) Lot widths on corner lots shall be increased by ten (10) feet.
(b) Or height of building, whichever is the greater.
1. Building height shall be measured from approved finished grade.
(End of Article)

Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts Page 7.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 7: Commercial Zoning Districts
Section 7.0 General Requirements.
A. Purpose and Zones. The commercial zoning districts are designed to provide a
range of commercial land uses. The purpose of these districts is to provide for
commercial development in locations, that are suitable and appropriate, taking
into consideration existing conditions, future land use needs, the availability of
public services, and the goals and objectives of the Town of Thatcher General
Plan. It is intended that these districts accommodate a variety of uses including
professional office, neighborhood retail and services, central business district
specialty retail, general retail and services, and mixed use commercial/residential.
The Commercial Districts are as follows:
1. NC Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District
2. C-1 General Commercial Zoning District
3. C-2 Highway Commercial Zoning District
4. MU Mixed-Use Zoning District
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted by
right within the zoning district; all other uses are prohibited. Permitted uses are
subject to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be
issued for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the Town has not
issued an approval.
C. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted
as a conditional use, temporary use or administrative use within the zoning
district and only after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit, a
Temporary Use Permit or an Administrative Use Permit in accordance with
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. All other uses are prohibited. Conditional uses
are subject to all other applicable standards of this Ordinance and those that may
be imposed by the decision-making body for the required use permit.
D. Review Process. All new development shall require Site Plan Review, by the
Zoning Administrator, prior to the applicants submittal for building and/or
grading permits. All applications for site plan review shall comply with the
submittal requirements outlined in Section 3.6 of this Ordinance. The required
fees shall accompany all applications.
E. Design and Development Standards. The site design standards, architectural
guidelines, and the individual development regulations required for each
commercial zoning district are outlined in Section 7.5, Table No. 6 and Table
No. 7 contained herein. These standards provide property owners, developers,
and neighbors with direction for design and development.
F. Compliance with Other Provisions.
Town of Thatcher
Page 7.2 Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts
1. Supplementary Requirements. The supplementary requirements in
Article 13 herein shall apply.
2. Parking Regulations. The parking regulations in Article 14 herein shall
apply.
3. Signs. All signage proposed shall comply with Article 15 herein.
4. Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with Article 16
herein.
5. Landscape Regulations. The landscape regulations in Article 17 herein
shall apply.
Section 7.1 NC Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Zoning District is to provide a location for welldesigned
small scale retail shops and services in convenient locations to meet the
daily needs of families in the immediate residential neighborhood. It is intended
that this district accommodate a restricted range of uses that must be compatible
with and integrated into the adjoining residential neighborhood. Residential uses
shall be incidental to the primary commercial development.
B. Permitted Uses in the NC Zoning District. Uses shall be restricted to a
total maximum building size of 4,000 square feet. Uses shall not include drive-in
facilities, drive-thru window facilities, and outdoor storage and shall be limited to
the following:
1. Residential units, when located above the first floor or behind the
commercial frontage and incidental to the primary commercial
development.
2. Child care centers, with no more than thirty (30) children total, and
including the required outdoor play area. The facility shall be licensed by
the State of Arizona Department of Health Services.
3. Personal and household services, including but not limited to; clothing
alteration, seamstress shop, beauty and barber shops, pet grooming shop,
launderette, dry cleaners (without on-site processing), printing and copy
shop, florist, mail service, catering service.
4. Specialty retail stores, including but not limited to; art gallery, bookstore,
card and gift store, and stationary stores.
5. Professional and general offices.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts Page 7.3
6. Medical, dental, chiropractic and clinical offices (excluding laboratory or
pharmacy facilities).
7. Art studios for the production and teaching of fine art, music schools,
karate and dance studios, and photography studios.
8. Music store, video store, and bicycle shop.
9. Bakery, delicatessen, candy shop, coffee house, ice cream shop, caf,
restaurants, and taverns; excluding live entertainment.
10. Grocery store and butcher shop (no slaughtering).
C. Administrative Uses in the NC Zoning District.
1. Seating areas for outdoor dining, in conjunction with a permitted use that
serves food and/or beverages for on-site consumption.
2. Required off-street parking located in front of the structure and/or
within the front yard setback area.
D. Conditional Uses in the NC Zoning District.
1. Live entertainment associated with a caf, restaurant, and/or tavern.
2. Mixed use neighborhood center for permitted retail, service or office use;
each business tenant space not to exceed 4,000 square feet with the total
center not to exceed 15,000 square feet with no drive-through window
facilities.
Section 7.2 C-1 General Commercial Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for general
commercial uses appropriate to a central business district. It is intended that this
district allow for a range of specialty retail and general commercial businesses
that do not require large scale buildings and promote a pedestrian-scaled
walkable downtown environment.
B. Permitted Uses in the C-1 Zoning District. Uses shall be restricted to a
maximum building size of 40,000 square feet. Uses shall not include outdoor
storage and shall be limited to:
1. Personal and household services, including but not limited to; clothing
alteration, seamstress shop, beauty and barber shops, pet grooming shop,
launderette, dry cleaners, printing and copy shop, florist, mail service,
catering service, shoe repair shop, small appliance repair, travel agency,
Town of Thatcher
Page 7.4 Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts
locksmith, and video rental.
2. Specialty retail stores, including but not limited to; apparel and accessory
store, art supply store, art gallery, bookstore, camera and photo shop,
card and gift shop, craft and beading shop, fabric store, jewelry store,
music store, pet store, stationery store.
3. General retail including but not limited to, antique shop, bicycle shop,
drug store and pharmacy, furniture and home dcor store, home
electronics store, photography studio, sporting goods store, gun shop,
used merchandise or second-hand/consignment shop.
4. Grocery store and butcher shop (no slaughtering).
5. Bakery, delicatessen, candy shop, coffee house, ice cream shop, caf,
restaurants, and taverns; excluding live entertainment.
6. Professional, administrative and general offices.
7. Medical, dental, chiropractic and clinical offices including laboratories.
8. Bank, savings and loan, credit union, check cashing and loan center.
9. Art studios for the production and teaching of fine art, music schools,
karate and dance schools.
10. Outdoor patios and seating areas for outdoor dining in conjunction with
a permitted use that serves food and/or beverages for on-site
consumption.
11. Indoor entertainment and recreational facilities, such as movie theater,
video and game arcade, billiards parlors, bingo, skating rink, bowling
alley, gymnasium, health and fitness facility.
12. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
13. Dwellings when located above the first story provided the first story is
designed and used exclusively for a commercial purpose permitted in the
zone.
14. Child care centers, with no more than thirty (30) children total, and
including the required outdoor play area. The State of Arizona
Department of Health Services shall license the facility.
15. Tire and general auto repair, including auto painting and body repair,
provided all repair operations are conducted within a building. May
include an outside vehicle storage area to be used only for vehicles under
repair which shall be screened from any street or surrounding property.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts Page 7.5
C. Administrative Uses in the C-1 Zoning District.
1. Temporary outdoor display area for merchandise sold on the property, if
approved, provided the display area is located on private property (not
within the public right-of-way), the merchandise is displayed in a manner
allowing for shopping with a clear walkway and the merchandise is
brought inside at the close of each business day.
2. Required off-street parking located in front of the structure and/or within
the front yard setback area
D. Conditional Uses in the C-1 Zoning District.
1. Outdoor storage in conjunction with a permitted use provided the
storage area is located on private property (not within the public right-ofway),
shall be screened from public view with an opaque fence or
decorative wall. Materials shall not be stacked, piled, or stored in such a
manner as to project above the opaque fence or decorative wall.
2. Live entertainment with amplified sound system, in conjunction with a
permitted use such as a restaurant, coffee house, caf, or tavern.
3. Wireless communication antennas as approved in accordance with the
requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
E. Temporary Uses in the C-1 Zoning District.
1. Seasonal or cultural activities such as; pumpkin sales lots and Christmas
tree sales lots. Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a
temporary use permit. A temporary residential use of a travel trailer by
the seasonal tenant, on-site for security purposes, may be permitted
provided it is located within the buildable area of the lot.
2. Mobile Vendors provided that such uses may not be located within any
portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks).
Section 7.3 C-2 Highway Commercial Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Zoning District is to provide a location for
general business and commercial uses. The intent of this district is to allow for
larger and more intense commercial uses to satisfy the broader retail and business
needs of the community at-large while providing for a broad range of
commercial activities.
B. Permitted Uses in the C-2 Zoning District.
Town of Thatcher
Page 7.6 Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts
1. Those uses permitted by right in the C-1 General Commercial Zoning
District.
2. Child care centers.
3. Small-animal hospitals or clinics, confined to a completely enclosed
sound-attenuated building with no outdoor kennels or exercise runs.
4. 24-hour/walk-in emergency care center and out-patient clinic; excluding
hospital.
5. Drive-thru window facilities in conjunction with a permitted use.
6. Liquor stores, nightclubs, dance hall/dancing facility.
7. Hotels and motels; excluding adult motels as defined in the Glossary of
this Ordinance.
8. Outdoor entertainment and amusement facilities such as; drive-in
theaters, miniature golf, batting cages, go-cart tracks, golf driving range
and putting green (not in conjunction with a golf course) and similar
uses.
9. Car wash facilities, auto part stores, auto service stations and convenience
market with the sale or dispensing of gasoline.
10. Outdoor display areas for the sale of new or used automobiles, trucks,
boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, and for the rental of such vehicles
provided all sales, repair, and rental activities are conducted within a
building.
11. Outdoor display area for the sale of new or used farm equipment and
construction equipment and for the rental of such equipment.
12. Tire and general auto repair, including auto painting and body repair,
provided all repair operations are conducted within a building. May
include an outside vehicle storage area to be used only for vehicles under
repair which shall be screened from any street or surrounding property.
13. Newspaper and printing office.
14. Building industry/contractor office and shop, including but not limited
to, cabinet, carpentry, plumbing, heating, ventilation, refrigeration, sheet
metal, tinsmith, exterminator services, painting; provided all fabrication is
conducted within a building and storage of vehicles and materials is
within an area enclosed on all sides by a solid fence or wall at least six (6)
feet in height. No goods, materials or objects shall be stacked higher
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts Page 7.7
than the fence or wall.
15. Lumber yard, excluding milling operations.
16. Art metal, ornamental iron shop, ceramics, glazing, sign fabrication,
welding provided all operations are conducted within an enclosed area
screened from any street or surrounding property.
17. Feed store, nurseries, flower and plant sales, provided all incidental
equipment and supplies, are kept within a completely enclosed building
or within an area enclosed on all sides by a solid fence or wall at least six
(6) feet in height and no goods, materials or objects are stacked higher
than the fence or wall.
18. Medical marijuana dispensary in compliance with regulations prescribed
in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
19. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
C. Administrative Uses in the C-2 Zoning District.
1. Outdoor dining area when ancillary to a restaurant use.
2. Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus and auctions provided
that the temporary uses do not displace required parking for the
permitted C-2 uses. Appropriate dust control abatement shall be
provided.
D. Conditional Uses in the C-2 Zoning District.
1. Wireless communication antennas, in limited as approved in accordance
with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
2. Product distributorships, wholesale and warehouse facilities; excluding
transfer facilities for general freight and providing it is an appropriate
location and limited to a 30,000 SF maximum building size.
3. Multiple residential developments in appropriate locations and with
adherence to the following standards.
a. Multi-story residential development that incorporates unique design
and exceptional amenities with a minimum lot size of eightthousand
(8000) square feet and a maximum of twenty-four (24)
dwelling units per acre.
b. The property does not have frontage onto or along U.S. Highway
70.
c. Development meets all of the Design and Development Standards
of Section 6.3 as required for the R-4 Zoning District.
E. Temporary Uses in the C-2 Zoning District.
Town of Thatcher
Page 7.8 Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts
1. Seasonal or cultural activities such as; pumpkin sales lots and Christmas
tree sales lots. Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a
temporary use permit. A temporary residential use of a travel trailer by
the seasonal tenant, on-site for security purposes, may be permitted
provided it is located within the buildable are of the lot.
2. Mobile Vendors provided that such uses may not be located within any
portion of the public right-of-way (including sidewalks).
Section 7.4 MU Mixed-Use Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Zoning District is to provide a location for small
scale, well designed, professional offices, personal services, limited retail, and
residential within a mixed use environment. It is intended that this district
accommodate a range of uses that encourages and allows both residential and
commercial development either as the primary use or secondarily in either a
vertical mixture or horizontal mixture if attached, and as adjacent uses if
detached.
B. Permitted Uses in the MU Zoning District. Commercial uses shall be
restricted to a maximum tenant space size of 4,000 square feet.
1. Residential units as allowed in the R-3 Zoning District, either single or
multi-residential in nature, developed as either attached or detached units
or in combination with a permitted commercial use; excluding mobile
homes and manufactured homes.
2. Live/Work unit(s).
3. Bank or credit union (without drive-thru window facilities).
4. Bed and breakfast establishments.
5. Specialty retail stores, including but not limited to, the sale of apparel, art
gallery, stationery, cards and gifts, bookstore, art supply shop, and
tobacco shop.
6. Music store, video store, bicycle shop, and sporting goods store.
7. Bakery, delicatessen, candy shop, coffee house, ice cream shop,
restaurants, and taverns; excluding drive-in and drive-thru facilities.
8. Art studios for the production and teaching of fine art, music schools
and dance studios.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts Page 7.9
9. Outdoor patios and seating areas for outdoor dining, in conjunction with
a permitted use that serves food and/or beverages for on-site
consumption.
10. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
C. Administrative Uses in the MU Zoning District.
1. Required off-street parking located in front of the structure and/or
within the front yard setback area.
D. Conditional Uses in the MU Zoning District.
1. Assisted living facilities and group care homes for the elderly and
handicapped provided that:
a. The facility is licensed by the State of Arizona Department of
Health Services.
b. The facility is licensed with, and administratively approved by the
Town of Thatcher, as to compliance with the standards of this
Ordinance and any Town license and permit requirements.
E. Temporary Uses in the MU Zoning District.
1. Seasonal or cultural activities such as; pumpkin sales lots and Christmas
tree sales lots. Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a
temporary use permit. A temporary residential use of a travel trailer by
the seasonal tenant, on-site for security purposes, may be permitted
provided it is located within the buildable are of the lot.
Section 7.5 Design and Development Standards.
A. Site Design Standards.
1. Any new multi-lot commercial development shall be subject to
requirements set forth in the Thatcher Subdivision Ordinance.
2. A new commercial development, developed as a subdivision, shall
provide the minimum net acreage of open space, as delineated in Table
No. 6, on a subdivision basis through the subdivision process.
3. The required on-site parking lot(s) may not be calculated as open space.
Building setbacks, street frontage and on-site retention areas may be
calculated as open space if those areas are landscaped. Courtyards and
Town of Thatcher
Page 7.10 Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts
outdoor seating areas, not associated with an outdoor dining area, may
also be calculated as open space.
Table No. 6
Open Space Requirements - Commercial Zoning
Districts
Zoning
District
Individual
Lot Basis
Subdivision
Basis
NC 0% 3%
C-1 0% 3%
C-2 1% 3%
MU 0% 3%
4. All developments shall provide an improved vehicular connection to the
adjacent public street, or approved private streets, in accordance with
regulations prescribed in Article 14 of this Ordinance.
5. Within the NC, C-1 and MU Zoning Districts the required offstreet
parking spaces shall be located in the rear or to the side of the
structures to avoid interrupting the rhythm of the established streetscape
and to maximize the businesss visibility from public streets. Parking in
front of the structure or within the front yard setback may be permitted,
if approved, through an administrative use permit.
6. Within the C-2 Zoning District parking areas adjacent to the required
front yard are encouraged to be screened by a decorative wall or
landscape berm or combination thereof to a height not to exceed three
(3) feet in order to adequately screen the undercarriages of the parked
vehicles. Parking areas other than in front of the principal building is
strongly encouraged.
7. Within the C-1 and C-2 Zoning Districts a solid masonry or wood
sight obscuring wall shall be required along any common property line
with a residentially zoned property.
8. The use of chain link fencing (with or without slats) shall be prohibited in
locations that are visible from the street or public view.
9. Bicycle parking facilities are encouraged and, if provided, should be
located near the pedestrian space.
10. Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened with a solid six
(6) foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse areas shall be located such that
they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or parking area, or
cannot be viewed from a public street. If the refuse containers can only
be located in a highly visible location then latching gates, for screening
the containers, at the opening to the enclosure shall be required.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts Page 7.11
B. Architectural Design Guidelines.
1. All exterior elevations (360 architecture) should provide architectural
detailing; not just the front elevation. Architectural details related to
color, finish, pattern, and application of materials shall be coordinated for
all elevations of a building to achieve harmony and continuity of design
on all elevations.
2. Roof access should be from within the building.
3. The use of accent colors is encouraged to provide a festive and lively
streetscape. Color should be used to accent entryways and special
architectural features of a building.
4. Mechanical equipment and similar utility devices, whether ground level or
roof mounted, shall be screened from public view and designed to appear
as an integral part of the building; except for solar panels. The
mechanical equipment screening shall be included in the overall building
height. Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective.
5. Reflective building materials are prohibited. Mirrored surfaces or any
treatment that changes ordinary glass into a mirrored surface are
prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including roof materials, shall be
chemically treated to be non-reflective.
6. The use of metal or corrugated metal as the primary building material is
discouraged; it may however be used as an architectural accent or
decorative element.
7. The building materials shall be durable and be of the same or higher
quality as surrounding developments. The Town strongly encourages all
new buildings to obtain Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) certification standards and building sites to utilize Low Impact
Development (LID) technologies.
C. Development Standards. The table, which follows, specifies the minimum lot
size, minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage percentages, maximum building
heights, and minimum yard setbacks allowed within the different commercial
zoning districts.
Table No. 7
Development Standards - Commercial Zoning Districts
Zoning District NC C-1 C-2 MU
Lot Area (square feet) 8,000 None None 8,000
Lot Width (feet) 80 None None 80
Lot Coverage (percentage) 80% 100% 100% 80%
Town of Thatcher
Page 7.12 Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts
Building Height (stories/feet) 2/30 3/45 3/45 3/45
Front Yard Setback (feet) 10 (a) 10 (a) 10 (a) 10 (a)
Side Yard Setback (feet) (b) (c) (b) (c) (b) (c) (b) (c)
Street-Side Yard Setback (feet) 10 (a) 10 (a) 10 (a) 10 (a)
Rear Yard Setback (feet) 10 (a) None (a) None (a) 10 (a)
Key:
(a) If adjacent to residential zone; setback shall be those of the residential zone.
(b) Zero lot lines may be applied if adjacent parcel is also zoned commercial and the
firewall regulations of the Building Code are met.
(c) If adjacent to residential zone; setback shall be one-half () the distance required by
the adjacent residential zone.
1. Permitted accessory buildings shall not exceed one (1) story or the overall height of
the main building, whichever is lower.
2. Building height shall be measured from approved finished grade.
(End of Article)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 7: Commercial Zoning Districts Page 7.
13
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)

Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts Page 8.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 8: Industrial Zoning Districts
Section 8.0 General Requirements.
A. Purpose and Zones. The Industrial Zoning Districts are designed to provide
for a range of industrial land uses from corporate offices in a business park
setting to open land uses and manufacturing. The purpose of these districts is to
provide for industrial development in locations that are suitable and appropriate;
taking into consideration existing conditions, future land uses needs, the
availability of public services, the general publics health and safety, and the land
use goals and objectives of the Thatcher General Plan. The Industrial Districts
are as follows:
1. I-1 Light Industrial Zoning District
2. I-2 General Industrial Zoning District
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted by
right within the zoning district; all other uses are prohibited. Permitted uses are
subject to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be
issued for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the Town has not
issued an approval.
C. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted
as a conditional use, temporary use or administrative use within the zoning
district and only after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit, a
Temporary Use Permit or an Administrative Use Permit in accordance with
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. All other uses are prohibited. Conditional uses
are subject to all other applicable standards of this Ordinance and those that may
be imposed by the decision-making body for the required use permit.
D. Review Process. All new development shall require Site Plan Review, by the
Zoning Administrator, prior to the applicants submittal for building or grading
permits. All applications for site plan review shall comply with the submittal
requirements outlined in Section 3.6 of this Ordinance. The required fees shall
accompany all applications.
E. Design and Development Standards. The site design standards, architectural
guidelines, and the individual development regulations required for each
industrial zoning district are outlined in Section 8.3, Table No. 8 and Table No. 9
contained herein. These standards provide certainty to property owners,
developers, and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
F. Compliance with Other Provisions.
1. Supplementary Requirements. The supplementary requirements in
Article 13 herein shall apply.
Town of Thatcher
Page 8.2 Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts
2. Parking Regulations. The parking regulations in Article 14 herein shall
apply.
3. Signs. All signage proposed shall comply with Article 15 herein.
4. Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with Article 16
herein.
5. Landscape Regulations. The landscape regulations in Article 17 herein
shall apply.
Section 8.1 I-1 Light Industrial Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for a mix of light
industrial uses, such as laboratories, light manufacturing, and light industry.
These uses shall include adequate screening and landscaping as required herein
and within this Ordinance, and uses shall be in locations that are suitable and
appropriate, taking into consideration the land uses on adjacent or nearby
properties and the availability of public utilities. It is intended that this district
will encourage and allow for employment bases through the establishment of
high quality, planned industrial centers for corporate offices and indoor
manufacturing uses in close proximity to major street or highway, rail service or
other means for the transport of products, materials and employees.
B. Permitted Uses in the I-1 Zoning District.
1. Assembly, fabrication, bottling, handling and packaging, treating, and
renovating goods, merchandise, products and equipment; excluding
agricultural products, provided that such uses conform to the following:
a. The primary use of the property is not the basic processing and
compounding of raw materials.
b. All activities pertaining to the actual manufacture or processing
of the product involved shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed building(s).
c. All outdoor storage of material or equipment shall be, ancillary
uses to these primary uses, and such ancillary uses shall only
occupy the rear one-half () of the lot.
d. A solid masonry wall, a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum
of eight (8) feet in height, shall screen all outdoor storage of
materials or equipment.
2. Laboratories for research and product development, including testing
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts Page 8.3
facilities.
3. Product distributorships, wholesale and warehouse facilities; excluding
transfer facilities for general freight;
4. Motion picture production, radio, and television studios and printing,
binding and publishing facilities;
5. Corporate offices/headquarters.
6. Building materials sales yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel, but
not including the production of rock, sand, and gravel.
7. Farm and contractors equipment sales yard, or rental of such equipment.
8. Truck yard.
9. Public utility service yard.
10. Medical Marijuana Dispensary Off-site Cultivation Location, subject to
the requirements found in Article 13 of this Ordinance (Medical
Marijuana Uses).
11. Limited retail commercial provided the product(s) sold at retail are the
product(s) that are assembled, fabricated, handled, packaged, treated, or
renovated as the primary use and the retail area does not exceed ten (10)
percent of the total gross floor area.
12. Mini-storage facility provided any outdoor open storage area is screened
from adjacent properties and public view. A night watchman quarters, if
provided as a security provision, may be allowed as an accessory use.
13. Commercial kennels, animal shelters and veterinary hospitals with
outdoor boarding and exercise facilities.
C. Administrative Uses in the I-1 Zoning District.
1. Seasonal or cultural activities such as; pumpkin sales lots and Christmas
tree sales lots. Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a
temporary use permit. A temporary residential use of a travel trailer by
the seasonal tenant, on-site for security purposes, may be permitted
provided it is located within the buildable are of the lot.
2. Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus and auctions provided
that the temporary uses do not displace required parking for the
permitted I-1 uses. Appropriate dust control abatement shall be
Town of Thatcher
Page 8.4 Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts
provided.
D. Conditional Uses in the I-1 Zoning District.
1. Adult Oriented Businesses, in compliance with regulations prescribed in
Article 13of this Ordinance (Adult Oriented Businesses).
2. Wireless communication towers and antennas as approved in accordance
with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
3. Commercial riding stables, boarding stables, and/or commercial ranch
provided there is a minimum of ten (10) acres and only after it has been
found to be in compliance with the following standards:
a. There shall be no more than eight (8) agricultural animals/acre
with a total of no more than 100 animals/facility at any given
time under any circumstance.
b. An attendant must be in residence on the property of any
commercial ranch.
c. All livestock structures, containment areas of facilities used for
the stabling, storing, showing or training of livestock and for
temporary manure storage shall be set back a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from any property line and at least one hundred (100)
feet from any other residences. Normal setbacks apply to all
other structures and uses.
d. No shows or other activities that would generate more vehicular
traffic than is normal to an area with single-family residences are
permitted unless the site has immediate access to a major or
collector street. Occasional small shows may be allowed per
stipulations of the Conditional Use Permit. Adequate parking for
daily activities and additional parking, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator, must be provided for shows or other
special events.
e. All livestock turnout areas and pens shall be enclosed with fences
at least five feet in height. The design of these enclosures shall be
shown on drawings submitted with the conditional use permit
application.
f. A specific plan for the physical containment and location of
manure storage and/or disposal, which minimizes odor and fly
impacts on adjacent lots or parcels, must be provided. The
spreading and tilling of manure into the soil of the paddock,
pasture or arena areas may be considered manure disposal.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts Page 8.5
g. The applicant must provide a specific program for fly control in
barn and stable areas that minimizes the attraction and breeding
of flies.
h. All activity and pasture areas shall be grassed, sprinkled or treated
with regularly tilled organic soil mix for dust suppression.
i. With the exception of the principal residence and its accessory
structures, upon revocation of the commercial ranch conditional
use permit or abandonment of the operation, all structures shall
be removed.
j. Failure to maintain any of the standards described above is
grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit.
k. In the review for a commercial riding stables, boarding stables,
and/or commercial ranch, the Town may also consider lighting,
landscaping, hours of operation, signage, plan of operation, and
neighborhood impact.
Section 8.2 I-2 General Industrial Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Zoning District is to provide for areas of general
and concentrated fabrication, manufacturing, processing and open land uses
appropriately screened and landscaped that are in close proximity to major access
routes for the transport of products, materials, and employees. It is intended
that this district provide adequate space for industrial operations and related
activities so that the economic base of the Town may be strengthened and
employment opportunities expanded while protecting residential and commercial
land uses from objectionable encroachments and negative impacts.
B. Permitted Uses in the I-2 Zoning District.
1. Those uses permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial Zoning District.
2. Refining, processing, or packaging of organic matter, raw agricultural
products, or edible food products.
3. Truss plant.
4. Manufacturing and assembly of furniture, apparel, glass, stone, clay,
leather, plastic, metal or concrete products.
5. Open storage yards for the storage of boats, trailers, and recreational
vehicles provided that there is no storage of abandoned, damaged, or
junked boats, trailers or recreational vehicles and that an eight (8) foot
Town of Thatcher
Page 8.6 Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts
decorative view-obscuring wall screens the open storage yard area.
6. Heavy equipment repair, sales and rentals provided equipment is stored
in a transportable position.
7. Farm equipment and implement repair, sales and rentals.
8. Construction offices and construction equipment storage yards provided
that the construction equipment storage yards are screened with an eight
(8) foot high decorative view-obscuring wall.
9. Retail and wholesale lumber yard, including incidental millwork.
10. Freight transfer facilities including highway, rail or air transport.
11. Facilities for the manufacturing and distribution of concrete and asphalt.
C. Administrative Uses in the I-2 Zoning District.
1. Seasonal or cultural activities such as pumpkin sales lots and Christmas
tree sales lots. Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a
temporary use permit. A temporary residential use of a travel trailer by
the seasonal tenant, on-site for security purposes, may be permitted
provided it is located within the buildable area of the lot.
2. Temporary uses such as revivals, carnivals, circus and auctions provided
that the temporary uses do not displace required parking for the
permitted I-2 uses. Appropriate dust control abatement shall be
provided
D. Conditional Uses in the I-2 Zoning District.
1. Wireless communication towers and antennas as approved in accordance
with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
2. Extraction and processing of minerals and natural resources, such as
mines, quarries and gravel pits and including concrete or asphalt batch
plants as an accessory use and including smelting only after it has been
found to be in compliance with the following standards:
a. No excavation or processing of excavated materials shall be
permitted within thirty (30) feet to the exterior boundaries and
within one hundred fifty (150) feet to any residential zoned
property or existing residence.
b. Material shall be excavated in such a manner so as to assure the
convenient, efficient, and successful restoration of the land and
to hold to a minimum any adverse effects to adjacent and
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts Page 8.7
surrounding land as a result of piling or storing the overburden
material.
c. Material shall be excavated in such a manner that leaves a
minimum of two (2) feet of undisturbed sand, gravel, or soil over
the entire excavation tract to provide a water bearing strata for
any ground water; or more if the required geological report
indicates that it is necessary.
d. The excavation operator shall maintain haul roads within the
premise covered by the permit and the perimeter public roads in
a dust-free condition.
e. The hours of operation, unless otherwise specified by the Town,
shall not be prior to 6AM or after 10PM unless the Town grants
special permission, for temporary expansion of the hours.
f. Operations shall be conducted in such a manner that excavated
areas will not collect or permit stagnant water to remain therein.
g. The required development plan shall indicate compliance with
the above standards and shall include the following topographic
information at a minimum of 5 foot contour intervals:
i. pre-excavation contours;
ii. proposed excavation contours;
iii. degree of slope of banks for all excavations;
iv. location of any public facilities, irrigation canals, ditches,
or streambeds;
v. post excavation re-use and contours.
3. Automobile wrecking and salvage yards, storage of junk automobiles and
trucks, storage and processing of scrap metals provided that such uses
shall conform to the following requirements;
a. The property shall be screened from neighboring properties and
public view with an eight (8) foot solid masonry wall.
b. No storage shall be visible above the wall.
4. Adult Oriented Businesses in compliance with regulations prescribed in
Article 13 of this Ordinance (Adult Oriented Businesses).
5. Recycling transfer stations or automated collection centers, municipal or
county landfills.
6. Hazardous waste and bio-hazardous medical waste treatment facilities.
Town of Thatcher
Page 8.8 Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts
Section 8.3 Design and Development Standards.
A. Site Design Standards.
1. An industrial development, developed as an industrial subdivision, shall
provide the minimum net acreage of open space, as delineated in Table
No. 8, on a subdivision basis through the subdivision process rather than
requiring open space on a lot-by-lot basis.
2. Open space shall be required for all new developments, based on the net
area of the development as delineated in Table No. 8, if open space was
not provided at the time of subdivision development.
3. The required on-site parking lot(s) and outdoor storage areas shall not be
calculated as open space. However, building setbacks, street frontage,
and on-site retention areas may be calculated as open space if those areas
are landscaped.
4. Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened with a six (6)
foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse areas shall be located such that
they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or parking area, or
cannot be viewed from a public street. Refuse enclosures in highly
visible locations shall provide latching gates for screening the opening to
the enclosure.
5. Service and loading bays should be oriented away from adjacent
residential zoning districts and should not front onto or be visible from
the public street.
6. Parking areas adjacent to the required front yard are encouraged to be
screened by a decorative wall or landscape berm or combination thereof
to a height not to exceed three (3) feet in order to adequately screen the
parked vehicles. All required front and street side yards shall be
landscaped and shall not be used for parking, maneuvering, product
display or drive aisle other than for the necessary points of ingress and
egress.
Table No. 8
Open Space Requirements - Industrial Zoning Districts
Zoning District Open Space Required
on an Individual Lot
Open Space Required
for a Subdivision
I-1 3% 10%
I-2 3% 10%
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts Page 8.9
7. All developments shall provide an improved vehicular connection to the
adjacent public street, or approved private streets, in accordance with
regulations prescribed in Article 14 of this Ordinance
8. A solid perimeter wall, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be
required along and adjacent to the side or rear property line of an
industrial development that abuts a residential district whether separated
by an alley or not. Any access gates shall be constructed of viewobscuring
material to provide effective site screening.
9. The exterior side of all perimeter walls shall be decoratively treated to
match the architectural style and design of the industrial
building/development.
B. Architectural Design Guidelines.
1. All exterior elevations (360 architecture) should provide architectural
detailing; not just the front elevation. The architectural details related to
color, patterning and materials should be coordinated for all elevations of
the building to achieve harmony and continuity of design.
2. Mechanical equipment, electrical meter and service components, and
similar utility devices, whether ground level or roof mounted, shall be
screened from public view and designed to appear as an integral part of
the building; except for solar panels. The mechanical equipment
screening shall be included in the overall building height. Mechanical
equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective
3. Reflective building materials are prohibited. Mirrored surfaces or any
treatment that changes ordinary glass into a mirrored surface are
prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including roof materials, shall be
chemically treated to be non-reflective.
4. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low
maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding
developments. The Town strongly encourages all new buildings to meet
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification
standards and building sites to utilize Low Impact Development (LID)
technologies.
C. Development Standards. The table, which follows, specifies the minimum lot
size, minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage percentages, maximum building
heights, and minimum yard setbacks allowed within the different industrial
zoning districts.
Town of Thatcher
Page 8.10 Article 8: Industrial Zoning Districts
(End of Article)
Table No. 9
Development Standards - Industrial Zoning Districts
Zoning District I-1 I-2
Lot Area (square feet) None 2 acre (b)
Lot Width (feet) none none
Lot Coverage (percentage) 80% 100%
Building Height (stories/feet) 3/45 3/45
Front Yard Setback (feet) 20 20
Side Yard Setback (feet) 0 (a) 0 (a)
Street-Side Yard Setback (feet) 0 (a) 0 (a)
Rear Yard Setback (feet) 0 (a) 0 (a)
Key:
(a) When adjacent to an existing residential district or use, the
following side and rear yard setbacks are required:
 Buildings with one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet in height
shall provide a setback of twenty-five (25) feet.
 Buildings with two (2) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height
shall provide a setback of fifty (50) feet.
(b) If adjacent to existing industrial district, the minimum lot area
requirement may be waived.
1. Building height shall be measured from approved finished grade.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District Page 9.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District
Section 9.0 General Requirements.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the MH Manufactured Home Zoning District is to
provide for a zone that will permit the placement and regulate the permanent
installation of manufactured homes for occupancy as single residence dwellings
on individual lots within a manufactured home subdivision or within an
approved manufactured home park (land-lease) development. The intent of
these provisions is to provide affordable and diversified housing opportunities
within the Town of Thatcher while establishing and maintaining standards
similarly established for neighborhoods of conventional site-built homes. This
zoning district is intended to replace Article 29-12 C-MH Conventional-
Mobile Home District and Article 29-13 MHS Mobile Home District for those
properties zoned under the previous Town of Thatcher Zoning Code.
B. General Provisions.
1. A minimum of six (6) acres shall be required to establish the MH
Manufactured Home Zoning District.
2. All manufactured homes shall be required to meet the current HUD
Code standards, be certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and comply with State of
Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations and all the
provisions outlined in this Ordinance.
3. A manufactured home shall not have been constructed more than ten
(10) years prior to the date of application for building/installation permit.
4. A mobile home, recreational vehicle, or park model may not be used as a
residential dwelling within the MH Zoning District.
5. Conventional (site-built) single-residence dwelling units shall be
prohibited in a manufactured home park (land-lease) development.
6. Conventional (site-built) single-residence dwelling units shall be
prohibited on an individual lot within a manufactured home subdivision
but may be allowed on a metes and bounds parcel within the MH Zoning
District, if applicable.
7. Conventional (site-built) structures shall be required for all recreational
and community-use structures within the MH Zoning District.
Accessory structures on individual lots/spaces may be conventional (sitebuilt)
structures or pre-fabricated.
8. The storage of an abandoned and/or structurally damaged manufactured
Town of Thatcher
Page 9.2 Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District
home is prohibited within the MH Zoning District.
C. Review Process.
1. A property owner seeking to develop a manufactured home subdivision
or a manufactured home park (land-lease) development shall submit
those materials outlined in Section 3.3 of this Ordinance and in the
Subdivision Ordinance; if applicable.
2. The property owner or applicant seeking to place a manufactured home
on either an individual subdivision lot or in a space within a
manufactured home park (land-lease) development shall be required to
obtain a manufactured home placement permit from the Town prior to
the installation of the manufactured home. As part of the manufactured
home placement permit application to the Building Department the
owner shall submit the additional following materials to the Zoning
Administrator for site plan review and approval:
a. Complete site plan of the lot or space. If the manufactured home
is proposed within a manufactured home park (land-lease)
development, a map of the development showing all existing
spaces and points of access shall also be required.
b. Elevations or color photographs of all sides of the structure.
c. Roof slope (expressed in a ratio horizontal to vertical feet) and
roofing material description.
d. Description of any proposed additions or alterations including
photographs where possible.
e. Description of the exterior finish including materials and colors.
3. The manufactured home shall be reviewed for compliance with the
Architectural Standards in Section 9.3. Additionally, the manufactured
home shall be reviewed for compliance with the specific standards and
conditions of the zoning as approved by the Town Council for the
specific development.
4. The Zoning Administrator may approve deviations from one or more of
the architectural standards provided herein on the basis of finding that
the materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the
dwelling would be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in
the vicinity.
5. Site plan review, by the Zoning Administrator, is required for all
conventional (site-built) structures within the Manufactured Home
Zoning District. Applications and submittal requirements can be
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District Page 9.3
obtained from the Zoning Administrator and should comply with the
submittal requirements outlined in Section 3.6 of this Ordinance. The
required fees shall accompany all applications.
D. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted by
right specifically for either a manufactured home subdivision or a manufactured
home park (land-lease) development; all other uses are prohibited. Permitted
uses are subject to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. No building permit
shall be issued for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the Town has
not issued an approval.
E. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted
as a conditional use, temporary use or administrative use within the zoning
district and only after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit, a
Temporary Use Permit or an Administrative Use Permit in accordance with
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. All other uses are prohibited. Conditional uses
are subject to all other applicable standards of this Ordinance and those that may
be imposed by the decision-making body for the required use permit.
F. Design and Development Standards. The site design standards, architectural
standards, open space requirements, and the individual development regulations
required for the Manufactured Home Zoning District are outlined in Section 9.3,
Table No. 10 and Table No.11 contained herein. These standards provide
certainty to property owners, developers, and neighbors about the limits of what
is allowed.
G. Compliance with Other Provisions.
1. Supplementary Requirements. The supplementary requirements in
Article 13 herein shall apply.
2. Parking Regulations. The parking regulations in Article 14 herein shall
apply.
3. Signs. All signage proposed shall comply with Article 15 herein.
4. Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with Article 16
herein.
5. Landscape Regulations. The landscape regulations in Article 17 herein
shall apply.
Section 9.1 Manufactured Home Subdivision Lot Development.
A. Permitted Uses (subdivisions). Permitted uses in the MH Manufactured
Home Zoning District, if developed as a Manufactured Home Subdivision Lot
Town of Thatcher
Page 9.4 Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District
Development, shall be only the following uses:
1. One (1) single-residence manufactured home per lot.
2. Public and private parks and playgrounds.
3. Private homeowners association owned recreational amenities and
facilities.
4. Public and private utility installations for gas, electric, water, wastewater
or communications including booster stations and lift stations.
5. Child care, Home-based. Home-based child care shall comply with all
the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations for
licensing.
6. Animals that are considered customary household pets with the following
limitations:
a. Limited to a combined total of two (2) small animals (i.e. dogs,
cats, or other small mammals) exclusive of animals under the age
of four (4) months, provided that horses, cows, goats, and other
hoofed animals shall not be permitted only in compliance with
regulations prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance;
b. Up to twelve (12) birds provided they are kept within a fully
enclosed building or accessory structures, and which do not
create odor or sound that is detectable on an adjoining lot.
7. Home occupations in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article
13 of this Ordinance.
8. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
B. Administrative Uses (subdivisions).
1. Amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas as approved in accordance
with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
2. A single travel trailer, to be placed on a lot for temporary dwelling, while
the permanent residence is being constructed on the same lot; with the
following standards:
a. Shall not exceed one (1) year from the issuance date of permit.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District Page 9.5
b. The applicant has posted a five hundred (500) dollar bond with
the Town guaranteeing the removal of the temporary dwelling
(travel trailer) from the lot at the issuance of the permanent
residence certificate of occupancy or within one (1) year
whichever is less.
C. Conditional Uses (subdivisions).
1. Publicly owned or operated fire station and/or police station.
2. Wireless communication towers and antennas, with the same locational
provisions required for single residence zoning districts, as approved in
accordance with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
Section 9.2 Manufactured Home Park (land-lease) Development.
A. Permitted Uses (park developments). Permitted uses in the MH
Manufactured Home Zoning District, if developed as a Manufactured Home
Park (land-lease) Development, shall be only the following uses:
1. One (1) single-residence manufactured home per designated space.
2. Park and playground for private use by residents of the manufactured
home park.
3. Recreational amenities and facilities for private use by residents of the
manufactured home park.
4. Public and private utility installations for gas, electric, water, wastewater
or communications including booster stations and lift stations.
5. Child care, Home-based. Home-based child care shall comply with all
the State of Arizona Department of Health Services regulations for
licensing.
6. Animals that are considered customary household pets with the following
limitations:
a. Limited to a combined total of two (2) small animals (i.e. dogs,
cats, or other small mammals) exclusive of animals under the age
of four (4) months, provided that horses, cows, goats, and other
hoofed animals shall not be permitted only in compliance with
regulations prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance;
Town of Thatcher
Page 9.6 Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District
b. Up to twelve (12) birds provided they are kept within a fully
enclosed building or accessory structures, and which do not
create odor or sound that is detectable on an adjoining lot.
7. Home occupations in compliance with regulations prescribed in Article
13 of this Ordinance.
8. Accessory buildings and accessory uses in compliance with regulations
prescribed in Article 13 of this Ordinance.
Section 9.3 Design and Development Standards.
A. Site Design Standards Subdivision Lot Developments.
1. All subdivisions shall be designed and processed in accordance with the
Thatcher Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Connections to all public utilities, including water and sewer service, shall
be extended to each manufactured home lot. All utilities within the
development shall be located underground; and both the water and sewer
systems shall be connected to the public system serving the Town of
Thatcher.
3. Manufactured home subdivisions shall be designed and built with public
streets.
4. All manufactured home subdivisions, at the time of subdivision
development and on a subdivision basis, shall provide the minimum net
acreage of open space as delineated in Table No. 10 herein. Open space
may include active recreational areas such as community buildings,
swimming pools, play areas or passive park space.
5. The individual manufactured homes should be designed and situated on
the lot in a manner that assures similarity in exterior appearance and in
keeping with, the architectural character of conventional (site-built)
dwellings and the character of the surrounding neighborhood in general.
6. The residential structure should have a strong relationship to the
neighborhood street. A walkway from the street to the front entry is
required.
7. Front porches and courtyards are strongly encouraged.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District Page 9.7
B. Site Design Standards Park (land-lease) Developments.
1. All manufactured home parks shall require Site Plan Review in
accordance with Section 3.6 of this Ordinance and may be reviewed
concurrently with the rezoning request.
2. A solid decorative masonry wall, six (6) feet in height, shall be required
on the perimeter of the manufactured home park.
3. No individual manufactured home space shall have direct vehicular
access to a public street outside of the park development.
4. Public utilities, including water and sewer service, shall be extended to
each space within the park. All utilities within the park development
shall be located underground; and both the water and sewer systems shall
be connected to the public system serving the Town of Thatcher.
5. Manufactured home park developments shall be improved with paved
private streets built to Town specifications.
6. All manufactured home parks shall provide the minimum net acreage of
open space as delineated in Table No 10 herein. Indoor recreation and
social centers, which may be used for dancing, crafts, hobbies, games,
child care, meetings, banquets, theatrical performances, movie viewing,
and similar entertainment uses which are intended and used primarily as a
resident only amenity may be calculated as open space. Such facility shall
be of conventional (site-built) construction. Recreation center parking
lot(s) and guest parking areas are required and shall not be included when
calculating the required open space.
7. Outdoor recreation facilities such as parks, swimming pools, ramadas,
playground equipment, shuffleboard and tennis courts, putting greens,
and similar recreational uses intended for use only by the residents of the
park may be calculated as open space.
8. The manufactured home park shall provide a designated manager's
office, which shall be of conventional (site-built) construction.
Common-use laundry facilities, maintenance buildings, and security guard
houses, if provided, shall be of conventional construction.
9. Common trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened with a
six (6) foot decorative wall. Said common trash and refuse areas shall be
located such that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or
parking area, or cannot be viewed from a public street. If the refuse
containers can only be located in a highly visible location then latching
gates, for screening the containers, at the opening to the enclosure shall
be required.
Town of Thatcher
Page 9.8 Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District
C. Architectural Standards (all manufactured homes).
1. Minimum Width.
a. The placement of a multi-section unit, exclusive of any garage or
carport area, is required on an individual lot within a
manufactured home subdivision lot development.
b. The placement of a single-section unit, exclusive of any garage or
carport area, shall be the maximum permitted on an individual
space within a manufactured home park (land-lease)
development.
2. Grading. Unless the topography of a particular lot precludes it, the
manufactured home shall be installed no higher from grade than eighteen
(18) inches (from ground to frame) on the highest side; and not less
than twelve (12) inches on the low side. The building official is
authorized to approve minor deviations from the height requirement
after inspection of the property to determine such deviation is necessary
because of lot conformity.
3. Foundations. The manufactured home shall be pit set and placed on an
excavated foundation with permanent stem wall so that the home
appears to have a foundation wall similar in appearance and kind to
conventional site built homes. Such installation shall render the dwelling
no more portable than if it were constructed totally on-site.
4. Exterior Building Materials. Exterior siding shall be made of nonreflective
and non-metallic materials. Acceptable siding materials include:
vinyl, wood, stucco, brick, stone, or other masonry materials or any
combination of these materials. Provided however, that the use of T1-
11 siding (rough sawn plywood siding with vertical grooves at 4 or 8
O.C.) or similar material shall be prohibited.
5. Roof Structure and Materials. All roof structures shall be sloped and
provide an eave projection of no less than six (6) inches and no greater
than twenty-four (24) inches. Unfinished galvanized steel, unfinished
aluminum, wood shake shingles, or fiberglass/asphalt shingles less than
325 lbs. /100 sq. ft. shall not be permitted.
6. Mechanical equipment. All manufactured home running gear, tongues,
axles, and wheels must be removed at the time of installation. Roofmounted
mechanical equipment is prohibited. Mechanical equipment,
propane tanks, water filters, coolers and air conditioning units and similar
utility equipment shall be installed at ground level or wall mounted and
should be screened from public view.
7. Garage or Carports. The design and materials of any garage or carport
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District Page 9.9
shall be compatible with the design and materials of the main structure.
8. Accessory Structures. If a front porch, deck or veranda is provided, it
shall be covered or under-roof. Uncovered porches, decks, or verandas
are permitted on the side and rear of the home provided they meet the
setback requirements of this Ordinance. Canopies, awnings or other
structures to provide shade or protection from weather shall be open on
three (3) sides.
9. Steps. If the dwelling unit has steps leading to the front entry the steps
shall be attached to a permanent foundation and designed and
constructed to be an integral part of the exterior of the dwelling unit.
10. Anchor Ties. The structure shall be anchored to the ground, in
accordance with approved manufactured home installation standards for
high wind areas.
11. Additions. All additions and alterations shall be in compliance with the
current Building Code as adopted by the Town or in compliance with the
most current HUD Code standards and the housing manufactures
specifications; whichever is more restrictive.
D. Open Space and Development Standards.
1. Open Space Standards. Table No.10, which follows, specifies the
minimum required open space for a manufactured home subdivision lot
development and for a manufactured home park (land-lease)
development.
2. Development Standards. Table No. 11, which follows, specifies the
minimum lot/space size, minimum lot/space width, maximum lot/space
coverage percentages, maximum building heights, and minimum yard
setbacks allowed within the MH Manufactured Home Zoning District.
Table No. 10
Open Space Requirements - Manufactured Home Zoning District
Type of Development MH Subdivision Lot
Development
MH Park (land-lease)
Development
Required Open Space 15% 10% (a)
Key:
(a) In addition to the manufactured home park developments required
common open space an additional 100 square foot/space shall be
required to be developed as a communal recreational facility for the
residents of the park.
Town of Thatcher
Page 9.10 Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District
Table No. 11
Development Standards - Manufactured Home Zoning District
Type of Development MH Subdivision
Lot
MH Park
Space
Lot/Space Area (square feet) 8,000 4,000
Lot Width (feet) 80 60
Lot Coverage (percentage) 40% 45%
Building Height (stories/feet) 2/30 1/16
Front Yard Setback (feet) 20 10 residence
20 garage/carport
Side Yard Setback (feet) 10 10 (a)
Street-Side Yard Setback (feet) 20 10 (a)
Rear Yard Setback (feet) 20 15 (a)
Key:
(a) All manufactured homes, including canopy and/or awnings, shall be set
back ten (10) feet from the exterior boundary of the park.
1. Building height shall be measured from approved finished grade.
Section 9.4 Exceptions.
A. The MH Manufactured Home Zoning District shall not prohibit the continued
occupancy of a non-certified mobile home or manufactured home, located and
occupied as a private residence, within the Town at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance that meets any of the following:
1. Not located within an approved MH Zoning District;
2. Located on a property that was zoned C-MH or MHS under the
previous Town of Thatcher Zoning Code in effect at the time of the
adoption of this Ordinance;
3. Currently has approval from the Town for the temporary use as a
dwelling while the resident is building, or having built, on-site, what will
be the permanent dwelling unit; not to exceed a one (1) year period;
4. Is not in compliance with the design and development standards of
Section 9.3;
5. Has a current Temporary Use Permit for temporary dwelling of the
residents parent(s) provided that upon the termination of the Temporary
Use Permit the mobile home or manufactured home shall be removed.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District Page 9.11
B. Existing mobile homes or manufactured homes that are not in compliance with
the design and development standards of Section 9.3 at the time of the adoption
of this Ordinance shall be brought into compliance as additions or alterations to
the structures are requested as may be required by the provisions of this
Ordinance on non-conforming structures.
C. The existing mobile home or manufactured home may be replaced in its entirety
only with a manufactured home that is in compliance with all of the design and
development standards outlined in Section 9.3 and all other provisions of this
Ordinance.
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 9.12 Article 9: Manufactured Home Zoning District
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 10: Open Space Zoning District Page 10.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 10: Open Space Zoning District
Section 10.0 General Requirements.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the OS Open Space Zoning District is to conserve
and protect open spaces, desert washes and flood plains, prime agricultural lands,
and lands agreed to be developed for recreational uses through the plan approval
process. The primary purpose of designating these areas is to raise the degree of
assurance that designated open space for conservation and recreational areas will
remain open as well as to further the goals and objectives of the Thatcher
General Plan.
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted by
right within the zoning district; all other uses are prohibited. Permitted uses are
subject to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be
issued for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the Town has not
issued an approval.
1. Growing and harvesting of field crops, trees, flowers and vegetables.
2. Nurseries for the propagation and growing of plants, trees, bushes,
flowers, and vegetables and other food crops; without an on-site retail or
wholesale component.
3. Public or community gardens.
4. Undeveloped natural land.
5. Archaeological or historic sites.
6. Cemeteries, crematoriums, columbaria and mausoleums.
7. Public parks, including but not limited to, picnic grounds, playgrounds,
athletic playing fields, swimming pools, golf courses, fairgrounds, and
rodeo grounds.
8. Private parks maintained by a homeowner or property owners
association.
9. Public or private golf course, including clubhouse and driving range
located thereon, but not including miniature golf courses or stand-alone
practice driving ranges, operated for commercial purposes, when not
associated with a golf course.
10. Paved or unpaved trails or pathway systems for use by hikers, bicyclists
(not bike lanes within the roadway pavement section), pedestrians (not
sidewalks integrated with the curb), and equestrians; including trailheads
Town of Thatcher
Page 10.2 Article 10: Open Space Zoning District
for such uses.
11. Manmade water features, rivers and streams.
12. Retention or detention basins; provided they are landscaped, multi-tiered
and designed to be used as an active multi-use area.
13. Public or private arboretums, wildlife reserves or sanctuaries.
14. Utility services, but not including offices, treatment plants, generating
stations, sub-stations, switching or splitting stations.
C. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted
as a conditional use, temporary use or administrative use within the zoning
district and only after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit, a
Temporary Use Permit or an Administrative Use Permit in accordance with
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. All other uses are prohibited. Conditional uses
are subject to all other applicable standards of this Ordinance and those that may
be imposed by the decision-making body for the required use permit.
1. Administrative Uses in the OS Zoning District..
a. Concessions, including but not limited to, amusement devices,
recreational buildings, refreshment stands, and snack bars.
b. Temporary uses such as carnivals, seasonal or holiday special
events, sporting tournament event, and concerts; provided they
are sponsored by a civic, community or government organization.
c. Mobile vendors when associated with a temporary carnival,
seasonal or holiday special event, sporting tournament event,
and/or concert.
2. Conditional Uses in the OS Zoning District.
a. Retail operation when in conjunction with and accessory to a
permitted use including but not limited to; restaurant, gift shop,
equipment sales or rental.
b. A visitor center operated in conjunction with an archaeological or
historic site.
c. Mortuary when in conjunction with an on-site cemetery,
crematorium, columbaria or mausoleum
d. Community activity centers, art centers and museums for group
assembly, display, and exhibition.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 10: Open Space Zoning District Page 10.3
e. Commercial riding and boarding stables provided the site
contains at least ten (10) acres. Additional acreage may be
required based on the number of horses stabled thereon.
f. Wireless communication towers and antennas in accordance with
the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
D. Review Process. All new development shall require Site Plan Review, by the
Zoning Administrator, prior to the applicants submittal for building or grading
permits. All applications for site plan review shall comply with the submittal
requirements outlined in Section 3.6 of this Ordinance. The required fees shall
accompany all applications.
E. Design and Development Standards. The site design standards, architectural
guidelines, and the development regulations required for the open space zoning
district are outlined below and in Table No. 12 contained herein. These
standards provide certainty to property owners, developers, and neighbors about
the limits of what is allowed.
1. Site Design Standards.
a. Retention basins with a bottom area in excess of one half (1/2)
acre, should be designed, turfed and equipped to accommodate a
play/sport field rather than being landscaped with decomposed
granite. All recreational facilities, tot lots, play equipment, and
amenities within a retention basin shall be located at least one (1)
foot above the 50-year storm level. Basin slopes should not
exceed a three to one (3:1) slope.
b. Paved trails and pathways should be landscaped and minimally
furnished to provide shade and rest areas in order to encourage
their extensive use as a secondary mode of transportation,
recreation, and access throughout the neighborhoods and the
Town.
c. Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened with a six
(6) foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse areas shall be located
such that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or
parking area, or cannot be viewed from a public street. Refuse
enclosures in highly visible locations shall provide latching gates
for screening the opening to the enclosure.
2. Architectural Design Guidelines.
a. All exterior elevations (360 architecture) should provide
architectural detailing; not just the front elevation. The
architectural details related to color, patterning and materials
Town of Thatcher
Page 10.4 Article 10: Open Space Zoning District
should be coordinated for all elevations of the building to achieve
harmony and continuity of design.
b. Mechanical equipment, electrical meter and service components,
and similar utility devices, whether ground level or roof mounted,
shall be screened from public view and designed to appear as an
integral part of the building. The mechanical equipment
screening shall be included in the overall building height.
Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective.
c. The use of metal or corrugated metal is strongly encouraged to
only be used as an architectural accent or decorative element and
not as the primary building material.
d. Reflective building materials are prohibited. Mirrored surfaces or
any treatment that changes ordinary glass into a mirrored surface
are prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including roof materials, shall
be chemically treated to be non-reflective.
e. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low
maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding
developments. The Town strongly encourages all new buildings
to meet Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) certification standards and building sites to utilize Low
Impact Development (LID) technologies.
3. Development Standards. Table No. 12, which follows, specifies the
minimum lot size, minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage
percentages, maximum building heights, and minimum yard setbacks
allowed within the open space zoning district.
Table No. 12
Development Standards - Open Space (non-residential) Zoning District
Zoning District OS
Lot Area (square feet) 5 Acres
Lot Width (feet) none
Lot Coverage (percentage) 5%
Building Height (stories/feet) 2/30
Front Yard Setback (feet) 30
Side Yard Setback (feet) 15
Street-Side Yard Setback (feet) 30
Rear Yard Setback (feet) 30
Key:
Building height shall be measured from approved finished grade.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 10: Open Space Zoning District Page 10.5
F. Compliance with Other Provisions.
5. Supplementary Requirements. The supplementary requirements in
Article 13 herein shall apply.
6. Parking Regulations. The parking regulations in Article 14 herein shall
apply.
7. Signs. All signage proposed shall comply with Article 15 herein.
8. Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with Article 16
herein.
9. Landscape Regulations. The landscape regulations in Article 17 herein
shall apply.
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 10.6 Article 10: Open Space Zoning District
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 11: Public-Institutional Zoning District Page 11.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 11: Public-Institutional Zoning District
Section 11.0 General Requirements.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the P-I Public-Institutional Zoning District is to
provide for those governmental, institutional and public uses which are necessary
to serve the public at various locations throughout the community, and to
distinguish them from private uses. It is intended that this district establish
regulations and standards to ensure that governmental, institutional and public
uses are not exempt from regulation, will not negatively impact neighboring uses,
and will further the goals and objectives of the Thatcher General Plan.
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted by
right within the zoning district; all other uses are prohibited. Permitted uses are
subject to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be
issued for a use not specifically mentioned and for which the Town has not
issued an approval.
1. Hospitals and institutions of an educational, charitable, or philanthropic
nature.
2. Religious institutions, convents, and parish houses.
3. Public and private educational institutions for post-secondary studies;
including university related uses including sporting fields, stadiums,
arenas and dormitories.
4. Public schools (K-12), athletic fields, and playgrounds
5. Public parks and recreational facilities, including but not limited to, picnic
grounds, playgrounds, athletic playing fields, swimming pools, golf
courses, fairgrounds, and rodeo grounds.
6. Government office buildings and grounds; excluding storage and
equipment yards, and service and maintenance facilities.
7. Fine art centers and museums, community activity centers and facilities,
and civic and convention centers for group assembly, display, and
exhibition.
8. Publicly owned or operated libraries, fire stations, police stations and
post offices.
C. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall only be those uses listed as permitted
as a conditional use, temporary use or administrative use within the zoning
district and only after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit, a
Temporary Use Permit or an Administrative Use Permit in accordance with
Town of Thatcher
Page 11.2 Article 11: Public-Institutional Zoning District
Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. All other uses are prohibited. Conditional uses
are subject to all other applicable standards of this Ordinance and those that may
be imposed by the decision-making body for the required use permit.
1. Administrative Uses in the P-I Zoning District..
a. Retail operation when in conjunction with and accessory to a
permitted use including but not limited to; snack bars, restaurant,
gift shop, equipment sales or rental.
b. Temporary uses such as carnivals, seasonal or holiday special
events, sporting tournament event, and concerts; provided they
are sponsored by a civic, community or government organization.
c. Mobile vendors when associated with a temporary carnival,
seasonal or holiday special event, sporting tournament event,
and/or concert.
d. Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 18 of this
Ordinance, permitted as an accessory use for a legally established
principal use.
2. Conditional Uses in the P-I Zoning District.
a. Governmental office buildings and grounds, including service
and maintenance facilities, outdoor storage yards for vehicles,
equipment, and materials.
b. Municipal water production and storage facilities; municipal
sewage treatment plants; municipal facilities for the collection,
transfer, and disposal of solid wastes.
c. Public safety and law enforcement facilities, including public or
private detention and correctional facilities.
d. Recycling transfer stations or automated collection centers,
municipal or county landfills.
e. Public utility generating plants.
f. Airports whether civilian or military.
g. Wireless communication towers and antennas as approved in
accordance with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
D. Review Process. All new development shall require Site Plan Review, by the
Zoning Administrator, prior to the applicants submittal for building or grading
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 11: Public-Institutional Zoning District Page 11.3
permits. All applications for site plan review shall comply with the submittal
requirements outlined in Section 3.6 of this Ordinance. The required fees shall
accompany all applications.
E. Design and Development Standards. The site design standards, architectural
guidelines, and the development regulations required for the P-I Public-
Institutional Zoning District are outlined below and in Table No. 13 contained
herein. These standards provide certainty to property owners, developers, and
neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
1. Site Design Standards.
a. Trash and refuse collection containers shall be screened with a six
(6) foot decorative wall. Trash and refuse areas shall be located
such that they are not the visual focal point of a driveway or
parking area, or cannot be viewed from a public street. If the
refuse containers can only be located in a highly visible location
then latching gates, for screening the containers, at the opening
to the enclosure shall be required.
b. Service and loading bay areas should be oriented away from
adjacent residential zoning districts and should not front onto or
be visible from the public street.
c. Parking areas adjacent to the required front yard are encouraged
to be screened by a decorative wall or landscape berm or
combination thereof to a height not to exceed three (3) feet in
order to adequately screen the parked vehicles. Parking areas
other than in front of the principal building is strongly
encouraged.
d. Bicycle parking facilities should be located near the public
entrance to the facility.
e. When adjacent to residential uses a solid view obscuring wall
(non-chain link), a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be
required along any outdoor storage area, or vehicle service and
equipment storage area. No goods, materials or objects shall be
stacked higher than the wall. Any access gates shall be
constructed of view-obscuring material to provide effective site
screening.
f. Building site details related to utility boxes, transformers,
generators, chiller farms, mailboxes, trash bins and air
conditioning units shall be integrated into the overall design of
the building and/or development and screened from view, yet
remain accessible for servicing.
Town of Thatcher
Page 11.4 Article 11: Public-Institutional Zoning District
2. Architectural Design Guidelines.
a. All exterior elevations (360 architecture) should provide
architectural detailing; not just the front elevation. The
architectural details related to color, patterning and materials
should be coordinated for all elevations of the building to achieve
harmony and continuity of design.
b. Mechanical equipment, electrical meter and service components,
and similar utility devices, whether ground level or roof mounted,
shall be screened from public view and designed to appear as an
integral part of the building. The mechanical equipment
screening shall be included in the overall building height.
Mechanical equipment shall be treated to be non-reflective.
c. The use of metal or corrugated metal is strongly encouraged to
only be used as an architectural accent or decorative element and
not as the primary building material.
d. Reflective building materials are prohibited. Mirrored surfaces or
any treatment that changes ordinary glass into a mirrored surface
are prohibited. Metallic surfaces, including roof materials, shall
be chemically treated to be non-reflective.
e. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low
maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding
developments. The Town strongly encourages all new buildings
to meet Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) certification standards and buildings to utilize Low
Impact development (LID) technologies.
3. Development Standards. Table No. 13, which follows, specifies the
minimum lot size, minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage
percentages, maximum building heights, and minimum yard setbacks
allowed within the P-I Public-Institutional Zoning District.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 11: Public-Institutional Zoning District Page 11.5
Table No. 13
Development Standards - Public-Institutional Zoning District
Zoning District P-I
Lot Area (square feet) none
Lot Width (feet) none
Lot Coverage (percentage) 80%
Building Height (stories/feet) 3/45
Front Yard Setback (feet) 20
Side Yard Setback (feet) 10 (a)
Street-Side Yard Setback (feet) 10 (a)
Rear Yard Setback (feet) 10 (b)
Key:
(a) If the property line or adjoining street abuts a residential
zone the setback shall be 20 feet.
(b) If the property line or adjoining street abuts a residential
zone the setback shall be 25 feet.
1. Building height shall be measured from approved finished
grade.
F. Compliance with Other Provisions.
1. Supplementary Requirements. The supplementary requirements in
Article 13 herein shall apply.
2. Parking Regulations. The parking regulations in Article 14 herein shall
apply.
3. Signs. All signage proposed shall comply with Article 15 herein.
4. Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall comply with Article 16
herein.
5. Landscape Regulations. The landscape regulations in Article 17 herein
shall apply.
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 11.6 Article 11: Public-Institutional Zoning District
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
Section 12.0 General Requirements.
A. Purpose and Zones. The overlay zoning districts shall be in addition to, and
shall overlay, all other zoning districts where it is applied, so that any parcel of
land lying in an overlay zoning district shall also lie in one (1) or more of the
other zoning districts provided for by the Thatcher Zoning Ordinance. The
specific Overlay Zoning Districts are as follows:
1. TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay Zoning.
2. RV Recreational Vehicle Overlay Zoning.
B. Application Process. The Overlay Zoning Districts are to be used in
conjunction with the underlying Zoning District(s). Rezoning to the Overlay
Zoning District shall follow the general procedures and rezoning requirements as
outlined in Article 3 along with any specific submittal and design requirements of
the overlay zone as delineated herein.
C. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be the same land uses as the underlying
base zoning district except for uses that may be specifically added herein and
those that may be excluded by the Town Council during the rezoning and
approval process. Permitted uses are subject to all applicable standards of this
Ordinance. No building permit shall be issued for a use not specifically
mentioned and for which the town has not issued an approval.
D. Compliance with Other Provisions.
1. Supplementary Requirements: The supplementary requirements in
Article 13 herein shall apply.
2. Parking Regulations: The parking regulations in Article 14 herein shall
apply.
3. Signs: All signage shall comply with the regulations of Article 15 herein.
4. Outdoor Lighting: All outdoor lighting shall comply with Article 16
herein.
5. Landscape Regulations: All landscaping shall comply with Article 17
herein.
Section 12.1 TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay
Zoning District.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the TND Overlay Zoning District is to
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.2 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
provide both the Town and the development community greater flexibility to
create a distinctive, innovative, high quality, sense of place that would not be
obtained by conventional zoning and development methods. The intent is to
encourage a creative land use mix of different residential types and densities,
promote the mix of residentially scaled commercial uses in a neighborhood
setting, and to achieve design excellence that will enhance the unique character
and setting of the Town of Thatcher.
B. General Provisions - TND Overlay Zoning District.
1. The minimum land area for a TND Overlay Zoning District shall be
forty (40) contiguous acres, under one (1) common ownership, that may
only be applied to an underlying R1-10 and/or R1-8 Zoning District.
2. Through the rezoning process the TND Overlay Zoning District allows
for the establishment of development standards unique to the specific
TND and different from those of the underlying zoning district. The
specific development standards for the TND are to be suggested by the
developer with the final determination approved by the Town Council.
3. If the TND is traversed by a proposed collector or arterial street as
shown on the Thatcher General Plan, the TND shall be designed to
continue the street(s) and dedicate that portion of the right-of-way within
the TND boundaries for said collector and arterial streets unless
otherwise approved by the Town Council.
4. The design standards and architectural design guidelines developed for
the TND shall not be any less than the minimum design standards and
architectural design guidelines outlined in this Ordinance and the
Subdivision Ordinance.
5. All development and land uses shall conform to the TNDs Master Plan
Map and the TNDs Architectural Design Standards & Guidelines as
approved by the Town for the specific TND development. Site plan
review, by the Zoning Administrator, shall be required for all uses and
shall comply with the submittal requirements outlined in Section 3.6 of
this Ordinance and/or on the Towns application form.
6. The developer of the TND shall form a Master Homeowners
Association (H.O.A.) and/or a Master Property Owners Association.
Parcels that are developed within the TND may form an additional
H.O.A. but shall still remain obligated to the master association.
7. An allocation of the TNDs overall open space requirements, per Table
No. 14, shall be provided in each phase of a multi-phased TND
development unless otherwise approved by the Town Council. The land
covered by roads, off-street parking, and the yards surrounding buildings
which constitute open space pertinent to individual dwelling units shall
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.3
not be included in computing the required area for open space.
8. Density transfers may be considered between parcels within the TND
provided the overall density for the TND doesnt increase from that
approved by the Town Council. Requests for a density transfer may be
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
9. For the purpose of calculating density the equation shall be as follows:
D= du
A - (C + AC + OS)
where: D = Density
du = Total number of dwelling units or lots.
A = Total gross site area (acres)
C = Total commercial land (acres)
AC = Arterial and collector rights-of-way (acres)
OS = Park and open space (acres)
10. The residential density permitted depends on the percentage of the
overall project that is devoted to multiple residence and/or commercial
land uses as denoted in the following Table No. 14. The land use mix,
density, and open space requirements shall be approved through the
rezoning process for the TND and will be based on the overall design
and quality of the project, its impact to surrounding properties, and the
integration of the project into the overall community.
Table No. 14 - Land Use Mix for a TND Overlay Development
Single Residential %
of Overall Project
Multiple Residence
and/or Commercial %
of Overall Project
Open Space %
Required
Permitted Single
Residential Density
80% 20% 10% 7 du/ac (a) (b)
90% 10% 12% 6 du/ac (a) (b)
95% 5% 15% 5 du/ac (a) (b)
100% 0% 20% 5 du/ac (a) (b)
Key:
(a) Conventional single family residential may be developed up to a maximum density
of 5du/ac. Any density greater than 5du/ac must be developed as
condominiums, town home/patio home, apartment, cluster residential, or
residential units combined within commercial uses.
(b) The overall density of any TND shall not exceed 10du/ac. The density of any
one multiple residence or mixed-use parcel within a TND shall not exceed
18du/ac.
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.4 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
11. It is the intent of the Town to monitor the project to ensure that the
percentage of commercial, residential, and open space agreed upon
through the rezoning process, is achieved and maintained.
C. TND Overlay Zoning Incentives.
1. Expedited Process:
a. With the TND Overlay Zoning District only one (1) rezoning,
to establish the TND overlay, shall be required. Once the TND
is approved, the individual parcels will not require further
rezoning; provided they are in compliance with the
developments approved Master Plan Map, project
Architectural Design Standards & Guidelines, and the
permitted uses. Platting of the individual subdivisions will still be
required and shall comply with the Subdivision Ordinance. Site
plan review will still be required for the development of the
multiple residence and commercial parcels.
b. When an application for rezoning to the TND Overlay is
accompanied by an application for a conditional use permit or
subdivision plat approval, both applications may be processed
and reviewed concurrently. If the proposed rezoning is not in
compliance with the Thatcher General Plan - Land Use Plan, an
application for an amendment to the Land Use Plan shall be
submitted by the applicant in accordance with A.R.S. 9-461.06
and the Thatcher General Plan.
c. The applicant submitting for a TND rezoning has the choice of
submitting for a Preliminary Development Plan or a Final
Development Plan depending upon the level of detail they are
prepared to submit to the Town (see Section 12.1 (F) below).
2. Flexibility:
a. Flexibility in development standards is allowed provided the
TND is well designed, creates a walkable environment, and
provides a mix of land uses.
D. Permitted Uses In addition to those uses permitted by right within the
underlying R1-10 and/or R1-8 zoning district(s) the following uses may be
permitted.
1. New duplex unit or an attached two (2) unit condominium on a corner
lot within a parcel designated on the approved TND Master Plan Map as
single residential; provided the lot and the dwelling units meet the
following standards:
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.5
a. The area of the corner lot is nine thousand (9,000) square feet or
larger in size.
b. Each dwelling unit must have its address and main entrance
oriented towards a separate street frontage.
2. Golf courses including clubhouses located thereon and unlighted driving
ranges but not including miniature golf courses. Golf courses may
account for no more than eighty percent (80%) of the required open
space in a TND. Golf courses shall be designed to be watered using
effluent water or reclaimed water wherever and whenever feasible.
3. Multiple residential uses, on parcels that have been designated for such
uses on the approved TND Master Plan Map, shall be limited to those
listed below. The maximum building height shall be limited to three (3)
stories or forty-five (45) feet. No building permit shall be issued for a
multiple residential use until the Town has approved the site plan review.
a. Multiple residential dwellings, whether detached or attached,
including condominiums, townhouses, patio homes and
apartments on a parcel designated for such use and developed as
a cohesive project.
b. Live-work units.
4. Office, service, retail and mixed-use on parcels that have been designated
for commercial or mixed use on the approved TND Master Plan Map,
shall be limited to those listed below. Drive-through windows and drivein
facilities shall be prohibited. Any development shall be limited to a
maximum building height of three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet and a
building footprint of 6,000 square feet. No building permit shall be
issued for a commercial use until the Town has approved the site plan
review.
a. Residential units, when located above the first floor or behind the
commercial and/or activity frontage and incidental to the primary
commercial or mixed-use development.
b. Live-work units.
c. Professional and administrative offices, banking and other
financial offices.
d. Medical, dental, chiropractic, clinical office and apothecary store.
e. Veterinarian office (excluding laboratory and boarding or kennel
facilities; except for short periods of observation incidental to
care or treatment).
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.6 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
f. Art galleries, art studios for the production and teaching of fine
art, music schools and dance studios.
g. Retail stores for the sale of stationery, cards, gifts, bookstore,
bakery, delicatessen, candy shop, coffee house, ice cream shop,
art supply shop, and photo shop.
h. Music store, video store, bicycle shop, sporting good store and
apparel and accessory store.
i. Personal and household services, such as; clothing alteration, dry
cleaning, laundromats, seamstress shop, beauty and barber shops,
therapeutic massage, travel agency, printing and copy shop, florist
and catering service.
j. Indoor health club, fitness or exercise facility.
k. Restaurants and taverns.
l. Day care centers, with no more than thirty (30) children total,
including the required outdoor play area.
5. Assisted living facilities and group care homes for the elderly and
handicapped; provided that such home is licensed by the State of Arizona
Department of Health Services and is registered with, and
administratively approved by the Town, as to compliance with the
standards of this Ordinance.
6. Other similar uses as determined by the Zoning Administrator and
approved by the Town Council.
E. Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses, on
parcels that have been designated for commercial and institutional uses on the
approved TND Master Plan Map, only after review and approval of a
Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Section 3.4 of this Ordinance.
Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable standards of this Ordinance
and those requirements that may reasonably be imposed by the Town Council.
Further, no building permit shall be issued for an approved conditional use until
the Town has approved the site plan review.
1. Mixed use neighborhood center for permitted retail, service or office use;
each business shall be restricted to a maximum building footprint of
6,000 square feet with the total center not to exceed 30,000 square feet
with no drive-through window facilities.
2. Grocery stores under 30,000 square feet.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.7
3. Public and private schools (K-12).
4. Temples, mosques, synagogues, or churches, including clergy housing.
F. Submittal Requirements.
1. The applicant must declare which development plan review process they
intend to submit at the time of application; Preliminary Development
Plan or Final Development Plan.
a. No matter which process the applicant chooses each shall require
two (2) public hearings; one (1) with the Planning and Zoning
Commission and, one (1) with the Town Council.
2. Approval of the Preliminary Development Plan is valid for a period of
one (1) year from the date of Town Council approval. Application for
the Final Development Plan must be submitted to the Town, along
with the application fee and all required material listed below, within one
(1) year from the date of preliminary development plan approval or the
Town may revoke the preliminary development plan. Revocation shall
be processed in accordance with the procedures established for rezoning
as outlined in Section 3.3 of this Ordinance.
3. Before planning and design commences, a comprehensive site analysis
examining a sites physical properties, amenities, special opportunities
and constraints, character, and neighboring environment is required. The
design and layout of the TND shall respond to the existing conditions of
the site, adjacent developments, connecting thoroughfares, natural
features and man-made features identified in the comprehensive site
analysis.
4. Preliminary Development Plans. In addition to the material outlined in
Section 3.3 of this Ordinance, a preliminary development plan shall also
contain, at a minimum, the following materials for review:
a. A preliminary Master Plan Map indicating the location and
specific land uses and densities planned for the individual parcels
within the development shall be submitted in conjunction with
the request for rezoning.
b. The Conceptual - Architectural Design Standards &
Guidelines, prepared by a designer or team of designers having
professional competence in urban planning, shall be submitted
for the entire project and shall include a narrative and graphical
description of the development character, site planning,
architecture, integration of the development into its
surroundings, and the landscaping that can be expected from the
development.
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.8 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
c. A Preliminary Landscape Plan, prepared by a nurseryman or
landscape architect, for all on-site and off-site, open space, trails,
and retention area landscaping. This preliminary plan should also
include information on: landscaping in compliance with the
Article 17 of the Ordinance; the proposed plant palette; the type
and locations of paths and trails within and adjacent to the
development; the location and an elevation of any proposed
fencing and walls; the location of any proposed street furniture or
public art.
d. A preliminary Open Space Plan, shall list in tabular form the
acreage of open space for each proposed phase of development
along with information on the type of open space proposed, the
general location, and the proposed uses. The plan shall also
include any community-wide open space systems, as defined in
the Thatcher General Plan that are within the development.
e. A preliminary sign package, including the location, size,
illumination, number, design and type of the project signage.
f. A Preliminary Utility Plan that at a minimum indicates the
location of existing and proposed public utility (power and gas)
lines and easements, the location and size of existing and
proposed water mains, gas mains and fire hydrants and the
location and size of existing and proposed sewers.
g. A Preliminary Drainage Report that at a minimum indicates or
delineates: the boundaries of on-site and off-site drainage areas;
the proposed drainage patterns of the development and the preexisting
patterns; run-off factor and run-off data; retention
volume and location of drainage easements. The Town Engineer
may request other drainage data necessary to review the proposed
development.
h. If determined to be necessary by the Town Engineer, a
preliminary traffic study, prepared by a Registered Traffic
Engineer or Civil Engineer, shall be submitted that at a minimum
addresses on-site and off-site traffic flows, traffic impacts on
nearby arterial and collector streets, project impacts and
mitigation measures, anticipated trip generations, and level of
service. The Town Engineer may request other traffic data
necessary to review the proposed development.
i. A phasing plan/schedule. If the project is to be developed in
phases each phase shall contain a mix of residential densities,
product designs and be self-sufficient meeting the requirements,
standards and conditions applicable to the project as a whole.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.9
Additionally, each phase of the project shall be self-sufficient in
regard to facilities, utilities, and services.
j. A.L.T.A. Survey no older than ninety (90) days.
5. Final Development Plans. A final development plan may be submitted in
lieu of a preliminary development plan provided that the necessary
detailed plans are submitted. In addition to the material outlined in
Section 3.3 of this Ordinance, a final development plan shall also contain,
at a minimum but not limited to, the following materials for review:
a. All of the plans and reports required for a preliminary
development plan review as outlined in Section 12.1 (F)(3) above.
b. The final Master Plan Map indicating the acreage, proposed use
and density of each parcel as well as the location and layout for
the backbone transportation and utility systems and open space
network for the TND.
c. The final Architectural Design Standards & Guidelines, with
both narrative and graphics, prepared by a designer or team of
designers having professional competence in urban planning and
architecture, shall be submitted to explain the standards that the
master developer will hold its homebuilders/parcel buyers to.
These architectural design standards & guidelines shall apply to
all types of land uses and buildings within the TND and should at
a minimum discuss the following:
i. Project density, different types and the mix of land uses;
ii. Setbacks, varying lot sizes, and lot widths;
iii. The overall design and architectural theme, architectural
diversity, relationship of buildings to each other and the
land and theme elements that tie the individual parcels to
the whole TND while creating diversity within the TND;
iv. Architectural standards such as style, form, massing,
building facades, roof architecture, colors, materials,
windows and doors;
v. The use of standard plans by production
homebuilders/parcel buyers, the specific architectural and
site design requirements, the diversity of elevations, and
sustainable building practices and materials;
vi. Project open space percentage, uses, and improvements;
vii. Project landscaping;
viii. Project signage and entry monumentation;
ix. Project walls including location and type; if walls are
proposed;
x. Street character and scene; and
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.10 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
xi. the projects management mechanisms and development
Covenants, Conditions,& Restrictions (CC&Rs).
d. A Final Landscape Plan, prepared by a nurseryman or
landscape architect, that shall include, but not be limited to, a
detailed list of plant species, plant sizes, and specific quantities.
The landscape plan shall depict specific plant locations, the type
and location of all walls and fencing, proposed location and
material types for paths and trails, identify the line of sight
requirements, and any other information deemed necessary by
the Town to adequately review the final landscape plan.
e. A final Open Space Plan shall be submitted unless the open
space types, locations, design and uses are fully addressed in the
Architectural Design Standards &Guidelines.
f. A comprehensive sign package that includes information
regarding entry monuments and the overall project signage:
color(s), material(s), size, location, type of sign (e.g. attached,
freestanding, kiosk, window, shingle, etc.), letter samples for all of
the types of proposed signage and any other information deemed
necessary by the Town to adequately review the comprehensive
sign package.
g. A Final Utility Plan prepared by a civil engineer that at a
minimum provides a Map of Dedication for all utility
easements necessary to serve the backbone utilities for the TND.
The plan shall also indicate the backbone layout for all utilities
that will serve the TND including but not limited to water, sewer,
power and gas and shall include profiles.
h. A Final Drainage Report that is a complete report and not an
addendum to the preliminary drainage report. The report shall
also include a Map of Dedication for drainage easements
identified in the Master Drainage Plan.
i. A Map of Dedication for the arterial and collector street system
for the TND shall be submitted. Additionally, a Final Traffic
Report may be required by the Town Engineer.
j. A copy of an approved permit required pursuant to Section 404
of the federal Clean Water Act if one is required for the
development location.
k. If determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary, a
Visual Analysis that illustrates the anticipated visual effects of
the proposed development, identifies and addresses scenic view
sheds and view corridors that should be protected, and illustrates
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.11
the mass and form of the proposed development, shall be
submitted to and approved by the Town.
G. Design Standards for any TND Zoning District.
1. Residential Parcels.
a. The parcel buyers and/or homebuilders shall be held to the
standards outlined in the Architectural Design Standards &
Guidelines and the Master Plan Map developed for the TND
and approved by the Town.
b. No one (1) residential lot size category shall comprise more than
sixty percent (60%) of the total overall number of lots/units
within the TND.
c. The TND is strongly encouraged to provide a mix of housing
types (i.e. single family, condominium, town home/patio home,
or apartments) within the residential component/percentage of
the project. A variety of housing types are encouraged within
each neighborhood/parcel.
d. Any residential parcel with more than forty (40) total lots shall be
required to provide a minimum of two (2) distinctly different
residential lot size categories. If the parcel has more than eighty
(80) total lots it shall be required to provide a minimum of three
(3) distinctly different residential lot size categories. For the
purposes of this ordinance distinctly different shall be defined
as a minimum of 2,000 square foot differential in area in
combination with a lot width differential of twenty (20) feet
unless otherwise recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and approved by the Town Council based on
superior design, product diversity and/or unique circumstances.
e. The parcel developer/homebuilder is strongly encouraged to
design the residential parcels/subdivisions using a variety of lot
widths and lot sizes adjacent to each other along the same street;
rather than designing them into separate sections. The
integration of different lot widths and sizes provides a variety to
the streetscape and a sustainable neighborhood that can
accommodate changing needs for the future homeowners.
f. If residential lots are platted adjacent to an existing residential
neighborhood (outside the TND) then the lots shall provide a
setback equal to the required setbacks of the existing adjacent
lots; applied to the lot line that borders the existing residential lot.
g. Residential parcels that are along the perimeter of the TND may
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.12 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
be required to provide deeper lots to back to the TND perimeter
as well as restrictions on the number of two-story homes built
along the perimeter, built adjacent to one another, built adjacent
to the open space areas, and require architectural treatments that
provide visual variety.
h. Production homebuilders should provide a minimum of four (4)
floor plans, with a minimum of three (3) distinctly different
elevations for each floor plan. Additionally, a minimum of three
(3) colors of roof material, three (3) styles of garage doors and
three (3) exterior paint colors shall be required to further
promote visual interest and architectural diversity. The same
elevations should not be utilized across from or adjacent to each
other.
i. Sustainable building practices and materials that meet Leadership
in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification
standards and building sites that utilize Low Impact
Development (LID) technologies are encouraged.
2. Commercial Parcels.
a. The TND should be designed in a way that provides interior
parcels for small scale neighborhood commercial uses and mixed
uses to serve as a village core for the TND rather than large
perimeter parcels for community wide commercial uses.
b. Residential uses are also encouraged, but not required, as a mixed
use within the commercial buildings of the village core provided
that the residential uses are located behind the commercial
and/or active use frontage on the first floor or on the upper
floors above the office, retail or service uses.
Examples of: mixed use with multiple residence above commercial uses in a village core setting.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.13
c. Mixed use residential/commercial (within the same building)
should be deed restricted to prohibit the conversion of the
commercial space to a residential use.
d. All commercial activities shall be conducted entirely within the
enclosed commercial buildings with no outside storage; except
that outdoor patios and dining areas, display areas, and seating
areas are encouraged to add to the pedestrian environment of the
neighborhood. The commercial buildings shall be designed in a
manner that is more residential in appearance (i.e. roofs,
windows, doors and materials etc.) to be compatible with the
residential neighborhood. Front porches and/or courtyards are
strongly encouraged and should provide a pedestrian connection
to the sidewalk, street, or open space network.
e. Commercial parcels should be integrated into the TND by
providing: pedestrian connections to adjacent residential parcels,
gathering spaces and outdoor areas that connect to the open
space network, residential components, a compact design, spatial
organization of the buildings that are walkable and inviting, and
multimodal use of right of ways that enhances the livability of the
entire TND.
Examples of outdoor dining and seated gathering areas integrated into the pedestrian space.
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.14 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
f. In addition, the TND may provide standards for street vendors
such as mobile carts, information kiosks, entertainment and other
outdoor temporary uses.
3. Open Space.
a. In order to create user-friendly spaces and to encourage use by
the public, the required open space and other public spaces
should incorporate all of the following features to the maximum
extent feasible:
i. Plan site drainage to lead runoff away from active use
areas;
ii. Orient open space to face south and west for solar access
to extend its use throughout the year;
iii. Create a sense of enclosure for outdoor seating areas with
landscaping, topography, and/or buildings and structures;
iv. Create a consistent palette of streetscape furnishings, such
as lighting, benches, landscaping, shelter, and trash
receptacles;
v. Locate streetscape furnishings in clusters or nodes
throughout the entire TND  not just within the village
core; and
vi. Use creative surfaces and materials for walking paths and
gathering and seating areas that are appropriate for their
respective functions.
b. Open spaces and outdoor public spaces should be located to:
i. Be shared by adjoining buildings, to the maximum extent
feasible;
ii. Visually or physically connect with open space on
adjacent properties and to the community-wide open
space network;
iii. Connect the entrances of multiple buildings on a site to
provide meeting and gathering spaces;
iv. Orient to views of activities or natural features to provide
visual interest; and
v. Preserve and/or enhance major drainage ways and
include on-site storm water detention facilities as an
integral component and amenity.
c. Community gardens are encouraged either within the residential
parcels or as part of the larger TND open space system.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.15
d. Open space within and throughout the TND should be designed
so that a playground, ball field, public gathering area, pedestrian
path, bicycle trail, picnic ramada, or community garden is
provided within 1,300 feet of every residential lot.
e. Outdoor play areas in association with a daycare center shall be
permitted and shall not be calculated as part of the required open
space.
f. The required open space shall be designed, located and oriented
to provide: 1) high pedestrian and bicycle accessibility within the
individual parcels; 2) connections to adjacent parcels to enhance a
structure of continuous open space throughout the TND; and 3)
a connection between the TND and the greater Thatcher
community open space system.
Examples of outdoor gathering and seating areas enclosed by the surrounding buildings and the use of a consistent streetscape
palette.
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.16 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
4. Circulation System.
a. The development should be designed in a manner that will slow
down through traffic; except on the collector roadway. Traffic
calming methods such as, but not limited to, chicanes,
roundabouts, all-way stop intersections, and different pavement
surfaces may be considered if found to be acceptable by the
Town Engineer.
b. The collector roadway within the TND should be designed as an
internal loop road that connects the various parcels within the
development. The local streets and arterial within the village
core should be designed in a grid to create a walkable street
system that improves the overall pedestrian environment.
c. The TND shall provide a backbone network of both on-street
bike lanes as well as off-street multi-use pathways to
accommodate all levels of cyclists and to provide a safe
alternative multi-modal system. On-street bike lanes shall not be
Examples of community gardens and playground integrated into the circulation system and entrance
into community open space system from within the parcels.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.17
calculated as part of the required open space. Off-street multiuse
pathways may be calculated as open space.
d. The residential parcels (subdivisions) shall likewise provide rightof-
way or open space for both bicycles and pedestrians within the
parcel and shall provide connections to the TNDs backbone
network.
e. Multi-use trails shall be used to interconnect the various open
space areas of the TND, the various neighborhoods within the
TND to each other, and the overall development to the greater
Thatcher open space system. Particular care should be given to
linkages with adjacent subdivisions within the TND to promote
internal pedestrian and bicycle traffic without crossing arterial or
collector street(s) as much as possible.
5. Drainage System.
a. If applicable, a projects drainage should be designed to allow
storm water retention/detention to meander through the
development as a greenbelt, simulating a natural waterway, as
opposed to constructing a series of separate and distinct basins.
b. Retention or detention basins, which are required in accordance
with either the TND master drainage report or an individual
parcel (subdivision) drainage report, should be landscaped, multitiered
and designed as part of the overall open space system of
the TND. Retention basins with a bottom area in excess of one
half (1/2) acre, shall be designed, turfed and equipped to
accommodate a play/sport field rather than being landscaped
with decomposed granite. Any recreational facilities, tot lots, play
equipment, and amenities within the basin shall be located at least
one (1) foot above the 50-year storm level. Terracing, berming
and contouring may be required to naturalize and enhance the
aesthetics of the basin. Basin slopes shall not exceed a three to
one (3:1) slope.
6. Site Design.
a. All required off-street parking spaces for commercial, mixed use,
and multi-family developments or buildings should be located in
the rear or to the side of the structures to avoid visibility from
public streets and the interruption to the rhythm of the
established streetscape. The parking lots are encouraged to be
screened from public view and from any adjacent residential
properties by a solid three (3) foot high screen wall that is
decoratively treated to match the architectural style and design of
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.18 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
the commercial, mixed use and multi-family product or a
landscape berm or combination thereof.
b. Trash and refuse collection locations for all commercial, mixed
use, and multi-family developments and/or buildings shall be
screened with a six (6) foot decorative masonry wall. Trash and
refuse areas shall be located such that they are not the visual focal
point of a driveway or parking area, or cannot be viewed from a
public street
7. Architectural Design.
a. All commercial, mixed use, and multi-family buildings shall
provide architectural detailing on all exterior elevations (360
architecture); not just the front elevation. Window
embellishments shall be provided by adding architectural features
that enhance the elevations (e.g. sturdy synthetic wood
substitutes, greater variation of window design, different window
styles, tile inlays and recesses, structural pop-outs, gabled roof
features over the windows, etc.)
b. For all commercial, mixed use, and multi-family buildings the
mechanical equipment and similar utility devices, whether ground
level or roof mounted, shall be screened from public view and
designed to appear as an integral part of the building; except for
solar panels. The mechanical equipment screening shall be
included in the overall building height. Mechanical equipment
shall be treated to be non-reflective. Electrical meters, service
components, and SES cabinets shall be screened from public
view and designed to appear as an integral part of the building
c. Roof access shall be from within the commercial building.
d. Full roof architecture utilizing simple and varied roof forms is
encouraged for all new commercial buildings/development; while
long, continuous mansard roofs, false mansard roofs, large
expanses of flat roofs and veneer (false-front) parapets are
discouraged. Parapet walls shall be designed and constructed in a
manner to appear as a solid, three-dimensional form rather than a
veneer.
e. The TND should promote the achievement of Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification
standards for all commercial multiple residential and mixed-use
buildings. Also, Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
for Neighborhood Development (LEED-ND) certification for
the TND should be pursued for the residential neighborhoods.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.19
H. Amendments to an Approved TND Overlay.
1. Minor amendments to an approved TND may be approved
administratively by the Zoning Administrator and shall only be
considered for minor changes to a site plan layout, architectural
amendments, boundary shifts between parcels or land uses within the
TND, and changes to the setbacks. Changes in the density or land use
types shall not be considered as minor amendments and such changes
shall be processed as a new TND application. In determining whether
the proposed minor amendment to the TND shall be approved, the
Zoning Administrator shall ensure that the proposed amendment meets
all of the following criteria:
a. That the development pattern contained in the originally
approved TND provides for appropriate optional sites for the
land use or change proposed by the minor amendment without
creating a negative impact on the surrounding land uses or
residential neighborhoods.
b. That the amendment constitutes an overall improvement to the
approved TND and is not solely for the good or benefit of a
particular landowner or owners at a particular point in time.
c. That the amendment will not adversely impact the community as
a whole or a portion of the community by:
i. Significantly altering acceptable existing land use patterns,
ii. Requiring additional and more expensive improvements
to roads, sewer, or water delivery systems than are needed
to support the prevailing land uses and which, therefore,
may impact developments in other areas,
iii. Adversely impacting existing or previously planned uses
through increased traffic generated by the proposal on
existing systems, or
iv. Affecting the livability of the area or the health and safety
of the residents.
d. That the amendment is consistent with the TNDs approved
Architectural Design Standards & Guidelines, does not
constitute a reduction in the amount of open space, and is
compliant with other adopted plans, codes, and ordinances.
2. It shall be the burden of the party requesting the minor amendment to
prove that the change constitutes an improvement to the TND. It shall
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.20 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
not be the burden of the Town to provide a reason that an amendment
should be denied.
Section 12.2 RV Recreational Vehicle Overlay Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the RV Recreational Vehicle Overlay Zoning
District is to provide for a specific zone that will permit recreational vehicle
parks which are suitably developed for the placement and occupancy of
recreational vehicles for residential purposes on rented or leased spaces with the
necessary accessory amenities. The intent of these regulations is to enable the
development of unique, well-planned projects for seasonal occupancy.
B. Underlying Zoning Districts. The RV Recreational Vehicle Overlay Zoning
may be applied to the underlying R-3 and C-2 Zoning Districts for the
express purpose of developing a land-lease Recreational Vehicle Park as defined
in Appendix A of this Ordinance.
C. Permitted Uses. In addition to those uses permitted by right within the
underlying R-3and/or C-2 zoning district(s) the following uses may be
permitted.
1. The only permitted use shall be for a recreational vehicle park (landlease)
development.
D. Site Specification. All RV parks shall provide adequate streets, driveways,
walkways, proper layout of park, proper sanitary facilities, adequate fire
protection, adequate water supply, adequate lighting, and adequate protection of
surrounding properties. All RV parks shall comply with the following in addition
to other requirements of this Ordinance:
1. No manufactured homes or site built dwelling units shall be permitted
except for that of the owner/manager.
2. No park model units shall be permitted within a RV park.
3. RV parks shall not be used as permanent residences except for that of
the owner/manager. All recreational vehicles within an RV park shall
display current license plates/tags and shall not be parked nor occupied
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per calendar year.
4. There shall be a maximum density of 20 spaces per net acre.
5. RV park developments shall be designed to accommodate a mix between
Class A, Class B, and Class C recreational vehicles (by varying the space
depth); with the following area requirements for the individual spaces
based on the different types of vehicles:
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts Page 12.21
a. Class A vehicle 2,100 square feet
b. Class B vehicle 1650 square feet
c. Class C vehicle 1350 square feet
6. The minimum width of any RV space shall be thirty (30) feet. There
shall be a minimum of five (5) feet between adjoining recreational
vehicles, including all attached awnings or shade canopies.
7. Each park must provide an adequate and easily identifiable office or
registration area. The location of the office shall not interfere with the
normal flow of traffic into and out of the RV park.
8. RV park developments shall be improved with paved private streets built
to Town specifications. Private streets shall be maintained by the private
owner of the RV park.
9. No RV space within the park shall have direct access to a public street
outside of the development.
10. An approved perimeter wall shall be constructed around the entire RV
Park.
11. Each designated space in the park shall have a concrete slab for the
parking of the RV unit. There shall be no RV parking other than on the
paved surface area within the designated space. The concrete slab shall
directly connect to the paved street system of the RV park.
12. Each RV unit shall be equipped with wheels, which remain on the unit;
however, the wheels may be blocked for stability.
13. No permanent room addition shall be attached to the RV unit nor shall
the unit be attached to any permanent structure.
14. Recreational amenities such as swimming, shuffle board, and tennis
and/or social centers, which may be used for dancing, crafts, hobbies,
games, meeting, banquets, and similar recreational uses, intended for use
solely by the residents of the park, shall be developed and may be of
conventional construction
15. Restroom and shower facilities shall be provided separately for men and
for women. A common use laundry facility shall be provided at a ratio of
one (1) washer and one (1) dryer for each twenty (20) spaces or fraction
thereof.
16. Each RV park shall be master metered for both electric and water/sewer
service. Individual lease spaces shall be developed with a hook-up to
these utilities. If approved by the Town, the park may be allowed some
Town of Thatcher
Page 12.22 Article 12: Overlay Zoning Districts
short-term lease spaces without utility hook-ups. Additionally, each
development shall provide at least one (1) approved disposal
site/pumping station for both water and sewer holding tanks for the RV
units.
(End of Article)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 13: Supplementary Requirements
Section 13.0 Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to accumulate, under one
heading, general development regulations and performance standards which
apply to all Zoning Districts rather than to repeat them several times. The
standards and regulations set forth in this Article shall qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the District Regulations set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Section 13.1 Use Restrictions.
A. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be only those uses listed as permitted uses
within the zoning districts and shall be subject to the specific requirements of the
Ordinance.
B. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses shall be only those uses listed as
conditional uses and shall require a Conditional Use Permit, Administrative Use
Permit, or a Temporary Use Permit in order to be established within the zoning
district in which they are listed.
C. Zoning Clearance. Zoning clearance is the verification by the Zoning
Administrator, or his/her designated representative, indicating that the proposed
building, structure, or use meets all the requirements of this Ordinance at the
time of building permit review if applicable. Zoning clearances shall be required
for all development and construction activities addressed within this Zoning
Ordinance. Any change in use shall also require a Zoning Clearance.
D. Building Permits. Building permits shall be required for all development and
construction activities addressed within the adopted Building Codes as well as
other policies, codes, or ordinances adopted by the Town of Thatcher. Building
permits shall be obtained prior to any development or construction activity.
Section 13.2 Lot Divisions.
A. No lot may be divided to create a lot not in conformance with these regulations.
No lot shall be divided or combined in any manner other than through
subdivision procedures as specified by the Town of Thatcher Subdivision
Ordinance.
B. No lot may be reduced in area so as to cause any open space or yard required by
this Ordinance to be less in dimension than is required for the Zoning District
and lot in question.
Section 13.3 Lot Access Requirements.
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.2 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
A. All lots shall abut a dedicated and accepted public street connecting to the
publicly dedicated and accepted street system; unless otherwise approved herein.
B. Through the Minor Land Split process, as specifically prescribed in the Town of
Thatcher Subdivision Ordinance, the Town may permit lot access by other
means.
C. The Town may, through the rezoning or subdivision process, allow private
streets that are designed and constructed per Town private street standards (refer
to Town of Thatcher Subdivision Ordinance for street standards) as follows:
1. Where access to a public road is to be provided by way of a private road,
such street shall be designed, graded, and paved in accordance with the
provisions of all applicable private street standards of the Town of
Thatcher.
2. All private roads, for so long as they shall remain private, shall be
maintained to the foregoing Standards.
3. In no event shall any private roads have guard or gatehouses or stalls or
other obstructions or impediments of any kind or nature whatsoever to
free and unrestricted access and travel for emergency and other vehicles.
D. Except for lots abutting private streets, which have been specifically approved by
the Town through the rezoning, subdivision process, or minor land split process,
a building permit shall not be issued for a recorded lot, which does not abut a
dedicated and accepted public street and the abutting street does not connect to
the publicly dedicated and accepted street system.
E. Prior to the acceptance by the Town of the dedication of a public street, such
street shall be designed, graded, and paved in accordance with the provisions of
all applicable public street standards of the Town of Thatcher.
F. Wherever a front or side yard is required for a building, which had been
designated by the Commission as a future street, the depth of such front or side
yard shall be measured from the planned street lines.
Section 13.4 Unsuitable Sites. No land shall be used or structure erected if the
Town Engineer or the Towns Consulting Engineer has determined, based on
accepted engineering principles and practices, that the land is unsuitable for such
use or structure by reason of potential flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate
drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, extreme topography, low percolation
rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility or any other feature or features
which may render such use or structure likely to be harmful to the health, safety
and general welfare of the community.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.3
Section 13.5 Performance Standards.
A. Every activity, operation or land use shall comply with the following
performance standards regardless of the zoning district in which it is located. .
1. Glare and Heat. Any activity producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not
to create a nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
2. Lighting. No light that flashes, revolves, or otherwise resembles a traffic
control signal shall be allowed in any area where such light could create a
hazard for passing vehicular traffic. All outdoor lighting shall be
installed, maintained, and utilized in conformance with Article 16 of this
Ordinance.
3. Fire and Explosion Hazards. Disposal of waste materials by outdoor
incineration on the premises shall require a burn permit from ADEQ.
All storage of, and other activities involving inflammable and explosive
materials shall be provided adequate safety devices against hazards of fire
and explosion, together with adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression
equipment and devices standard in industry. All storage of inflammable
or explosive materials shall further comply with location requirements set
forth by the Fire Department or as established by this or other Town
codes and ordinances.
4. Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not discernible, without
instruments, at any point beyond the site property line.
5. Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases and Other Forms of Air Pollution.
No emission shall be permitted which can cause damage to health, to
animals, or vegetation, or other forms of property, or which can cause
excessive soiling.
6. Liquids and Solid Waste. No materials (organic or inorganic),
compounds or chemicals, which can contaminate any water supply,
interfere with bacterial process in sewerage treatment or otherwise cause
emission of elements which are offensive or hazardous to the public
health, safety, welfare or comfort shall be discharged at any point into
any public sewer, private sewage disposal system or stream or into the
ground, except in accordance with the standards approved by the
Arizona State Department of Health and/or Environmental Quality or
such governmental agency as may have jurisdiction over such activities.
7. Odors. No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
permitted in such quantities as to be offensive in such a manner as to
create a nuisance or hazard beyond the site property line.
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.4 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
8. Noise. No use shall result in noise perceptible beyond the boundaries of
the immediate site of the use that exceed the levels which engender
annoyance or create an unhealthy environment for adjacent properties.
9. Drainage and Flooding. Surface water from rooftops or lots shall not
be allowed to drain onto adjacent lots. No structure or land shall
hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered within
any flood hazard areas that would create a public nuisance or create a
hazard to life or property. Encroachment into the floodway shall be
prohibited including but not limited to, fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless certification by an AZ
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with
these performance standards and shall invoke the provisions for enforcement of
compliance with these performance standards wherever there is reasonable
evidence that performance standards are being violated by such activity,
operation or use
Section 13.6 Projections into Required Yards.
A. The space in any required yard shall be open and unobstructed, except for the
ordinary projections of chimney flues, awnings, open outside stairways and
balconies, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and other architectural
features provided such features shall not project further than three (3) feet into
any required yard, and provided further that in no case shall such projections be
nearer than seven (7) feet to the property line.
B. Bay windows, including their cornices and eaves, may project into any required
yard not more than three (3) feet, provided the sum of such projections on any
wall does not exceed one-third (1/3) the length of the wall and provided that in
no case shall such projections be nearer than seven (7) feet to the property line.
C. Mechanical equipment, such as air conditioners, may be constructed within any
yard in conformance with this Ordinance, provided that in no case shall said
mechanical equipment create an open side yard area of less than seven (7) feet.
This open clear area extends from the front of the structure to five (5) feet
beyond the rear of the structure. All mechanical equipment shall be screened
from public view.
D. For zoning districts in which residential dwellings may be constructed on or
across a common lot line, when separated on the line by a dividing wall, Council
approval of the development plan shall be required.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.5
E. The setback from the street for any dwelling located between two (2) existing
dwellings in any Residential Zone may be the same as the average for said two (2)
existing dwellings, provided the existing dwellings are on the same side of the
street, and are located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each other.
Section 13.7 Height Limitations.
A. Building Height. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally
altered to exceed the height limitations designated for the zone in which such
building or structure is located. Height regulations established elsewhere in this
Ordinance shall not apply to the following:
1. In residential districts: church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not for
human occupancy, public monuments, water towers, grain elevators or
necessary mechanical appurtenances associated with agricultural produce
processing and accessory agricultural buildings provided they do not
exceed a height of sixty (60) feet. Also, noncommercial radio or
television antennas or wireless communication towers as approved in
accordance with the requirements of Article 18 of this Ordinance.
2. Chimneys in residential districts may be two (2) feet above the roofline of
the residential structure, even if the roofline is at the maximum building
height.
3. In industrial districts: chimneys, refrigeration coolers, ventilation fans,
elevator bulkheads, derricks, conveyors, grain elevators, or other similar
mechanical appurtenances and/or structures necessary to operate and
maintain the building provided they do not exceed seventy-five (75) feet
in height and are so located and constructed that if it should collapse, its
reclining length would still be contained on the property on which it was
constructed.
4. The combined height of roof-mounted solar panels and associated
equipment and the structure upon which it is installed may exceed the
maximum building height of a zoning district by an additional 6-feet, so
long as the structure upon which the solar panels and associated
equipment are installed does not exceed the maximum building height of
the zoning district in which it is located.
B. Height Limitation on Corner Lots. Notwithstanding any other provisions in any
zoning district which require a front yard, the height of any buildings, fences,
walls, retaining walls, gateways, ornamental structures, hedges, shrubbery and
other fixtures, and construction and landscape plantings shall not obscure the
view of automobile drivers. Such heights on corner lots in all zoning districts
shall be limited as follows:
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.6 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
1. Height shall not exceed three (3) feet above the established elevation of
the intersecting streets for a distance of fifty (50) feet along the front and
side lot lines and within the triangle formed by the connection of these
two lot lines.
2. Within this triangle, and in cases where front yards are terraced, the
ground elevation of such front yards also shall not exceed three (3) feet
above the established street elevation of the intersecting streets.
3. Vegetative screening and/or any type of shrubs planted within the front
yard setback shall be restricted to only those plant varieties that do not
exceed a mature growth height of three (3) feet.
Section 13.8 Accessory Buildings and Uses.
A. Customary Outbuildings, including garages, sheds, swimming pool, and
accessory buildings may be located within or maintained as accessory to any
building lawfully within the boundaries of any specified district.
B. Accessory Buildings.
1. Accessory buildings constructed of metal, wood, or block with a roof
area exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet may be built in the
required rear yard but such accessory buildings shall not occupy more
than thirty percent (30%) of the required rear yard. Accessory buildings
shall be setback a minimum of three (3) feet from the rear and interior
side property lines. If located closer than six (6) feet to the principal
dwelling then the accessory building must be attached to the principal
dwelling through an integral roof structure a minimum of six (6) feet in
width; except for owner assembled garden sheds less than one-hundred
twenty (120) square feet in size.
2. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located in the required front
yard.
3. Accessory buildings may be built on the property line provided the roof
area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet and all
accessory building roof drainage stays on the property.
4. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height regulations of the zoning
district within any part of the buildable lot area, and shall not exceed
eighteen (18) feet in height in any required yard.
5. In the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall maintain side yard
setbacks from the street side lot line as required for the main structure in
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.7
that zone; and when a garage is entered from an alley, it shall not be
located nearer than three (3) feet to the alley line.
6. Accessory buildings or uses shall not be constructed or established on a
lot until construction of the principal building has been actually
commenced or the primary use established; except for agricultural uses in
the R1-43 Zoning District.
7. Accessory buildings shall not be used for dwelling purposes except for a
guesthouse or if permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance.
8. All accessory buildings and accessory uses, such as but not limited to;
guesthouses, barns and corrals, garages, and swimming pools shall
require building permits and/or zoning clearance and shall adhere to any
applicable provisions elsewhere in this Ordinance.
9. All accessory buildings or uses, except for wells and related well
equipment shall have the same electrical meter as the principal building
or use unless the public utility determines that a separate meter is
required for safety reasons which shall be determined on a case-by-case
basis.
10. Manufactured homes, mobile homes, and recreational vehicles shall not
be used as an accessory building in any district.
C. Cargo Containers and Semi-trailers.
1. Semi-trailers shall be prohibited in all zoning districts as a principal or
accessory building and/or use.
2. Cargo containers may be permitted in all zoning districts, for the on-site
storage of construction material only when in conjunction with an active
building permit on-site, with an approved Administrative Use Permit.
3. Semi-trailers may be permitted in the C-1, C-2 and industrial zoning
districts, only for the temporary on-site storage of holiday related
materials when in conjunction with a permanent use and with an
approved Temporary Use Permit.
4. Cargo containers may be permitted in the OS, P-I and Industrial
zoning districts as an accessory building for storage purposes only.
5. Cargo containers may be permitted in all commercial zones as principal
and/or accessory building subject to the following provisions:
a. If a cargo container is to be used as an accessory building it shall
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.8 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
be painted or resurfaced to architecturally match the principal
building, be located away from the front of the principal building
and shall be limited to only one (1) container per lot.
b. If cargo containers are to be used in part, whole, or in some
combination as the principal commercial building, they shall be
painted, resurfaced or architecturally modified to appear more
conventional in nature and shall require site plan review by the
Zoning Administrator.
6. Cargo containers may be permitted in the single residential zones as a
principal and/or accessory building subject to the following provisions:
a. If a cargo container is to be used as an accessory building it shall
be painted or resurfaced to architecturally match the principal
residential building, be located only in the rear yard, and shall be
limited to only one (1) container per lot.
b. If a cargo container(s) is to be used in part, whole, or in some
combination as the principal building it shall be painted,
resurfaced or architecturally modified to appear more
conventional in nature and shall require site plan review by the
Zoning Administrator.
7. If a cargo container is used as an accessory building it shall adhere to the
requirements outlined in Section 13.8.B above.
D. Portable Carports. Portable carports shall be permitted in all residential districts,
subject to the following provisions.
1. Portable carports shall be easily re-locatable, shall not be permanently
affixed to a foundation, and shall require site plan review but not
otherwise require the issuance of a building permit under the
International Building Code.
2. Portable carports shall be installed in accordance with the following:
a. Portable carports shall remain open on four (4) sides and shall be
limited to a maximum of four-hundred (400) square feet in size.
b. Portable carports shall be anchored in such a manner to prevent
wind uplift.
c. Portable carports may not be permanently anchored to concrete
slabs or footings or otherwise anchored in a manner that would
impede ready removal and portability.
d. Portable carports shall be limited to one (1) per lot.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.9
3. Portable carports shall not encroach into required front or side yard
setbacks when adequate area and access otherwise exist.
4. If the lot size, area, access, or configuration limitations do not permit the
installation of portable carports without encroaching into the required
front, side or rear yard setbacks, the Zoning Administrator may authorize
encroachment into the setback by issuing an administrative use permit
pursuant to Section 3.4 of this Ordinance.
Section 13.9 Fences and Walls.
A. No fence, wall, or hedge shall be constructed higher than three (3) feet above the
grade of the sidewalk in any required front yard. Where a sidewalk does not
exist, the future sidewalk grade, as determined by the zoning administrator, shall
be used. Fences, walls, and hedges constructed within the required side or rear
yard, which are not immediately adjacent to a street, shall not be built higher than
six (6) feet above the grade of the lot.
B. Corner Lot Exceptions: Fences, walls, or hedges constructed on corner lots may
not be located in a sight-visibility-triangle that extends 25 in both directions
from the adjacent back of sidewalk (or future back of sidewalk, as determined by
the zoning administrator). Fences walls or hedges constructed on corner lots
must be three (3) feet or less in height when located in the required front or side
yard setback and shall not be higher than six (6) feet above the grade of the lot
when located outside the front or rear yard setback. When two corner lots back
against each other and neither fronts onto the side street, a six (6) foot fence,
wall or hedge may be constructed within the required side yard.
C. Within the P-I and industrial districts the maximum fence or wall height shall
be eight (8) feet except that fences or wall abutting a residential district shall not
exceed six (6) feet in height. These height regulations shall not apply when
fences or walls of greater height are required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or Town Council in order to provide adequate screening as required
by this Ordinance. Utility companies, which are regulated by the Arizona
Corporation Commission, and schools, public and quasi-public institutions
including correctional facilities, may be allowed increased fence heights when
based on national or state standards.
D. Every fence or wall shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and be of a
conventional fencing material such as masonry, preformed concrete sections,
treated wood, wrought iron, vinyl, or chain link except as may be specified
elsewhere within this Ordinance. Any materials not specified as approved within
this Ordinance shall not be used unless a different, new or unspecified material is
approved through an administrative use permit. Every fence or wall shall be
maintained in a condition of good repair and shall not be allowed to become and
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.10 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
remain in a condition of disrepair, damage, or unsightliness, and shall not be
allowed to constitute a public or private nuisance. Any such fence or wall that is,
or has become, dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare, or has become
unsightly through improper maintenance or neglect shall be deemed to be a
public nuisance and the Zoning Administrator may commence proper
proceedings for the abatement of such nuisance.
E. All fences and walls shall be located entirely on the private property of the
person, firm or corporation constructing, or causing the construction of any such
fence or wall unless the owner of the adjoining property agrees, in writing, that
such fence or wall may be erected on the division line of the respective
properties except where otherwise restricted by this Ordinance. Walls and fences
shall be located so that electric and gas meters are accessible and not behind
gates in the rear or side yard.
F. An arched entry gate/feature may be permitted within the front yard setback
provided it is an integral part of an approved front yard wall and does not exceed
a height of eight (8) feet or a width of eight (8) feet.
G. Electrical fences shall be prohibited except within the R1-43 Zoning District
for the containment of animals.
H. Barbed Wire and Concertina (Razor) Wire:
1. Barbed wire may be used in the agricultural residential zone R1-43 for
agricultural purposes. Barbed wire is prohibited in all other residential
zoning districts.
2. Barbed wire may be permitted in P-I and the industrial zoning districts
for security purposes surrounding allowed outdoor storage areas
provided the barbed wire is located six (6) feet or more above grade and
angled inward so as not to be visible from public view.
3. Concertina wire is prohibited; except around public or quasi-public
correctional/detention facilities when necessary for the restraint of the
occupants or for security purposes.
I. Fences surrounding a tennis court shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height,
cannot be located in the required front yard and must maintain a minimum
setback of ten (10) feet from all property lines.
Section 13.10 Swimming Pools.
A. In all residential districts, contained bodies of water, either above or below
ground level, with the container being eighteen (18) or more inches in depth
and/or wider than eight (8) feet at any point, measured perpendicular to the long
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.11
axis, shall conform to the location and fencing requirements for swimming pools
as outlined in this Ordinance and in A.R.S. 36-1681. Irrigation and storm water
retention facilities, and the water features in public parks and golf courses are
exempt from the fencing requirements of this section.
B. Any swimming pool along with incidental installations, such as pumps and filters,
shall be completely enclosed by a permanent fence, wall or barrier to restrict
access to the swimming pool from public property, from adjoining private
property, and directly from all guest rooms of a hotel, motel or resort
development located on the same premises as the swimming pool.
C. Swimming pools along with incidental installations, such as heater, pump and
filter or other mechanical equipment used in association with a private swimming
pool may be located in required yards, other than the required front yard,
provided such pool and all incidental installations are set back from all lot lines a
minimum distance of five (5) feet.
D. The design, placement and access for all swimming pools shall meet State statute.
If there is a conflict, the State statute shall apply.
Section 13.11 Home Occupations.
A. A home occupation shall be considered a permitted accessory use in all
residential districts provided that they are operated and maintained to not
interfere with the peace, quiet, and dignity of the property owners or neighbors,
if it complies with the following regulations:
1. All home occupations shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the
use of the property and dwelling unit for dwelling purposes. A valid
Town Business License shall be maintained for the home occupation use.
2. All home occupations shall be conducted entirely from within the
principal residence, garage, or accessory building and shall not change the
residential character thereof. Carports and yards may not be used for
home occupations. Exceptions to this provision shall be made for
swimming lessons or in-home day care.
3. There shall be no employees other than members of the immediate
family residing in the dwelling unit where the home occupation is being
operated.
4. The activity, including deliveries and pickups, shall be limited to the
hours between eight (8) A.M to six (6) P.M. No business shall be
conducted that requires delivery vehicles or other services not customary
to a residence.
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.12 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
5. There shall be no external evidence of the activity such as outdoor
storage, displays, noise, dust, odors, fumes, vibration, electrical
interference or fluctuation, or other nuisances discernible beyond the
property lines. The home occupation shall not generate traffic, parking,
sewerage or water use in excess of what is normal in the residential
neighborhood.
6. No signs signifying the home occupation business or any commercial
products or service are allowed anywhere on the property and/or
structures; unless a sign is required per State licensing requirements in
which case said sign shall be limited to a window sign.
7. No vehicle, used in conjunction with the home occupation, with a
payload rating of more than one ton, shall be stored on the site. Outside
storage of heavy equipment or material shall be prohibited.
8. Storage of goods and materials necessary for the home occupation shall
not include flammable, combustible or explosive materials.
9. The home occupation shall not use or create any hazardous waste.
B. The following are some examples of uses, which would be acceptable as home
occupations, provided they comply with the above regulations:
1. Home offices with no client visits to the home permitted.
2. Painting, sculpting, writing, or composing provided no selling of the
artistic product to the public on the premise.
3. Home crafts, such as jewelry making, pottery, weaving and rug making,
woodworking, and metal working with no sales permitted on the
premise.
4. Music lessons, swim lessons, and tutoring with not more than four (4)
persons at any one time.
5. Personal services such as catering, home cooking and preserving,
dressmaking, sewing and tailoring services.
6. Telephone answering, message services, word processing and other
computer applications.
7. Child care, Home based - As specified in Article 5 and Article 6 of this
Ordinance.
8. Door to door sales or party sales not on the premise.
9. Barber shops and beauty parlors provided:
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.13
a. Limited to only one (1) beautician or barber who resides on the
premises, and
b. A professional license issued by the State of Arizona is required.
C. A home occupation shall not include the following uses, and other uses similar
thereto: (this list is not all inclusive)
1. Animal hospitals, veterinarian office, animal grooming facilities and
kennels or boarding facilities.
2. Dance and gymnastic studios.
3. Nursery schools;
4. Private clubs;
5. Repair shops, machine shop, and furniture refinishing;
6. Restaurants;
7. Stables or kennels for commercial purposes;
8. Motor vehicle repair or paint shops storage, restoration or conversion,
engine repair or similar uses; except on a vehicle personally owned by the
resident;
9. Medical, dental, physical therapy or psychotherapy, real estate offices,
and insurance offices.
10. Retail sales.
11. Contractors shops or storage yards.
12. Body piercing and/or painting and tattoos.
D. Any proposed Home Occupation that is neither specifically permitted by Section
13.11(B) nor specifically prohibited by Section 13.11(C) shall be considered by
the Zoning Administrator upon consideration of those standards contained in
Section 13.11(A).
E. Complaints by citizens or local residents may be cause for immediate termination
of the home occupation use if appropriate measures cannot be undertaken to
mitigate the complaint or violations. All complaints or violation of the above
conditions shall be registered with, and reviewed by, the Zoning Administrator.
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.14 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
Section 13.12 Outdoor Storage and Junk Automobiles.
A. With the exception of retail sales displays in an approved commercial area,
outdoor storage shall be screened from public view by a six (6) foot high solid
masonry fence or a view obscuring fence with no storage visible above the wall
or fence. The presence of hazardous materials, not used on-site in association
with the permitted business, is prohibited.
B. Storage of personal tractors may be permitted in any residential district provided,
that if the tractor is stored outdoors, it is stored in the rear or side yard behind
the front line of the primary structure.
C. Storage of licensed motor homes, farm trailers, boats, travel trailers, camping
trailers, utility trailers, or other such trailers may be permitted in any residential
district provided that the owner of the motor home, farm trailer, boat, travel
trailer, camping trailer, utility trailer, or other such trailer resides on the property
to which it is stored. Such vehicles if located or stored outside of a garage or
barn, must be stored in the following manner:
1. The vehicle/trailer shall be stored in the rear or side yard behind the
front line of the primary structure.
2. The vehicle/trailer shall not be located closer than three (3) feet to any
side or rear lot line.
3. Placement in other than the rear or side yard for loading and unloading
purposes may be permitted for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72)
hours.
D. All abandoned or junk motor vehicles or motor vehicles while being repaired or
restored, shall be stored in an enclosed area by the owner or occupant of the
property upon which such vehicle is located. Such enclosed area shall not be
visible from adjacent property or a public street.
E. The storage of more than one truck having a rated capacity of one and one-half
(1 l/2) tons and the storage of construction equipment such as bulldozers,
graders, cement mixers, compressors, backhoes, dump trucks, etc., shall not be
permitted on any lot in any residential zone, provided however that construction
equipment may be stored on a lot during construction of a building thereon, but
not to exceed one-hundred eighty (180) days. Parking and storage of commercial
vehicles may be permitted within the screened storage area of an approved C-2
or the industrial zoning districts or where otherwise permitted and under the
specific conditions outlined within this Ordinance.
Section 13.13 Dumping and Disposal.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.15
A. No person shall obstruct or reduce the capacity of any natural or man-made
water way within the Town by filling or dumping any earth, stone or other
materials therein.
B. No yard or other open space surrounding an existing building in any residential
zone shall be used for the storage of junk, garbage, litter, or debris; and no land
shall be used for such purposes, except as specifically permitted herein.
C. The use of land for the storing, dumping, or disposals of scrap iron, junk
garbage, rubbish or other refuse, ashes, landscape wastes, or industrial wastes or
by-products shall be prohibited in every zoning district except as specifically
otherwise provided in this Ordinance. All stored, dumped or disposed of above
listed materials existing on a property at the time of the passage of this
Ordinance shall, within twelve (12) months of its passage, be made to comply
fully with these requirements and/or remove said materials from the property.
Section 13.14 Restrictions on Keeping Animals, Fowl, or Rodents.
A. Any person having a parcel of unimproved land at least one-half () acre in size
greater than the minimum lot size required in a zoning district may keep three
(3) of any one (1) animal or combination of animals totaling three (3) and one
(1) additional animal for each additional one-half () acre of land exclusive of
animals under the age of six (6) months.
B. Unless otherwise limited by regulations applicable to a residential zoning district,
a person owning or keeping fowl or rodents shall be limited to fifty (50) fowl or
twenty five (25) rodents or combination of fifty (50) of such fowl and rodents
with the maximum number of rodents being twenty-five (25). The increase over
the limitations shall be disposed of within sixty (60) days after being born or
hatched.
C. Anyone keeping animals, fowl or rodents shall maintain their corrals or
enclosures at least one hundred (100) feet from any residence except that of the
owner or keeper of said animals and at least two hundred (200) feet from any
place of business, school or religious institution. This restriction shall not
preclude pasturing of animals within the limitation for residences to the extent
no nuisance or health hazard is created.
D. It is unlawful for anyone to cause or permit any animal to run at large, to be
pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, alley, lane, park or public place
within the Town.
E. No poisonous reptiles shall be kept within the town limits. Swine and potbelly
pigs will not be permitted in any district; except for a limited time in conjunction
with a temporary livestock project, limited to one (1) such animal provided that it
is kept in a manner that does not create a nuisance for adjacent neighbors or land
uses.
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.16 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
Section 13.15 Medical Marijuana Uses.
A. The minimum requirements of this section shall apply to all medical marijuana
dispensary and medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location uses
located in allowable zoning districts.
B. All medical marijuana uses shall comply with all regulations and laws pursuant to
the Arizona Revised Statutes.
C. An applicant for any medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation permit shall submit a completed Town application
to the Zoning Administrator along with all requested information.
D. A medical marijuana dispensary shall have operating hours not earlier than 9:00
a.m. and not later than 5:00 p.m.
E. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location shall:
1. Be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer,
cargo container or motor vehicle.
2. Not have a drive-thru service.
3. Not emit dust, fumes, vapors or odors into the environment.
4. Not provide offsite delivery of medical marijuana.
5. Prohibit consumption of marijuana in the premises.
6. Not have outdoor seating areas.
7. Display a current Town of Thatcher business license applicable to
medical marijuana uses.
8. Provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or byproducts, and
not to be placed within the facilities exterior refuse containers.
F. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation shall meet the following minimum separations, measured in a straight
line from the boundary of the parcel containing the medical marijuana dispensary
or medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location to the property
boundary of the parcel containing any uses listed below:
1. One thousand (1,000) feet from any residentially zoned property.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.17
2. Two thousand (2,000) feet from any other medical marijuana dispensary
or medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location.
3. Two thousand (2,000) feet from a residential substance abuse diagnostic
and treatment facility or other residential drug or alcohol rehabilitation
facility.
4. One thousand (1,000) feet from a public, private, parochial, charter,
dramatic, dancing, music, learning center, or other similar school or
educational facility that caters to children.
5. One thousand (1,000) feet from a childcare center.
6. One thousand (1,000) feet from a public library or public park.
7. One thousand (1,000) feet from a church.
8. One thousand (1,000) feet from a facility devoted to family recreation or
entertainment.
G. A medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location not associated with a
medical marijuana dispensary is prohibited; and only one medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be permitted for the single medical
marijuana dispensary with which it is associated.
H. The number of medical marijuana dispensaries permitted within the city limits of
the Town of Thatcher shall be limited to one (1).
Section 13.16 Adult Oriented Businesses.
A. Adult Oriented Businesses, shall be subject to the following conditions or
limitations:
1. The proposed adult oriented business shall not be established, operated
or maintained within two thousand (2,000) feet from any:
a. public park or playground;
b. public recreational facility;
c. private, public or charter school;
d. day-care center or child care facility:
e. library; or
f. religious facility or cultural activity.
2. The proposed adult oriented business shall not be established, operated
or maintained within two thousand (2,000) feet from any other adult
Town of Thatcher
Page 13.18 Article 13: Supplementary Requirements
oriented business or any residential zone boundary.
3. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials displaying or
depicting specified anatomical areas or specific sexual activities shall
not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible or audible to the public
from adjacent streets, sidewalks or walkways or from other areas outside
the establishment; and all building openings, entries and windows for
adult oriented businesses shall be located, covered or screened in such
manner as to prevent the interior of such premises from being viewed
from outside the establishment.
4. An adult oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use shall
not be rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a
residential district or residential use, public park or playground, day-care
center, place of worship or assembly, or school within two thousand
(2,000) feet of said adult-oriented use.
5. Such distances shall be measured between subject lot lines at their closest
proximity on an aerial view without regard for intervening structures,
topography, political boundaries, or other objects.
6. A map showing the particular property or properties for which the
application is being requested and the adjacent properties, buildings and
structures, land uses, and public streets and ways within a radius of two
thousand (2,000) feet of the exterior boundaries thereof shall be
submitted along with the application for a Conditional Use Permit.
B. No adult oriented business, except for an adult motel and adult theaters, may
remain open at any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
noon (12:00) P.M. on Sundays.
Section 13.17 Underground Utilities.
A. All electric linesshall be installed underground; within a public utility easement
(PUE), electric easement, or right-of-way; unless specifically approved by
Graham County Electric Co-op and the Town Engineer.
B. All telephone lines, cable television lines, and other communication and utility
lines necessary to serve a project, development, residence, or business shall be
installed underground; within a public utility easement (PUE) or right-of-way.
The developer/owner of the property shall be responsible for the costs of the
underground construction in accordance with the underground policy of the
serving utility.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 13: Supplementary Requirements Page 13.19
C. Easements will be required for all public and/or private utilities outside of the
street right-of-way and should be placed as required by the utility companies.
(End of Article)

Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 14: Parking Regulations Page 14.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 14: Parking Regulations
Section 14.0 Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum
standards for the provisions of adequate off-street parking and maneuvering
according to the amount of traffic generated by each use in a manner that is safe,
efficient, convenient and visually attractive. These regulations shall apply to all
new construction and expansion of or changes to existing uses permitted by this
Ordinance. The regulations set forth in this article shall supplement the district
regulations set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Section 14.1 General Regulations.
A. Location of Required Parking Spaces. The required parking spaces shall be
located as follows:
1 On the same lot as the use they are intended to serve; or
2 Within four hundred feet (400') of the premises they are intended to
serve, if the use of such lot for parking purposes is provided for in
perpetuity.
3 Participation in a joint use parking lot project or a parking improvement
district is encouraged and may be permitted in lieu of on-site parking.
4 The required off-street parking spaces within the commercial, industrial
and public-institutional zoning districts should be located in the rear or to
the side of the structures/lots to lessen the visual impact of large parking
areas along the street and building frontage. Joint use parking lots and
single and multiple residence dwellings shall be exempt from this
locational requirement.
B. All vehicular egress from parking lots to public right-of-way shall be by forward
motion only, except in Single Residence Zoning Districts.
C. No part of any vehicle may overhang into a public sidewalk or within five (5) feet
of a street curb where no sidewalk exists.
D. Tandem arrangement of required parking spaces is prohibited; except in Single
Residence Zoning Districts. For purposes of this provision, tandem
arrangement shall mean parking spaces arranged one behind the other, such
that one car will be unable to exit the parking space if a second car has parked in
the tandem space behind it.
Town of Thatcher
Page 14.2 Article 14: Parking Regulations
Section 14.2 Improvements.
A. Required parking spaces, parking lot area, loading spaces, maneuvering areas,
driveways, and fire lanes shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, paving stones, or
a similar dust free material approved by the Town to a sufficient thickness to
withstand repeated vehicular traffic.
B. All required off-street parking spaces shall be connected with a public street, or
to an approved private street, by a paved driveway of not less than twenty (20)
feet in length, within the property line, unless otherwise approved by the Town
Engineer and Zoning Administrator.
C. Within the commercial zoning districts the parking areas developed to the side of
a structure/lot and joint use parking lots should be screened from the public
street with landscape and pedestrian amenities such as street furniture and
lighting to avoid interrupting the rhythm of the pedestrian environment along
the street.
D. All parking lots shall be improved with landscaping in accordance with Article 17
of this Ordinance. All landscape areas shall be depressed from the surrounding
parking surface and protected by either a concrete curb or wheel stops. The
curbing or wheel stops protecting these landscape areas shall be designed with
openings that will allow the storm water to drain into the landscape area for
harvesting the storm water.
E. Required parking spaces shall be permanently marked; except for a single
residential use. Applicants shall be required to differentiate on applications the
different type of customer parking provided.
Section 14.3 Parking Space and Maneuvering Dimensions.
A. Standard Parking Space: The standard parking space shall be a minimum of nine
(9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long unless specified otherwise by this
Ordinance.
B. Parallel Parking: A parallel parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet
wide by twenty-two (22) feet long unless specified otherwise by this Ordinance.
C. Disabled Parking: In accordance with Town policy, the American Disability Act
standards relating to dimensions and locations shall apply.
D. Motorcycle parking: The standard parking space shall be a minimum of five (5)
feet wide by nine (9) feet long and perpendicular to the street or drive aisle.
E. Driveway and Aisle Dimensions: Every parking facility shall be provided with
one or more access driveways. The minimum dimensional standards for all
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 14: Parking Regulations Page 14.3
driveways and drive aisles shall be as follows; except for single residential uses:
1. One-way driveway for enter/exit and one-way drive aisle shall be
fourteen (14) feet in width; except for industrial uses.
2. Two-way driveway for enter/exit and two-way drive aisles shall be
twenty-four (24) feet in width; except for industrial uses.
3. Industrial: one-way driveway for enter/exit and one-way drive aisle shall
be sixteen (16) feet in width.
4. Industrial: two-way driveway for enter/exit and two-way drive aisle shall
be thirty-two (32) feet in width.
Section 14.4 Required Parking by Type of Use.
A. The number of parking spaces required to be provided for uses permitted in this
Ordinance are specified in the following Table No. 15.
B. The number of parking spaces required for uses not listed shall be determined by
the Zoning Administrator and approved through the site plan review process.
C. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirement for off-street parking spaces
shall be the sum of the various uses computed separately. Cumulative parking
space requirements for mixed-use occupancies may be reduced by the Zoning
Administrator if it is determined that peak requirements of the mixed-use
occupancies occur at different times.
D. All parking areas which contain over five (5) required spaces, but less than
twenty (20) parking spaces, shall provide one (1) disabled parking space. Parking
areas with more than twenty (20) spaces shall provide one (1) disabled parking
space for every fifty (50) standard parking spaces.
Town of Thatcher
Page 14.4 Article 14: Parking Regulations
Table No 15 - Required Parking Spaces
Single Residence Land Uses Required Vehicle Parking
Single Residence, detached dwellings
Manufactured Homes
Recreational Vehicles
2 spaces: dwelling
2 spaces: unit
1 space: unit
Multiple Residence Land Uses Required Vehicle Parking
Efficiency/Studio unit
One (1) bedroom units
Two (2) bedroom units
Three (3) bedroom units
Four (4) bedroom units
Complexes with 10 or more units
1 space: unit
1.5 spaces: unit
2 spaces: unit
2.5 spaces: unit
3 spaces: unit
2 visitor space: 5 units
Public-Institutional Land Uses Required Vehicle Parking
Religious Institutions:
Main assembly (fixed seating)
Main assembly (without fixed seating)
1 space: 5 seats + school, etc.
1 space: 300 sf. of G.F.A.+ school
Hospitals, Assisted Living Facilities,
Nursing Homes and Convents
1 space: 5 beds +
1space: 1 staff physician
1 space: 2 employees
Elementary Schools & Jr. High Schools 1 space: classroom +
1 space: 2 employees
High Schools, Trade Schools & Colleges 1 space: 2 employees +
1 space: 5 students
Commercial Land Uses Required Vehicle Parking
Indoor Commercial Amusement:
arenas & indoor stadiums
amusement center / arcades
dance clubs
theaters
bowling alleys
billiard hall
1 space: 5 seats
1 space: 300 sf. G.F.A.
1 space: 300 sf. G.F.A.
1 space: 4 seats
2 spaces: lane
2 spaces: table
Indoor Swap Meet, Farmers Market 1 space: 500 sf. G.F.A.
Health/Fitness clubs 1 space: 100 sf. G.F.A.
Medical & Dental Offices, Clinics 1 space: 250 sf. G.F.A. 1st floor +
1 space: 300 sf. G.F.A. other floors
General, Professional & Civic Offices 1 space: 250 sf. G.F.A. 1st floor +
1 space: 300 sf. G.F.A. other floors
Private Clubs, Lodges & Fraternal
Organizations 1 space: 200 sf. G.F.A.
Retail sales, personal services, banks, and
grocery stores 1 space: 300 sf. G.F.A.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 14: Parking Regulations Page 14.5
Table No 15 (continued)
Commercial Land Uses (continued) Required Vehicle Parking
Hotels, Motels, and Bed & Breakfast
1 space: room +
1 space:1 daytime employee and
ancillary use requirements
Bars, Dance Halls, Nightclub 1 space: 50 sf. G.F.A.
Restaurant:
Indoor (public areas only)
Outdoor (public areas only)
Drive-through (public areas only)
Take-out only (no table/chairs)
1 space: 75 sf.
1 space: 150 sf., or 1 space: 4 seats
1 space: 100 sf.
1 space: 300 sf.
Mortuary/ Funeral Home 1 space: 125 sf. G.F.A.
General auto repair, car wash, service
station, lube shops
1 space: 375 sf. G.F.A. +
1 space: employee
Outdoor Commercial Land Uses Required Vehicle Parking
Outdoor Commercial Amusement :
golf courses
driving ranges
Miniature golf courses, batting cages,
amusement parks, water slides.
2 space: green + restaurant, pro
shop, etc.
1 space: each tee space
1 space: 500 sf. of outdoor and
indoor recreational area
Parks (public or private)
20 spaces: athletic field
6 spaces: volleyball court
6 spaces: basketball court
2 spaces: tennis court
Outdoor Sales:
plant nursery, building supplies, RV &
boat sales, and automobile sales
1 space: 500 sf. display area +
1 space: employee
Outdoor Swap Meet, Farmers Market 1 space: 500 sf. area used for
storage, display, and sales.
Industrial Land Uses Required Vehicle Parking
Manufacturing, Assembly, Production 1 space: 600 sf. G.F.A.
Wholesale Sales, Warehouse & Freight
Movement 1 space: 1,000 sf. G.F.A.
Waste Related Uses including recycling
centers 1 space: employee
Mini-warehouse/self-storage facility 1 space: 5,000 sf. G.F.A. + 2 spaces
for managers quarters/office
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 14.6 Article 14: Parking Regulations
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 15: Sign Regulations
Section 15.0 Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish comprehensive
provisions that will eliminate confusing, distracting and unsafe signs; establish
reasonable regulations to promote economic vitality for local businesses and
services; and enhance the visual environment of the Town of Thatcher.
Section 15.1 Applicability and General Requirements.
A. The regulations, requirements, and provisions set forth in this article shall apply
to all signs erected, placed, or constructed within the Town.
B. Sign permits and a zoning clearance shall be required for all signs except those
signs specified in Section 15.5 herein. The Building Official, or his designee,
shall issue a sign permit only if the proposed sign, construction, alteration, reerection,
maintenance and location of the sign comply with these regulations.
C. All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in good order, repair, and
appearance at all times so as not to constitute a danger or hazard to the public
safety or create visual blight as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Signs shall not be located within or projecting over any public street, right-ofway,
or other public property, except as may be permitted herein, and those
required to provide necessary traffic control and directional information.
E. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the intersection of any street in such
a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision nor at any location where by its
position, shape or color it may interfere with or obstruct the view of or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. No sign, signal, or
device, shall obstruct or interfere with a drivers view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic.
F. The source of the signs illumination, except neon illumination, shall not be
visible from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent property and shall be in compliance
with Section 16.4 of this Ordinance. An Administrative Use Permit shall be
required before the erection, re-erection, construction, alteration, placing,
maintaining or locating of neon, intermittent, flashing illumination, computer
generated changing signs (EMD signs) including time and temperature units, and
animated signs in any zone where such signage may be permissible.
G. There shall be no visible angle iron supports, guy wires, braces or secondary
supports except in the case of projecting signs. All sign supports shall be an
integral part of the sign design.
H. Signage within approved TND may deviate only from the requirements
governing the total aggregate sign area and sign dimensional requirements of this
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.2 Article 15: Sign Regulations
article provided the TND has an approved comprehensive sign package and all
proposed signage within the TND is in compliance with that comprehensive sign
package.
I. Whenever the use of land or structures changes or ceases, signs including any
supporting structures shall be appropriately altered or removed within thirty (30)
days.
J. Where there is conflict between these regulations and other town regulations, the
more restrictive shall apply.
Section 15.2 Sign Measurements.
A. Sign Area shall be measured as follows.
1. Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area
distinctively painted, textured or constructed as a background for the sign
copy shall be measured as that area within the outside dimensions of the
background panel or surface. The base of a freestanding monument sign
shall not be calculated as sign area unless said base contains signage.
2. Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a wall or
parapet of a building or other structure that has not been painted,
textured, or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the
sign copy shall be measured as a sum of the smallest rectangle that will
enclose each word, grouping of such letters, words, or graphics in the
total sign copy.
3. Multi-face signs shall be measured as follows:
a. A double faced sign shall be considered as one sign when
determining the sign area, provided both faces are parallel and the
distance between faces does not exceed one (1) foot or the
interior angle between the two (2) sign faces is forty-five (45)
degrees or less. If the interior angle is greater than forty-five (45)
degrees, the sign area shall be the sum of the area of the two (2)
faces.
b. Where a sign has three (3) or more faces the area of the sign shall
be calculated as the total sum of the area of all faces.
c. Where a sign is a spherical, free-form, sculptural or other nonplanar
sign the sign area shall be fifty (50%) percent of the sum
of the area of the sides of the smallest polygon that will
encompass the sign structure.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.3
4. The aggregate sign area for all signs on a lot or parcel shall be the sum of
the areas of all the signs except, the area for the following:
a. Directional signs, assisting in the flow of traffic, which do not
exceed an area of two (2) square feet or a height of three (3) feet
and do not include advertising.
b. Street address wall signs, which do not exceed an area of two (2)
square feet.
c. For sale, lease or rent signs.
B. Sign Height shall be measured as follows.
1. Freestanding signs shall be measured as the vertical distance from the top
of the highest element of the sign or sign structure to the top of the curb
or sidewalk, or the street grade of the nearest adjacent roadway where no
curb exists. The height of any monument base or other structure erected
to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign
height.
2. Wall or parapet mounted sign height shall be measured as the vertical
distance to the top of the sign or sign structure from the base of the wall
on which the sign is located.
Multi-Face Signs
Non-Planar Signs
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.4 Article 15: Sign Regulations
Section 15.3 Permitted Signage by Zoning District.
A. Single and Multiple Residence Zoning Districts. For all signs within the
R1-43, R1-22, R1-10, R1-8, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts
the following shall apply:
1. Temporary signs as outlined in Section 15.4 below may be permitted.
2. Signage shall not be permitted to advertise a home occupation; unless
required to display a sign per State license and/or Town business license
which shall be limited to a window sign with a maximum size equal to the
minimum size required by said license.
3. A perimeter wall mounted or a freestanding monument sign may be
permitted at no more than two (2) of the entryway(s) of a subdivision to
identify the subdivision. The signage shall be integrated to complement
the streetscape and landscaping frontages. A maximum aggregate area of
no more than forty-eight (48) square feet per subdivision with no more
than one (1) sign on each
side of the entry, if wall
mounted, may be
permitted. Back lighted
signs are preferred; spot
lighting signs are strongly
discouraged.
4. Only a school, municipality, or religious
institution may use a reader panel sign. Said
sign may use up to one-half () of the allowed
sign area for the reader panel sign. A reader
panel sign may be internally illuminated with an
administrative use permit.
5. Non-residential uses, allowed by an Administrative Use Permit in the
single residence zoning district, shall be limited to forty-eight (48) square
feet in total aggregate area regardless of the type of sign(s) utilized.
Signage may be externally illuminated with down lighting and shall be
limited to the following types and styles (see Section 15.3B.4 below for
standards).
a. Wall Mounted Building Signage
b. Freestanding Monument Signage
c. Window Signage
d. Awning Signs
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.5
e. Shingle Signs
6. Building number or letter signs for multiple building developments shall
be in compliance with Fire Department requirements and shall not be
counted as part of the aggregate sign area.
B. Commercial Zoning Districts. For all signs within the commercial districts of
NC, C-1, C-2, and MU the following regulations shall apply.
Additionally, any complex of three (3) or more businesses shall be required to
submit a comprehensive sign package (see Section 15.7) to be reviewed and
approved by the Town.
1. Total Signage:
a. The combination of all of the below types and styles of allowed
signage shall be included in calculating the total aggregate sign
area; except for wall mounted signs and except where specifically
excluded or otherwise exempted herein. For corner buildings or
developments only the main entrance frontage shall be measured
when determining the allowable signage.
b. The combined total aggregate sign area of all signs for any one (1)
business in the NC and MU Zoning Districts shall not
exceed thirty-six (36) square feet.
c. The combined total aggregate sign area of all signs for any one (1)
business in the C-1 Zoning District shall not exceed sixty-four
(64) square feet.
d. The combined total aggregate sign area of all signs for any one (1)
business in the C-2 Zoning District shall not exceed eightyfour
(84) square feet; except that commercial shopping centers
with more than three(3) businesses may be permitted additional
signage, through the comprehensive sign plan process, if so
approved by the Town Council.
2. Only one (1) wall mounted building sign per business may be permitted
in the NC and MU Zoning Districts.
3. No roof sign shall be erected upon the top of a building.
4. The type and style of permitted signs within the Commercial Zoning
Districts shall be limited to the following:
a. Wall Mounted Building Signage:
i. The sign area for any one (1) business or individual tenant
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.6 Article 15: Sign Regulations
shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each two (2)
linear feet of street or building frontage.
ii. For a single building development with multiple tenants
the wall mounted building sign shall only be permitted on
the exterior wall of the space occupied by the business
and shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each lineal
foot of street frontage.
iii. Signage shall not extend horizontally a distance greater
than fifty (50%) percent of the width of the building wall
on which it is displayed.
b. Freestanding and Monument Signage:
i. One (1) freestanding identification sign shall be permitted
per development and may include only the name of the
business and shall include the address.
ii. The sign shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height;
unless it is a multi-tenant sign approved by the Town
Council through the comprehensive sign plan process.
iii. For a single tenant building the sign area shall not exceed
one (1) square foot for each two (2) lineal feet of street
frontage with the maximum not to exceed sixty-four (64)
square feet.
iv. For a single building development with multiple tenants
the sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each two
(2) lineal feet of street frontage with the maximum not to
exceed eighty-four (84) square feet in area.
v. In the case where there is no street frontage, the property
owner may either; share a multi-tenant sign with the
frontage property; or erect a freestanding sign on the
frontage property within a sign easement procured
from the frontage property owner. A minimum distance
of fifty (50) feet shall be maintained between signs on the
same property and from any sign on adjacent properties.
vi. For multiple building developments or commercial
shopping centers one (1) sign may be permitted for every
330 foot of street frontage for the entire development
with a maximum of two (2) signs per street frontage if
applicable. The individual buildings within the
development and/or the pad sites within the commercial
center shall not be considered as separate developments.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.7
The minimum distance between two signs on the same
street frontage shall be 330 feet. Each sign may be a
maximum of eighty-four (84) square feet in area and may
be either a center identification sign or a multi-tenant
identification sign.
c. Directory Signs: One (1) directory sign may be used when
required to identify the location of various buildings, offices or
businesses within a complex. A directory sign may be externally
illuminated or non-illuminated and have a maximum area of six
(6) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet and shall not
be included in calculating the total aggregate area for signage
allowed on a parcel or lot or for a particular business.
d. Window Signage:
The total aggregate
area of all window
signs shall not exceed
twenty-five (25)
percent of the total
area of the windows
through which they
are visible.
e. Awning Signs:
i. A maximum of twenty-five
(25) percent of the front face
area of the awning may be
used for signage.
ii. May only identify the name of
the business. Such signs shall
not include advertising copy.
f. Shingle Signs and Projecting Signs:
Awning Signage
Window Signage
Shingle Signage
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.8 Article 15: Sign Regulations
i. One (1) shingle sign or projecting sign
which is designed and oriented primarily
for the aid of pedestrians may be allowed
per business and shall be located
immediately adjacent to the business it
identifies.
ii. Shall have an eight (8) foot minimum clearance between
the bottom of the sign and the sidewalk.
iii. Projecting signs shall not
project less than six (6)
inches nor more than eight
(8) feet from the building
wall or building face.
iv. Shingle signs shall have a
maximum area of six (6)
square feet.
v. Projecting signs for each
ground floor business, on a
street, shall not exceed one
(1) square foot for each
linear street frontage of
business, up to a maximum
of twenty-four (24) square
feet.
vi. May only identify the name of the business. Such signs
shall not include advertising copy.
g. Menu Boards:
i. Each drive-through or drive-in restaurant may be
permitted one (1) preview board and one (1) ordering
menu board. These boards may be freestanding or wallmounted;
located not less than forty-five (45) feet from
the street property line and the front of the board shall
not be visible from the public street.
ii. Maximum sign area shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
square feet and shall not be included in calculating the
total aggregate area for signage allowed on a parcel or lot
or for a particular business.
iii. The sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
Projecting Signage
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.9
h. Price Signs: (For gasoline service stations only)
i. One freestanding sign per street frontage on which the
service station has frontage.
ii. Maximum sign area shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
square feet.
iii. Maximum sign height shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet.
i. Directional Sign: Such signs shall not exceed an area of six (6)
square feet or a height of three (3) feet. These signs shall not be
included in calculating the total aggregate area of signage allowed
on a particular lot or for a particular business, and shall not
include any advertising.
C. Industrial Zoning Districts. For all signs within the industrial districts of I-1
and I-2 the following regulations shall apply. Additionally, any development of
three (3) or more businesses shall be required to submit a comprehensive sign
package (see Section 15.7) to be reviewed and approved by the Town.
1. Total Signage:
a. The combination of all of the below types and styles of allowed
signage shall be included in calculating the total aggregate sign
area; except for wall mounted signs and except where specifically
excluded or otherwise exempted herein. For corner buildings or
developments only the main entrance frontage shall be measured
when determining the allowable signage.
b. The combined total maximum aggregate sign area of all signs for
any one (1) business in the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts shall
not exceed eighty-four (84) square feet.
2. No roof sign shall be erected upon the top of a building.
3. The type and style of permitted signs within the Industrial Zoning
Districts shall be limited to the following:
a. Wall Mounted Building Signage:
i. Identification signs pertaining to any one (1) business or
individual tenant shall not exceed one (1) square foot for
each linear foot of street or building frontage.
ii. For a single building development with multiple tenants a
wall mounted building sign shall only be permitted on the
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.10 Article 15: Sign Regulations
exterior wall of the space occupied by the business and
shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of
street frontage.
iii. The aggregate of all wall or building signage shall not
extend horizontally a distance greater than fifty (50%)
percent of the width of the building wall on which it is
displayed.
iv. Signage shall be located near the building or business
entryway and shall not exceed a height of twenty-four
(24) feet above finished grade.
b. Freestanding and Monument Signage:
i. For a single user/tenant development there may be
permitted one (1) freestanding identification sign, not
exceeding eighteen (18) feet in height or sixty-four (64)
square feet in area.
ii. For a multi-tenant development there may be one (1)
freestanding identification sign, not exceeding eight (8)
feet in height or eighty-four (84) square feet in area.
iii. If the development is located on a corner lot or parcel,
for both the single tenant and the multi-tenant
developments, then two (2) signs of the dimensions
outlined above (64sf and 84sf respectively) may be
permitted.
iv. Where two (2) signs are permitted there shall be a
minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet between
the freestanding signs.
c. Directional Signs: Such signs shall not exceed an area of six (6)
square feet or a height of three (3) feet. These signs shall not be
included in calculating the total aggregate area of signage allowed
on a particular lot or for a particular business, and shall not
include any advertising.
d. Awning Signs: Such signs shall adhere to the standards outlined
in Section 15.3B.4. above.
e. Projecting Signs: Such signs shall adhere to the standards
outlined in Section 15.3B.4. above.
D. Open Space and Public-Institutional Zoning Districts: For all signs
within the Open Space OS Zoning District and the Public-Institutional P-I
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.11
Zoning District the following regulations shall apply.
1. Total Signage:
a. The combination of all of the below types and styles of allowed
signage shall be included in calculating the total aggregate sign
area; except for wall mounted signs and except where specifically
excluded or otherwise exempted herein. For corner buildings or
developments only the main entrance frontage shall be measured
when determining the allowable signage.
b. The combined total aggregate sign area of all signs for any one (1)
property/development in the OS and P-I Zoning Districts
shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet.
2. No roof sign shall be erected upon the top of a building.
3. The type and style of permitted signs within the Open Space and Public-
Institutional Zoning Districts shall be limited to the following:
a. Wall Mounted Building Signage:
i. Wall identification signs pertaining to any one (1)
business or individual tenant shall not exceed one (1)
square foot for each linear foot of street or building
frontage.
ii. The aggregate of all wall or building signage shall not
extend horizontally a distance greater than fifty (50%)
percent of the width of the building wall on which it is
displayed.
b. Monument Signs: Freestanding monument signs may be
permitted; provided a single sign does not exceed thirty-six (36)
square feet in area and a height of twelve (12) feet.
c. Directional Signs: Such signs shall not exceed an area of six (6)
square feet or a height of three (3) feet. These signs shall not be
included in calculating the total aggregate area of signage allowed
on a particular lot or for a particular business, and shall not
include any advertising.
d. Directory Signs: One (1) directory sign may be used when
required to identify the location of various buildings, offices or
businesses within a complex. A directory sign may be externally
illuminated or non-illuminated and have a maximum area of six
(6) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet and shall not
be included in calculating the total aggregate area for signage
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.12 Article 15: Sign Regulations
allowed on a parcel or lot or for a particular business.
e. Reader Panel Signs: Elementary and secondary schools may
also use, in addition to the above types of signs, a freestanding
reader panel sign provided it does not exceed twenty-four (24)
square feet in area and six (6) feet in height.
Section 15.4 Temporary Signage.
A. Banners, Pennants and Displays for Grand Openings.
1. Banners, pennants, and other displays, for the grand opening of a
business, shall be allowed within the commercial zoning districts on a
one-time basis for a maximum of fourteen (14) consecutive days.
2. Banners, pennants, and other displays for special sales events may be
permitted within the commercial zoning districts. A business may
request such signs and displays a maximum of four (4) times per year for
a maximum period of ten (10) consecutive days on each occasion. A
minimum of thirty (30) days shall pass between each such display. Such
signs and displays shall be removed immediately upon termination of the
sale that they advertise or after the ten (10) day period, whichever occurs
first.
3. An Administrative Use Permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator prior to the installation of any special sales event or grand
opening banners, pennants, signs, balloon, or other displays.
4. Banners and pennants shall be displayed only on the building and not
within the parking area, perimeter landscape, or some other area of the
development.
5. The maximum banner size shall be four (4) foot by eight (8) foot or
thirty-two (32) square feet and shall be limited to one (1) per street
frontage for the business.
6. No pennant, banner or display shall be placed on or above the roof of
any building.
B. Special Event Banners and Community Signs.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.13
1. Banners shall be made of cloth, nylon, or
similar material.
2. Banners may be fastened to streetlights that
are specifically designed to accommodate
banners. Such banners may advertise a townauthorized
special event or a community wide
event or a community message but not for
individual businesses.
3. All banners shall be reviewed and approved
by the Town.
C. Political Signs:
1. Political signs are allowed without a permit in all zones.
2. Signs shall not be displayed earlier than thirty (30) days prior to an
election and shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours after the
specific election to which they refer. If a candidate is in a run-off
election the sign may remain until after the completion of the run-off
election.
3. Signs shall not be placed in any portion of the public right-of-way.
4. The sign area shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet and if the sign is a
freestanding sign it shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
5. Political signs and candidate signs shall be non-illuminated.
D. Real Estate Signs: Signs advertising the sale, lease or renting of a building,
suite, dwelling or lot shall conform to the following regulations and are exempt
from the total aggregate sign area.
1. Real estate signs are permitted in all zones.
2. In all zoning districts one (1) non-illuminated sign, located on the subject
property, shall be permitted. Said sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet
in area or four (4) feet in height. For multiple residential developments
the real estate signs shall be placed at the dwelling unit unless an
alternative location, not along the street frontage, is provided by the
development for all such signs. For multi-tenant commercial centers the
real estate sign shall be placed at the suite or building frontage and not
along the street frontage.
3. A maximum of four (4) portable Open House directional signs may be
posted for each home not within the public right-of-way. Each sign shall
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.14 Article 15: Sign Regulations
have a maximum height of three (3) feet. The signs may be posted only
when a sales person is on duty at the home and for no longer than nine
(9) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period.
4. All real estate signs shall be removed upon closing of the sale.
E. Construction and Future Development Signs:
1. For residential construction one (1) sign may be posted on the lot or
parcel and shall have a maximum area of six (6) square feet and a
maximum height of four (4) feet.
2. For commercial construction one (1) sign may be posted on the lot or
parcel and shall have a maximum area of twenty-four (24) square feet and
a maximum height of six (6) feet.
3. In all cases, such signs shall be removed within ten (10) days following
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project.
F. Portable Signs:
1. Portable signs shall be allowed only in the Commercial Zoning Districts.
Signs may be placed on-site or within the adjacent public rights-of-way
provided they are placed in a manner that does not impede or restrict
vehicular, non-vehicular, or pedestrian traffic. No portable signs shall be
allowed within the sight triangle at intersections or within the center
medians that divide portions of paved or unpaved roads.
2. Portable signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height or six (6) square
feet in area and shall not exceed one (1) sign per business.
3. Signs may be placed, in the permitted areas, only between sunrise and
sunset. Signs shall be removed daily prior to sunset, except if used to
advertise a meeting then they shall be removed at the conclusion of the
meeting, or they shall be subject to confiscation by the Town.
G. Yard Sale Signs:
1. Yard sale signs shall be portable signs limited to residential districts only
and shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
2. Such signs shall not be up longer than three (3) consecutive days. All
signs shall be picked up within twenty-four (24) hours from the
completion of the yard sale.
Section 15.5 Exceptions.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.15
A. Permits Not Required: Sign permits are not required for the following signs
provided that such signs are subject to all other provisions of this Ordinance.
Note: Electric permit required for all exterior electric signs.
1. Standard sign maintenance.
2. Political signs.
3. Real Estate and Open House signs (see Sec. 15.4 (D) for regulations).
4. Messages painted directly on, or adhesive vinyl film affixed to, the
exterior surface of existing mineral glass windows; except that the
aggregate square footage of such signs shall be calculated as window
signage.
5. Signs required by a county, state or federal agency provided permits for
such signs are issued by those agencies and signs are posted as
determined by the governing agency.
B. Exempted Signage: The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to the
following. (Note: Electric permits are required for all exterior electric signs).
1. Flags, pennants or insignia of any nation, state, county, Town, or school.
2. Memorial plaques, statuary or remembrances of persons or events
noncommercial in nature, or building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made
of non-combustible material and made an integral part of the building or
structure.
3. Works of fine art, building wall murals, and historic or cultural artifacts
when not displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise that may
derive direct commercial gain from such display.
4. Temporary decorations or displays celebrating the occasion of
traditionally accepted patriotic, religious or local holidays or events.
5. Signs that are relevant to the function of the property that are not visible
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are located,
or from any public right-of-way.
6. Signs displayed within the interior of a building.
7. The placement and maintenance of official traffic, fire and police signs,
signals and devices and markings of the State of Arizona and the Town
of Thatcher or other authorized public agency, and the posting of notices
as required by law.
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.16 Article 15: Sign Regulations
8. Non-illuminated directional or informational signs of a non-commercial
public or quasi-public nature and community signs.
9. Signs displayed during recognized holidays as identification of temporary
sales areas for trees and similar holiday items in conjunction with an
approved Temporary Use Permit. Such signs shall be exempted only
when displayed within thirty (30) days of the recognized holiday.
Section 15.6 Prohibited, Unsafe and Illegal Signs.
A. Prohibited Signs: Any sign not specifically listed as permitted by this
Ordinance is prohibited, including, but not limited to the following:
1. Billboards are prohibited in the Town of Thatcher.
2. Signs mounted, attached, or painted on a motor vehicle, or trailer
consistently parked, stored or displayed on public or private property, in
a manner intended to attract the attention of the public, except for signs
that the primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the display of
signs. The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part of
the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and
do not break the silhouette of the vehicle. The vehicle or trailer is in
operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on
public streets when applicable, and actively used or available for use in
the daily function of the business to which such signs relate. This does
not prohibit the identification of a firm or its principal products on a
vehicle operating during the normal course of business or being taken
home.
3. Signs attached to any utility pole or structure, streetlight, traffic signal,
tree, fence, fire hydrant, park bench or other location on public property
unless otherwise specifically addressed in this article.
4. The use of pennants, banners, balloons, streamers, and similar displays
except those temporarily displayed as may be permitted in Section 15.4
herein.
5. Off-site signs, unless otherwise permitted by this article.
6. Portable signs except as allowed for temporary signs as outlined in
Section 15.4 herein.
7. Signs that rotate (except barber poles) or emit audible sound.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.17
8. Signs displayed in a manner or locations that prevent free ingress and
egress from a door, window or other exit.
9. Signs displayed in a location in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere
with an official traffic sign, signal or device, or signs that obstruct or
interfere with the drivers view of approaching, merging or intersecting
traffic and signs within the road medians or signs that are otherwise
prohibited by this Ordinance.
10. Balloons/Inflatable Devices as defined in Appendix A of this Ordinance,
used for promotional and advertisement purposes.
11. Signage on wireless communication facilities unless otherwise required by
the Town of Thatcher.
B. Unsafe Signs:
1. If the Building Official determines any sign or sign structure to be in an
unsafe condition, he shall immediately notify, in writing, the owner of
such sign who shall correct such condition within forty-eight (48) hours.
2. If the correction has not been made within forty-eight (48) hours, the
Building Official may have the sign removed if it creates a danger to the
public safety or have any necessary repairs or maintenance performed at
the expense of the sign owner or owner or lessee of the property upon
which the sign is located.
C. Illegal Signs:
1. The Zoning Administrator, or other designated Town official, shall
remove all illegal signs or legal signs placed in prohibited locations.
Should an entity continue to place sign(s) without permit(s) a citation
may be issued.
Section 15.7 Submittal and Permit Requirements.
A. Sign permit approval is required for constructing or altering any non-exempt
sign. A sign permit application shall be made in writing on forms provided by
the Town. The following information shall be required as part of all sign permit
applications:
1. Business owners name, address, telephone and email.
2. Sign contractors name, address, telephone and email.
Town of Thatcher
Page 15.18 Article 15: Sign Regulations
3. Inventory of all existing signs on the property showing the type and
dimensions of each sign as well as a site plan showing the locations of
each sign.
4. Fully dimensioned plans and elevations showing the dimensions, design
copy, and location of each proposed sign in relation to the property
line(s) and public right-of-way.
5. Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done;
including details of all connections, supports, footings, and materials to
be used.
6. Required information for an electrical permit for all signage illumination.
7. A comprehensive sign plan is intended to provide for the establishment
of signage criteria that are tailored to a specific development location,
and which may vary from specific Ordinance provisions. The intent is to
provide for flexible sign criteria that promote superior design through
architectural integration of the site, buildings and signs. A
comprehensive sign plan shall demonstrate consistency and uniformity
among signs within a project. The requirements of a comprehensive sign
plan shall apply to all businesses and/or developments within a related
project, even if the properties have been subdivided. When a
comprehensive sign package is required by this Ordinance the submittal
shall include information regarding the location(s), color(s), material(s),
type of sign(s), method of illumination if applicable, and letter samples
that are for all tenant, freestanding identification signage, directional
signs, window signs and any other information deemed necessary by the
Town to adequately review the comprehensive sign package.
B. Two (2) copies of all information listed above in Sec 15.7 (A) shall be submitted
with the application for each sign; one (1) copy being returned to the applicant at
the time the Permit is issued.
C. Before issuing any sign permit required by this Ordinance, the Town shall collect
a fee in accordance with a fee schedule established by the Town Council. If
work, for which a permit is required by this Ordinance, is started before a permit
has been issued, the fees specified above shall be doubled. The payment of such
double fee shall not relieve any persons from complying fully with the
requirements of this Ordinance in the execution of the work or from any
penalties prescribed herein.
D. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspections during
various stages of construction as prescribed by the Town of Thatcher Building
Safety Department.
E. Amendments. Applications for amendments to a Comprehensive Sign Package
shall be processed in the same way as an original application. Revisions or
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 15: Sign Regulations Page 15.19
amendments to a Comprehensive Sign Package shall require documentation
from all tenants and/or property owners on the property prior to approval.
F. Minor Alterations. Minor alterations in sign locations resulting from
unexpected conditions on site may be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(End of Article)

Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations Page 16.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
Section 16.0 Purpose and Intent.
A. The purpose of this Article is to protect the unique environment of Thatcher by
protecting and maintaining the access to the dark night sky. Intended outcomes
include continuing support of astronomical activity and minimizing wasted
energy while not compromising the safety, security and well-being of persons
engaged in outdoor nighttime activities.
B. It is the intent of this Article to control the obtrusive aspects of excessive and
careless outdoor lighting usage while preserving, protecting and enhancing the
lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of any and all property. It is recognized that
portions of properties may be required to be unlit or have reduced lighting levels
in order to allow enough lumens in the lighted areas to achieve light levels in
accordance with nationally recognized recommended practices.
Section 16.1 Conformance and Applicability.
A. All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the
provisions of this Article, the International Building Code, the International
Electrical Code and the sign regulations of this Ordinance, as applicable, and
under appropriate permit and inspection.
B. All proposed new land uses, developments, buildings, structures, or building
additions or alterations of fifty percent (50%) or more either with a single
addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this
provision, shall meet the requirements of this Article for the entire property.
Cumulative modification or replacement of outdoor lighting fixtures constituting
fifty percent (50%) or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the
actual amount of lighting already on a non-conforming site, shall constitute a
major addition for purposes of this section.
C. Whenever the use of any existing building, structure or premises is changed to a
new use, all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance with
this code before the new use commences.
D. If a property or use with nonconforming lighting is abandoned as defined in the
Glossary of this Ordinance, then all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and
brought into compliance with this Article before the use is resumed.
E. The provisions of this Article are not intended to prevent the use of any design,
material or method of installation or operation prescribed by this code
Town of Thatcher
Page 16.2 Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
Section 16.2 Outdoor Lighting Areas and Lighting Uses.
A. The Town of Thatcher has several different lighting areas. The fixture type,
lamp type, shielding requirements, and lighting curfews are determined by both
the lighting area and the zoning district that the property is located in. The
lighting areas are further delineated as follows:
1. E3: Lighting area E3 is an urban area (incorporated entities) with
primary land uses for commercial, business, industrial activity, apartments
and surrounded by suburban residential areas.
2. E2: Lighting area E2 consists of rural residential and agricultural areas.
3. E1: Lighting area E1 is a special area around astronomical observatories
and includes all areas within the boundaries of the Graham County
lighting area map. This includes Mt. Graham in the Pinaleo Mountains
and those areas within any national park, monument or forest boundary.
In these areas, the preservation of a naturally dark environment both in
the sky and in the visible landscape is considered of paramount concern.
4. A property located in more than one of the lighting areas described in
subsections (1) to (3) above shall be considered to be only in the more
restrictive lighting area.
B. Outdoor lighting fixtures may be permitted for the following uses and activities:
1. Street lighting;
2. Parking lot lighting;
3. Building and structural lighting;
4. Landscape lighting;
5. Recreational lighting;
6. Signage (advertising or otherwise);
7. Product display lot or display area lighting;
8. Building overhangs and open canopies;
9. Security lighting;
10. Walkways; and
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations Page 16.3
11. Lighting of agricultural facilities, arenas, corrals and animal containment
areas, and mines.
C. To qualify as a display lot or display area one of the following specific uses
must occur: automobile sales where accurate color perception by customers is
required; assembly lots; swap meets; airport; and automobile fueling areas. Other
uses must be approved as a display lot or area use by the Town of Thatcher.
Section 16.3 Total Lighting Output and Shielding Requirements.
A. The tables in this section give requirements of the total light output permitted
per acre for the different lighting areas and the fixture shielding requirements for
class of lighting, lamp type, and lighting area. These requirements shall be met
for all lighting installations subject to this Article.
B. Total outdoor light output shall not exceed the lumen limits given in Table No.
16 herein. Total means the sum of shielded and unshielded light.
C. Outdoor light fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the lamp type and
shielding requirements of Table No. 17 herein.
D. All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed in such a
manner that the shielding is effective as defined in the Glossary of this
Ordinance for full cut-off fixtures.
E. Beyond the shielding requirements of this section, all light fixtures on the
residential side of commercial property adjacent to residential property shall be
full cut-off and shall be a maximum of ten (10) feet above grade at the property
line and no higher than a line rising twenty (20) feet above the ten (10) feet until
one hundred (100) feet from the property line. All outdoor lighting adjacent to
residential areas shall have internal house-side shields. In addition, all residential
and commercial luminaires shall be full cut-off within twenty-five (25) feet of
adjacent residential property lines.
F. Multi-class lighting must conform to the shielding and timing restrictions, if any,
that apply to the most restrictive included class.
G. For lamp types that vary in light output as they age (such as fluorescent and high
intensity discharge (HID) lamps), the mean lumen output as defined by the
manufacturer shall be the lumen value used.
H. The total light output of each outdoor fixture shall be based on the largest lamp
that the outdoor fixture is rated to accommodate. For the purpose of compliance
with Section 16.3 B. above, the largest lamp rating for fluorescent and HID
fixtures shall be based on the installed ballast rating.
Town of Thatcher
Page 16.4 Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
I. For determining compliance with Section 16.3 B. above the total lumens shall be
of the sum of the following:
1. One hundred percent (100%) of the lumens from outdoor light fixtures
installed on grade, on poles and installed on the tops or sides of buildings
or other structures when not shielded from above by the structure itself.
2. Twenty five percent (25%) of the lumens from outdoor light fixtures
installed under canopies, buildings, overhangs or roof eaves where all
parts of the center of the lamp or luminaire are located at least five feet
from the nearest edge of the canopy or overhang.
3. Fifty percent (50%) of the lumens from underwater light fixtures unless
the fixture is aimed at an angle of less than forty-five (45) degrees above
the horizontal in which case the calculated lumens shall be calculated at
ten percent of the rated lamp lumens.
Table No. 16 - Total Outdoor Light Output Lumen Caps
(Initial Lumens per Net Acre(4))
Zoning District(s) Lighting Areas
E3 E2 E1
Commercial and Industrial Zoning  Option 1(1)(2)
Total (full cut-off plus unshielded)(5) 100,000 25,000 12,500
Unshielded (fraction of the total) 5,000 2,000 1,000
Commercial and Industrial Zoning  Option 2 (1)(2)
Total (all outdoor lighting shall be full cut-off) 150,000 32,500 12,500
Unshielded ()fraction of the total) 0 0 0
All Residential Zoning (3)
Total (full cut-off plus unshielded) 25,000 16,500 11,000
Unshielded (fraction of the total) 5,000 2,000 1,000
Notes:
(1) Use either Option 1 or Option 2 for entire property.
(2) This refers to all land-use within all commercial and industrial zoning districts.
(3) This refers to all land-uses within the residential zoning districts including all densities and
types of housing.
(4) These are upper limits and not design goals. Design goals should be lower and should be
the lowest levels that meet the task, and hence save energy and minimize glare.
(5) If shielded Low Pressure Sodium (LPS) lighting is used for commercial and industrial
zoning, then the lumen caps are raised to 250,000 in E3, and 75,000 in E2, but non-LPS
Actual Lumens shall not exceed limits of this Table.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations Page 16.5
Section 16.4 Outdoor Advertising Signs.
A. External illumination for on-site signs shall conform to all provisions of this
Article. In particular, such lighting shall be treated as Class 1 lighting and shall
conform to the lamp source, shielding restrictions and lumen caps of Section
16.3. External fixtures shall be mounted on top or above the sign and directed
downward onto the sign face.
B. Electrical illumination of outdoor advertising off-site signs is prohibited except
that the use of lighting fixtures legally installed in areas E2 and E3 prior to the
Table No. 17 - Lamp Type and Shielding Standards
Use Class and Lamp Type E3 E2 E1
Class 1 Lighting (Color Rendition)
LPS greater than or equal to 2950 lumens/luminaire F F F
Others greater than or equal to 2950 lumens/luminaire F F F
All types below 2950 lumens/luminaire A(1) F F
Class 2 Lighting (General Illumination)
LPS greater than or equal to 2950 lumens/luminaire F F F
Others greater than or equal to 2950 lumens/luminaire F F X
All types below 2950 lumens/luminaire A(1) F F
Class 3 Lighting (Decorative)(4)
All lighting greater than or equal to 2950 lumens/luminaire F X X
All types below 2950 lumens/luminaire A(1) A(1) F(2)(3)
Class 4 Lighting (Assimilation)(4)
All lighting greater than or equal to 2950 lumens/luminaire F X X
All types below 2950 lumens/luminaire A(1) F F
Notes:
(1) Flood or spot lamps must however be aimed no closer than 45 degrees to the
horizontal (halfway between straight down and straight to the side) when the source
is visible from any adjacent residential property.
(2) Exception: seasonal decorations using unshielded low-wattage incandescent lamps
shall be permitted.
(3) Non-LPS Actual Lumens shall not exceed limits of Table No. 16.
(4) All Class 3 lighting shall be extinguished between 11:00 p.m. (or when the business
closes whichever is later) and sunrise.
? All Class 4 lighting shall be extinguished between two hours after sunset and two
hours before sunrise.
? Under canopy lighting must meet the requirements of Table No. 16.
Use Code:
A = unshielded light allowed above those allowed by Table No. 16; shielding not
required but highly recommended.
F = full cut-off lights required, except as allowed by Table No. 16
X = not allowed.
Town of Thatcher
Page 16.6 Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
effective date of this code may continue provided such fixtures are mounted on
the top of the sign structure shall not be illuminated between the hours of eleven
p.m. (11:00 p.m.) and sunrise, and comply with all other provisions of the code.
C. Outdoor internally illuminated advertising signs may be constructed with an
opaque or colored background and translucent text and symbols. Lamps used for
internal illumination of such signs shall not be counted toward the lumen cap
described in Section 16.3.
D. Illumination for all advertising signs both externally illuminated and internally
illuminated shall be turned off at the curfew times listed in Table No.18 or when
the business closes whichever is later.
Section 16.5 Special Uses.
A. Outdoor Recreational Facilities.
1. All site lighting not directly associated with outdoor athletic playing areas
shall conform to the lighting standards described in this Ordinance
including but not limited to the lamp type and shielding requirements of
Section 16.3C and the lumens per acre limits of Section 16.3B.
2. Lighting for outdoor athletic fields, courts or tracks shall be considered
Class 1 (Color Rendition), and shall be exempt from the lumens per acre
limits of Section 16.3B. All such lighting shall utilize full cut-off
luminaires that are installed in a fashion that maintains the full cut-off
characteristics unless certified by a registered engineer that such shielding
is impractical. Every such lighting system design shall be certified by a
registered engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions of this
Ordinance. Where full cut-off fixtures are not utilized, acceptable
luminaires shall include those which:
a. Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers
and installed so as to limit direct uplight to less than five percent
Table No. 18 - Illuminated Sign Curfews
Sign Type and Zoning Districts Lighting Area
E3 E2 El
Commercial & Industrial Zoning Districts
Opaque Background 12:00 AM 11:00 PM X
Colored Background 12:00 AM 12:00 AM X
All Residential Zoning Districts
Opaque Background 11:00 PM 10:00 PM X
Colored Background 11:00 PM 10:00 PM X
Notes:
X = not allowed.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations Page 16.7
(5%) of the total lumens exiting from the installed fixtures and
minimize offsite light trespass as required herein, and
b. Are installed with minimum aiming angles of twenty-five (25)
degrees downward from the horizontal. Said aiming angle shall be
measured from the axis of the luminaire maximum beam
candlepower as certified by independent testing agency.
3. All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity before the
curfew listed in Table No. 19. Illumination of the playing field, court or
track shall be permitted after the curfew only to conclude a scheduled
event that was unable to conclude before the curfew due to unusual
circumstances. No recreational lighting is permitted in area E1.
B. Outdoor Display Lots.
1. All site lighting not directly associated with the display areas shall
conform to the lighting standards described in this Ordinance, including
but not limited to the lamp type and shielding requirements of Section
16.3C and the lumens per acre limits of Section 16.3B.
2. Lighting for display lots shall be considered Class I (Color Rendition),
and shall be exempt from the lumens per acre limits of Table No. 16.
However, the installation shall be designed to not exceed the luminance
recommendations for the activity as defined by the most current
recommended practice of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA). All such lighting shall utilize full cut-off luminaires
that are installed in a fashion that maintains the full cut-off
characteristics. Every such lighting system design shall be certified by a
registered certified engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions of
this Article.
3. Class 1 display lot lighting exceeding the lumens per acre cap of Section
16.3B shall be turned off at the curfew times listed in Table No. 19 or
within thirty (30) minutes after closing of the business whichever is later.
4. Class 2 display lot lighting shall be permitted for security and safety
lighting and shall be exempted from the turn-off requirements of Section
16.5A.
Table No. 19 - Sports Facility and Display Lot Curfews
E3 Lighting Area E2 Lighting Area E1 Lighting Area
11:00 PM 11:00 PM X
Notes:
X = not allowed
Town of Thatcher
Page 16.8 Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
C. Agricultural Facilities.
1. All site lighting not directly associated with the agricultural facilities shall
conform to the lighting standards described in this Ordinance, including
but not limited to the lamp type and shielding requirements of Section
16.3C and the lumens per acre limits of Section 16.5A.
2. Lighting for agricultural fields or greenhouses shall be considered Class 4
(Assimilation Lighting), and shall be exempt from the lumens per acre
limits of Section 16.3B. All such lighting shall utilize full cut-off
luminaires that are installed in a fashion that maintains the full cut-off
characteristics unless certified by a registered engineer that such shielding
is impractical. Every such lighting system design shall be certified by a
registered engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions of this
Ordinance. Where full cut-off fixtures are not utilized acceptable
luminaires shall include those which:
a. Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers
and installed so as to limit direct up-light to less than five percent
(5%) of the total lumens exiting from the installed fixtures and
minimize offsite light trespass as required herein, and
b. Are installed with minimum aiming angles of twenty-five (25)
degrees downward from the horizontal. Said aiming angle shall be
measured from the axis of the luminaire maximum beam
candlepower as certified by independent testing agency
3. All lighting shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity before the
curfew listed in Table No.20.
D. Parking Lot Lighting.
1. Within the Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts the maximum
lighting intensity of the parking areas shall be 8 lumens (8 fcs), as
measured within the parking lot and at the property line. However, if the
commercial or industrial zoning district abuts a residential zoning district
the maximum lighting intensity in the parking area shall be 2 lumens (2
fcs) measured at the property line.
Table No.20 - Agricultural Facility Curfew
E3 Lighting Area E2 Lighting Area E1 Lighting Area
11:00 PM 2 hours after sunset to
2 hours before sunrise
2 hours after sunset to
2 hours before sunrise
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations Page 16.9
2. The maximum height of parking lot lighting standards (poles) shall be
sixteen (16) feet within the interior of the parking lot and twelve (12) feet
at or along the perimeter of the parking lot.
3. All parking lot lighting, serving commercial and industrial businesses,
shall be turned off one-half () hour after the close of the business(es)
that the parking lot serves or as required for the safety of the employees
leaving the business.
Section 16.6 Submittal and Permit Requirements.
A. Submission Contents. The applicant for any permit required by any provision of
the laws of the Town of Thatcher in connection with proposed work involving
outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit (as part of the application for permit)
evidence that the proposed work will comply with this code. The submission
shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of
which may be part or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the
laws of this jurisdiction upon application for the required permit:
1. Plans indicating the location on the premises and the type of illuminating
devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors and other devices;
2. Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports,
reflectors and other devices and the description may include but is not
limited to catalog cut sheets by manufacturers and drawings (including
sections where required); and
3. Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar
showing the angle of cut-off or light emissions. Photometric data need
not be submitted when the full cut-off performance of the fixture is
obvious to the reviewing official.
B. Additional Submission. The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be
sufficiently complete to enable the plans examiner to readily determine whether
compliance with the requirements of this Article will be secured. If such plans,
descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination by reason of the
nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures or lamps proposed, the applicant
shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance certified reports of tests that
have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory.
C. Subdivision Plat Certification. If any subdivision proposes to have installed street
or other common or public area outdoor lighting, the final plat shall contain a
statement certifying that the applicable provisions of this Article will be adhered
to.
D. Lamp or Fixture Substitution. Should any outdoor light fixture or the type of
Town of Thatcher
Page 16.10 Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
light source therein be changed after the permit has been issued, a change
request together with adequate information to assure compliance with this
Article must be submitted to the design professional and building official for
his/her approval prior to substitution.
E. Special Inspection. In area E3 special inspection by a registered electrical
engineer is required if the lumens per net acre are greater than one hundred
thousand (100,000).
Section 16.7 Prohibited Outdoor Lighting.
A. Mercury Vapor Lamps Fixtures and Lamps. The installation, sale, offer for sale,
lease or purchase of any mercury vapor lamp for use as outdoor lighting is
prohibited.
B. Certain Other Fixtures and Lamps. The installation, sale, offering for sale, lease
or purchase of any low pressure sodium, high pressure sodium, metal halide,
fluorescent, quartz or incandescent outdoor lighting fixture or lamp the use of
which is not allowed by Table No. 17 is prohibited.
C. Laser Source Light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity
light for outdoor advertising or entertainment when projected above the
horizontal is prohibited.
D. Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited
in lighting areas E1 and E2 and in all other areas between ten p.m. (10:00 p.m.)
and sunrise the following morning.
Section 16.8 Temporary Exemption.
A. Request, Renewal and Information Required. Any person may submit a written
request on a form prepared by the jurisdiction, to the jurisdiction for a temporary
exemption request. A temporary exemption shall contain the following
information:
1. Specific exemption or exemptions requested;
2. Type and use of outdoor light fixture involved;
3. Duration of time of the requested exemption;
4. Type of lamp and lamp lumens;
5. Total wattage of lamp or lamps and number of lamps to be used;
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations Page 16.11
6. Proposed location on premises of the outdoor light fixture(s);
7. Previous temporary exemptions, if any, and addresses of premises
thereunder;
8. Physical size of outdoor light fixture(s) and type of shielding provided;
9. Such other data and information as may be required by the building
official.
B. Approval and Duration. The Town of Thatcher shall have five business days
from the date of submission in writing of the request for temporary exemption
to act on the request. If approved, the exemption shall be valid for not more
than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of the approval. The approval
shall be renewable at the discretion of the building official upon a consideration
of all the circumstances. Each such renewed exemption shall be valid for not
more than thirty (30) additional days.
C. Denial and Appeal. If the request for temporary exemption is denied, the person
making the request will have the appeal rights provided in Section 16.10.
Section 16.9 Nonconformance.
A. Bottom-mounted outdoor advertising sign lighting shall not be used.
B. All other outdoor light fixtures lawfully installed prior to and operable on the
effective date of this Ordinance are exempt from all requirements of this Article.
There shall be no change in use or lamp type or any replacement or structural
alteration made without conforming to all applicable requirements of this Article.
Further, if the property is abandoned or if there is a change in use of the
property, the provisions of this Article will apply when the abandonment ceases
or the new use commences.
Section 16.10 Alternative Materials and Appeals.
A. The provisions of this Article are not intended to prevent the use of any design,
materials or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed by this
Article provided any such alternate has been approved. The building official may
approve any such proposed alternate provided he finds that it:
1. Provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific
requirements of this Article;
2. Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this Article; and
Town of Thatcher
Page 16.12 Article 16: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
3. Has been designed or approved by a registered professional engineer and
is supported by calculations showing that the design submitted meets that
intent of the Article and meets nationally recommended outdoor lighting
levels.
B. Appeals. Any person substantially aggrieved by any decision of the building
official made in administration of this Article has the right and responsibilities of
appeal pursuant to Section 113 of the International Building Code.
Section 16.11 Law Governing Conflicts. Where any provision of federal, state,
county, or Town statutes, codes or laws conflict with any provision of this
Article the most restrictive shall govern unless otherwise regulated by law.
(End of Article)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 17: Landscape Regulations Page 17.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 17: Landscape Regulations
Section 17.0 Purpose and Intent.
A. The purpose of this Article is to establish landscape standards applicable to all
Zoning Districts. The standards and regulations set forth in this Article shall
qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the zoning district regulations set
forth elsewhere in this Ordinance.
B. The intent of the landscaping requirements is to enhance, conserve, and stabilize
property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings and thus
create the necessary atmosphere for the orderly development of a pleasant
community. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise, and glare
through the proper placement of green plants, trees, and desert landscaping.
Section 17.1 Plant Specifications. Low water use drought tolerant and freeze
resistant plant species are encouraged.
A. Trees: Where required by this Ordinance trees shall be, upon installation, a
minimum of fifteen (15) gallon size with forty percent (40%) of the required
number of trees to be specimen trees of twenty-four (24) inch box size or larger.
B. Shrubs: Where required by this Ordinance shrubs shall be, upon installation, a
minimum of one (1) gallon size with forty percent (40%) of the required number
being five (5) gallon in size. The use of cactus and/or succulents may be
substituted for up to fifty (50%) percent of the required shrubs.
C. Organic Groundcovers: Where required by this Ordinance organic
groundcovers shall be, upon installation, a minimum of one (1) gallon size. Turf
may also be considered. An irrigation system for the turf areas shall be installed
by approved standards.
D. Inorganic Groundcovers: Where required by this Ordinance inorganic
groundcovers shall consist of decomposed granite (minimum size  minus).
Other decorative rock groundcover , in select areas, may also be considered.
E. Prohibited: The use of fruit producing species of Olive and Mulberry trees shall
be prohibited.
F. Maintenance: Required landscaping areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean,
orderly, and healthful condition. This includes proper pruning, weeding, mowing
of lawns, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of dead plants, and the regular
watering of all plantings. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a drip
irrigation system terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers or bibs to
ensure a sufficient amount of water to sustain plants within the landscaped areas,
except for all single residences and multiple residences of less than four (4) units.
Town of Thatcher
Page 17.2 Article 17: Landscape Regulations
Section 17.2 Landscape Requirements for Specific Land Uses.
A. Single Residence Zoning/Land Use.
1. Required landscaping for a subdivision development shall include the
required open space area, retention or detention basins, and the adjacent
public right-of-way.
2. The required landscaping for a subdivision development shall be installed
in proportion to the construction phasing of the project and in
accordance with the approved subdivision landscape plan.
3. Front yards and side yards of all dwellings that front on public streets
shall be landscaped except for the area that is devoted to driveways and
off-street parking space.
4. A planting plan shall not be required for single residence dwellings.
Single residences are required to have the front yard landscaping
completed within six (6) months from date of issuance of the Certificate
of Occupancy.
B. Multiple Residence Zoning/Land Use.
1. The required landscaping for a development shall include the required
common area and open space area, retention or detention basins, parking
area, and the adjacent public right-of-way as required in Section 17.3.
Installation of the required landscaping shall be in accordance with the
approved landscape plan for the development. Any part of the lot or
parcel not developed for buildings, structures, vehicular access, streets,
parking and utility areas shall be landscaped.
2. For developments with ten (10) or more dwelling units the required
landscaping shall be installed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy. For developments with fewer than ten (10) dwelling units
the required landscaping shall be installed within the first three (3) month
from date of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
3. The required rear and side yards shall contain a continuous, landscaped
buffer area having a minimum width of ten (10) feet and containing a
minimum of one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs every thirty (30) feet, or
portion thereof, to provide visual screening between adjacent uses.
Parking in these landscaped buffer areas is discouraged.
4. If the required onsite parking is adjacent to this landscaped buffer area,
then the landscaped buffer area shall be designed in a manner that will
allow the storm water to drain from the parking area into the landscaped
buffer area for harvesting the storm water.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 17: Landscape Regulations Page 17.3
5. In addition to the landscaping within the buffer area, a perimeter wall
may be required along the rear and side property lines. Vegetative
screening may be used rather than the use of a perimeter wall only when
adjacent to another multiple residence use or zoning district or adjacent
to a property zoned NC or MU. Where vegetative screening is used
in lieu of a perimeter wall the landscaped buffer area width from the
common property line should be increased by five (5) feet and the
required shrubs within the landscaped buffer area should be double the
required amount. A perimeter wall shall be required when adjacent to a
single residence zoned property.
6. If a perimeter wall is constructed it shall be a maximum of six (6) feet in
height and is encouraged to be decoratively treated on all sides to match
the architectural style and design of the development.
C. Commercial Zoning/Land Use.
1. The required landscaping for an individual site or development shall
include the retention or detention basins, parking area, buffer areas, and
the adjacent public right-of-way as required in Section 17.3. Installation
of the required landscaping shall be in accordance with the approved
landscape plan for the individual site or development and installed prior
to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy unless otherwise provided
herein. Any part of the lot area not developed for buildings, outdoor use
areas, structures, approved storage, loading and vehicular access, streets,
parking and utility areas shall be landscaped.
2. All NC and MU zoned commercial properties shall provide and
maintain a landscaped buffer area, a minimum width of ten (10) feet
along the rear and five (5) feet along the side property lines if a rear
and/or side yard setback is required. This landscaped buffer area shall
not be used for parking.
a. When required, this landscaped buffer area shall contain a
minimum of one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs every twenty-five
(25) feet, or portion thereof.
b. When required, in addition to the landscaping within the buffer
area when required, a perimeter wall shall be required along the
rear and side property lines. Vegetative screening may be used
rather than the use of a perimeter wall only when adjacent to a
multiple residence zoning district.
c. Where vegetative screening is used in lieu of a perimeter wall the
landscaped buffer area width of the side yard, from the common
property line, should be increased by five (5) feet and the
Town of Thatcher
Page 17.4 Article 17: Landscape Regulations
required shrubs should be double the required amount.
d. Installation of the required landscaping shall be completed within
the first three (3) months from date of issuance of the Certificate
of Occupancy.
3. All C-1 and C-2 zoned commercial properties shall provide and
maintain a landscaped buffer area, a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet
along the rear and eight (8) feet along the side property lines if a rear
and/or side yard setback is required.
a. When required, this landscaped area shall contain a minimum of
one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs every twenty-five (25) feet, or
portion thereof. This landscape area shall not be used for
parking, maneuvering or storage. In addition to the landscaping
within the buffer area, a perimeter wall shall be required along the
rear and side property lines when adjacent to a residential zoning
district.
D. Industrial and Public-Institutional Zoning/Land Use.
1. The required landscaping for an individual site or development shall
include the retention or detention basins, parking area, buffer areas, and
the adjacent public right-of-way as required in Section 17.3. Installation
of the required landscaping shall be in accordance with the approved
landscape plan for the individual site or development and installed prior
to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Any part of the lot area
not developed for buildings, outdoor use areas, structures, approved
storage, loading and vehicular access, streets, parking and utility areas
shall be landscaped.
2. All industrial and public-institutional zoned properties shall provide and
maintain a landscaped buffer area, a minimum width of ten (10) feet,
along the rear and side property lines, if a rear and/or side yard setback is
required.
3. When required, this landscaped buffer area shall be located on the
exterior side of any required perimeter wall and shall contain a minimum
of one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs every forty (40) feet, or portion
thereof. This landscape area shall not be used for parking, maneuvering
or outdoor storage.
Section 17.3 R.O.W., Parking Lot and Retention Basin Landscaping.
A. Specific Right-of-Way Landscaping Requirements.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 17: Landscape Regulations Page 17.5
1. U.S. Highway 70 / Principal Arterial. Any lot, parcel or development, or
portion thereof, that is adjacent to the U.S. Highway right-of-way or to a
Principal Arterial Street, as classified in the Thatcher General Plan, shall
be required to landscape that portion of the undeveloped right-of-way
adjacent to their development, measure from back of ultimate
improvements, in addition to the on-site landscaping that is required by
this Ordinance.
a. The landscape plan and plant palette shall be approved by the
Town of Thatcher.
b. Additional streetscape such as, but not limited to, benches and
trash containers may be required in accordance with the adopted
downtown streetscape plan.
2. Minor Arterial & Collector Streets. Any lot, parcel or development, or
portion thereof, that is adjacent to a Minor Arterial or Collector Street, as
classified in the Thatcher General Plan, shall be required to landscape the
undeveloped portion of the right-of-way, measured from back of
ultimate improvements, in addition to the on-site landscaping that is
required by this Ordinance.
a. The right-of-way landscaping shall be planted in a formal linear
pattern creating a tree lined street and shall, at a minimum,
consist of one (1) specimen tree and three (3) shrubs planted
every forty (40) feet or fraction thereof; exclusive of that portion
of the public rights-of-way occupied by a driveway area.
b. Additional streetscape such as, but not limited to, benches,
school bus stops, trash containers, pedestrian path and/or bike
trail may be required if the Town has an adopted streetscape plan
that identifies these amenities.
c. Individual property owners and/or Homeowner Associations
shall properly maintain all landscape materials and landscaped
areas, including that within the public rights-of-way adjacent to
their property or the development, in accordance with the
approved landscape plan, except in and along public rights-ofway
and easements where the Town of Thatcher has agreed to
provide maintenance.
3. Local & Neighborhood Streets.
a. All residential lots, parcels or developments (single residence and
multiple residence) are encouraged to provide, at a minimum, one
(1) canopy-type shade tree of fifteen (15) gallon size or greater, to
be planted in each front yard either within a landscape easement
Town of Thatcher
Page 17.6 Article 17: Landscape Regulations
at the back of the sidewalk or within the right-of-way between
the back of curb and the sidewalk if such a separation exists.
b. All commercial, industrial, and public-institutional zoned lots,
parcels or developments shall provide, at a minimum, one (1)
specimen tree and three (3) shrubs to be planted in the adjacent
public right-of-way every forty (40) feet or fraction thereof;
exclusive of that portion of the public rights-of-way occupied by
a driveway area. The right-of-way landscaping is encouraged to
be planted in a formal linear pattern creating a tree lined street.
B. Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements.
1. Amount Required. In parking lots, at least three percent (3%) of the
interior parking area shall be landscaped, exclusive of perimeter
landscaping (buffer area) and frontage landscaping. For every ten (10)
required parking spaces, or portion thereof, a minimum of one (1) tree
and two (2) shrubs shall be provided within the interior of the parking
area. Trees located in the interior of the parking area shall have a clear
trunk of at least five (5) feet and shrubs located in the interior of the
parking area a maximum height of three (3) feet for adequate visibility.
The total amount of parking lot landscaping may be reduced
proportionally if permanent shade canopy/structures are provided.
2. Screening. Vehicular parking areas adjacent to the right-of-way are
encouraged to provide screening to a height of at least three (3) feet by
either a solid decorative masonry wall or a landscaped berm or a
combination thereof. The slope of any berm should not exceed a ratio of
one to two (1:2) and shall be landscaped with ground cover to prevent
soil erosion. All landscape areas adjacent to the vehicular parking and
access areas shall be protected by a permanent vertical barrier or
containment, in order to minimize damage by vehicular traffic, and
designed with openings that will allow the storm water to drain from the
parking area into the landscape area for harvesting the storm water.
3. Location. Landscape areas shall be located and designed in such a
manner as to break up the expanse of the parking area, better define
parking circulation, and provide shade and comfort. The required
landscaping shall be located in protected areas such as along walkways, in
centrally located protected islands, at the ends of parking aisles, or
between parking spaces. Landscape areas should contain a minimum of
twenty-five (25) square feet and should have a minimum width of five (5)
feet. The landscape areas should be depressed from the surrounding
parking surface and designed with openings that will allow the storm
water to drain into the landscape area for harvesting the storm water.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 17: Landscape Regulations Page 17.7
4. Irrigation of Parking Lot Landscaping. All right-of-way street frontage,
perimeter, and interior parking area landscaping shall be provided with a
pressurized, underground irrigation system.
C. Retention Basin Landscaping.
1. Residential subdivision retention or detention basins shall be landscaped
and may qualify as open space only if they are multi-tiered, designed to
be used as an active multi-use area, and integrated into the interior of the
development. All basins to be accepted by the Town for maintenance
shall be constructed with a minimum of four to one (4:1) side slopes.
2. Commercial and industrial retention or detention basins shall be
landscaped and may qualify as open space only if they are visible from
the public right-of-way. Terracing and contouring are encouraged to
naturalize and enhance the aesthetics of the basin. Basin slopes shall not
exceed a three to one (3:1) slope.
D. Maintenance of Landscaping.
1. The maintenance of all required landscaping, whether located on the
property or within the adjoining right-of-way frontage, parks, basins, and
paths shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
2. The developer must put in place a Homeowners Association (HOA),
improvement district, or other Town approved mechanism that shall
fund the maintenance of these areas.
Section 17.4 Landscape Plan Submittal Requirements.
A. Any proposed building, building additions, or use of land that requires Site Plan
Review by the Town shall also include, either on the site plan or on a separate
sheet, information on the required landscaping in compliance with this
Ordinance and, if applicable, the Subdivision Ordinance. The landscape
information may be submitted as a separate Landscape Plan and shall be
prepared by an Arizona Registered Landscape Architect, an Arizona Certified
Nurseryman, or other approved professional. The landscape plans shall be
submitted at the time of application for rezoning, use permit, subdivision plat
approval, or at the time of building permit if none of the above applications are
required and shall at a minimum contain the following:
1. Irrigation plans.
2. Plant Location: Call out the location of all existing and proposed species
and inorganic ground covers, sidewalks, paths, curbing, fencing, walls,
benches, ramadas, fountains, and waterways. Notations should be made
Town of Thatcher
Page 17.8 Article 17: Landscape Regulations
concerning any existing trees that will be removed. For fencing and
walls, provide a graphic representation as to what is intended relative to
the fencing and wall theme.
3. Right-of-way landscaping is required. The entire area of the right-of-way,
as measured from back of ultimate improvements, between the property
line and back of curb (B.O.C.) and/or pavement except for approved
driveways, sidewalks and bike paths, shall be landscaped.
4. Plant Species: Include a plant palette, in list form, on the landscape plans
that call out all proposed plant species and inorganic ground covers.
5. Plant Sizes: Call out the specific sizes of all proposed plant and inorganic
ground covers. This information shall be included within the plant
palette list on the landscape plan.
6. Plant Quantities: Call out the exact quantities for each species of tree,
shrub and ground cover per each size and species. This information shall
be included within the plant palette list on the landscape plan.
7. Paths, Trails, Sidewalks: Indicate the location of any proposed path, trail,
or sidewalk on the landscape plan. Call out the material type and width
of the surfacing of all proposed paths, trails and walks.
8. Walls/Fencing: Call out the type and location of proposed
walls/fencing, if applicable. Indicate exact material types for all fencing
and walls proposed. A separate 24 X 36 wall/fence sheet may be
required to be submitted if the Zoning Administrator determines it to be
necessary for clarification.
9. Signage: Indicate the location of any proposed signs or freestanding
monument signs to be located within the landscape area.
10. Identify existing lots, streets, fences, walls, wells, or other features as may
be applicable.
11. Identify the line of sight requirements of the Town, County and State.
12. Identify the name of the developer, project engineer, and landscape
architect/designer on the plan.
B. All Site Plans and/or Landscape Plans submitted shall be reviewed and approved
by the Town prior to the issuance of a Building Permit.
(End of Article)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities Page 18.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 18: Wireless Communication Facilities
Section 18.0 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this Article is to establish uniform standards and procedures to
manage the development, siting, installation, and operation of wireless
communications facilities in compliance with the Federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996. These regulations are intended to provide for appropriate
development of wireless communication facilities to provide services within the
Town in a manner that will protect and promote public health and safety,
preserve the Towns residential character and uncluttered appearance and
prevent visual blight.
B. This Article shall apply to all new wireless communications facilities and the
renewal, expansion and/or alteration of any existing Wireless Communication
Facility (WCF), including the following:
1. Amateur or Ham radio facilities;
2. Over the air reception devices (OTARD) and satellite earth stations;
3. Radio and television broadcast and transmitting facilities.
Section 18.1 Conformance with Applicable Codes.
A. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations
of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), and any other agency of the state or federal government
with the authority to regulate towers and antennas, and the provisions of this
Article. The following provisions are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or method of installation not specifically prescribed by this Article,
provided any such alternate has been approved in writing by the Zoning
Administrator. As new wireless communication technology develops, the
Zoning Administrator shall consider any state of the art technology that is
consistent with the intent of the Ordinance.
Section 18.2 Application and Submittal Requirements.
A. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for any WCF including wireless
communication towers and antennas. An Administrative Use Permit shall be
required for any amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas. All Use Permits shall
be in accordance with Section 3.4 of this Ordinance.
B. All wireless communication towers and antennas (including pole, rooftop and
building mounted) shall submit the following information:
Town of Thatcher
Page 18.2 Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities
1. Inventory. An inventory list and map of existing WCF(s) operated
within 2 miles of the proposed site, to include specific information as to
location, height, and design of each facility.
2. Report on Alternatives. A report explaining why the WCF is needed at
the requested location. If the applicant is seeking to construct a new
monopole, applicant shall explain why co-location or location on another
kind of support structure (including alternative poles or buildings) is not
feasible, including efforts made to develop such an alternative. If the
Town has requested that the applicant co-locate its WCF on a site,
applicant shall explain why co-location is not feasible, including efforts
made to develop such an alternative.
3. WCF Plans. A map of the service area for the proposed facility. Plans
shall include a fully-dimensioned diagram of the proposed facility and
antennae, including mounting style, number of antennas planned, height,
shape, size and nature of construction. The plans for a monopole must
provide sufficient detail to demonstrate that the structure will be able to
accommodate at least one (1) other similar telecommunications provider
in addition to the applicant. The plans shall include a diagram showing
the separation between the proposed WCF and any existing WCF(s) on
the same support structure or site, if co-location is planned.
4. Site Plans. A fully-dimensioned site/landscaping plan that includes, at a
minimum, the following information: specific placement of the proposed
tower, equipment shelters, and any other WCF on the site, setbacks from
adjacent property lines, adjacent land uses and zoning, proposed means
of access, the location of existing structures, trees, and other significant
site features identifying those features proposed to be removed, the type
and locations of fencing and plant materials proposed to screen WCF
components; and the proposed materials and color(s) for the WCF
including a description of efforts to blend the WCF with the surrounding
area.
5. Visual Analysis. Photo-simulations showing views of the proposed
facility from surrounding residential properties and public rights-of-way
at varying distances with a map indicating the locations from used for the
analysis and their distances from the site.
6. Fees. In addition to any other fees required by this Zoning Code,
applicants shall pay a permit fee as established by resolution of the
Council, to cover the reasonable actual cost and a reasonable
administrative fee for consulting services required by the Town to
evaluate any technical aspect of the WCF application.
7. Additional Information. Any other information required by the Town
for issuance of a use permit pursuant to Section 3.4 of this Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities Page 18.3
C. Amateur (ham) radio towers and antennas, permitted as an accessory use in all
single residence zoning districts and in the Manufactured Home Zoning District,
shall submit the following information:
1. A fully-dimensioned site plan showing the location of the proposed
tower and antennas in relation to the residence, property lines, setbacks
and accessory structures.
2. Specification cut sheet for proposed retractable tower and antennas that
at a minimum details the full height and retractable height of the tower,
the dimension of the antennas, the method of anchoring and/or
attachment.
Section 18.3 Use Permit and Findings.
A. The Council, may approve or approve with conditions, modify, deny or revoke a
Conditional Use Permit required pursuant to Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. The
following additional findings are required for approval of a Conditional Use
Permit for wireless communications (towers and antennas):
1. The proposed use conforms with the specific purposes of this Article
and any special standards applicable to the proposed facility.
2. The applicant has made good faith and reasonable efforts to locate a
WCF on an existing support structure other than a monopole or to
accomplish co-location.
3. The applicant has made good faith and reasonable efforts to locate a
WCF on another kind of structure within the needed service area.
4. The visibility of a monopole will be reduced to the extent feasible by
decreasing its height, increasing its setback, placing it strategically in
relationship to other structures, using antennae designs which minimize
horizontal projections, and/or by undertaking other measures.
5. The monopole provides an important link in applicants service area
build-out and in providing services to Town residents.
B. The Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with conditions, deny, or
revoke an Administrative Use Permit pursuant to Section 3.4 of this Ordinance.
An Administrative Use Permit for amateur (ham) radio towers shall be subject to
the following conditions and requirements.
Town of Thatcher
Page 18.4 Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities
1. Such structures shall not be located in the required front yard, or required
street side side yard, or in front of the front line of the dwelling or
principal building; and
2. Such structure shall in no case be located nearer than five (5) feet to any
side or rear property line; and
3. Such structures does not exceed a height of eighteen (18) feet within a
required side or rear yard; and
4. Such structures does not exceed a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in
height measured from grade if located within the buildable area of the
lot; and
5. Not more than two (2) such structure shall be erected per lot or parcel;
and
6. The tower and antenna shall be retractable.
C. A communication tower and antennas designed and used specifically for public
safety purposes shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and are exempt
from the Conditional Use Permit process. Communication towers and antennas
for public safety purposes and which are also utilized by commercial
communication companies shall be considered commercial communication
towers and are subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
Section 18.4 Permit Terms, Limitations and Waivers.
A. An Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit for a WCF shall have a
term of ten (10) years, except an Administrative Use Permit for a temporary
wireless communications facility shall have a term of up to one hundred-twenty
(120) days, subject to termination or expiration as provided for in this Article or
under the specific conditions of the permit.
1. A permittee may apply for a renewal permit under the Code as it may
exist at such time within six (6) months prior to expiration of its existing
permit, except no renewal of an Administrative Use Permit for a
temporary wireless communications facility shall be allowed.
2. Renewal of an Administrative Use Permit for a public safety
communications tower shall be granted in successive terms for up to
thirty (30) years, where permittee demonstrates compliance with
applicable rules and regulations, existing permit conditions, and
continued need for the public use.
3. When a use permit is granted for a co-location on a facility with an
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities Page 18.5
existing use permit, the action of granting the new use permit shall
extend the existing use permit so that they will expire simultaneously.
B. Any Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit issued pursuant to
this Article shall expire automatically if the use is not commenced within one (1)
year after the date of approval of such permit.
C. If use of the facility is discontinued for over ninety (90) days, the permit shall
expire and permittee shall remove the facility or the Town may cause the facility
to be removed at the expense of the permittee/owner of the facility.
1. Permittee shall maintain the WCF, including paint and landscaping, to
standards imposed by the Town at the time of granting the permit. If the
permittee fails to maintain the facility, the Town may undertake
maintenance at the expense of the permittee or terminate the permit.
2. The applicant shall notify the Town in writing of all changes in
ownership of the facility within sixty (60) days of the change.
D. The Council may waive or modify requirements of this Article upon finding that
strict compliance would result in noncompliance with applicable federal or state
law.
E. Upon compliance with the requirements of this article and stipulations of the
Conditional Use Permit or Administrative Use Permit, whichever the case may
be, the Building Inspector shall issue a permit for the installation of the WCF or
the amateur tower and/or antenna to be installed per the approved application.
Section 18.5 General Requirements.
A. In Single Residence Zoning Districts. All WCFs, except for amateur (ham)
radio towers and antennas, shall require a Conditional Use Permit and shall be
limited to the following locations:
1. On property owned by the state, municipality, county, public school
district, or community college district, if the primary use of such property
is a governmental use (not wireless communication use).
2. On property owned by a church if the primary use of the property is for
worship or social use (not wireless communication use).
3. On property owned by an electric utility company, if the primary use of
such property is an electric utility use (not wireless communication use).
B. Support Structures. Support structures for WCFs shall comply with all
applicable building and engineering codes. In addition, the following standards
Town of Thatcher
Page 18.6 Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities
apply:
1. A building used as a support structure for a WCF must be an existing
non-residential building. For purposes of this Article, Non-Residential
Building shall mean no person is residing in the building.
2. A monopole or tower used as a support structure for a WCF shall be
sunk into the ground and/or attached to a foundation. All new
monopoles and towers must be constructed to allow for co-location by
other wireless communications providers. If less than the maximum
height permitted within such zoning district, the monopole or tower
must have suitable footing and be capable of bolting an additional
vertical section to a total height permissible. A monopole may be
mounted on a trailer or a portable foundation if the use is for a
temporary WCF.
3. A replacement WCF electric utility pole diameter at its base, middle and
top shall not exceed the existing pole diameter at such points by more
than twenty-five percent (25%).
4. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in
height and no more than eight (8) feet in height and shall be nonclimbable.
Above ground equipment cabinets shall be completely
screened from view by a compatible solid wall or view obscuring fence.
5. Towers shall be painted or treated to minimize the contrast of the tower
against the horizon.
C. Height. Maximum height restrictions for all types of WCF are specified in the
following Table No.21.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities Page 18.7
Table No. 21 - Maximum Height of WCF
WCF Type of Support
Structure
Zoning Districts
Industrial Commercial Residential OS & P-I
Monopole (measured
from natural grade)
125 125 not allowed 125
Monopole - temporary 125 125 not allowed not allowed
Existing Non-
Residential Building
10 above
roofline
10 above
roofline
10 above
roofline
5 above roofline
Existing Verticality height of
existing
verticality
height of
existing
verticality
height of
existing
verticality
height of existing
verticality
Alternative WCF/
Recreational Ball Field
Light Pole
60 60 60 60
Alternative WCF/
Other Light Pole
height of
approved
lighting use
height of
approved
lighting use
height of
approved
lighting use
height of
approved lighting
use
Alternative WCF/
Building Element
10 above
permissible
bldg. height
10 above
permissible
bldg. height
10 above
permissible
bldg. height
(OS) not allowed
(P-I) 10 above
permissible bldg.
height
Alternative
WCF/Stealth Structure
40 40 40 40
Replacement
WCF/Electric Utility
pole
original pole
height
original pole
height
original pole
height
original pole
height
Public Safety
Communication Tower
125
125 not allowed 125
Satellite Dish Antenna
(2 meters and under)
5 above
roofline, if
roof mounted
5 above
roofline, if roof
mounted
groundmounted
only
(OS) not allowed
(P-I) ground
mounted only
Satellite Dish Antenna
(under 1 meter)
2 above
roofline
2 above
roofline
2 above
roofline
2 above roofline
Satellite Earth Station
Antenna (2 meters or
larger)
5 above
roofline, if
roof mounted
5 above
roofline, if roof
mounted
groundmounted
only
(OS) not allowed
(P-I) ground
mounted only
Amateur Radio Tower not allowed not allowed 18 - 35 not allowed
Notes:
D. Setbacks and Exemptions.
1. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or
antenna complies with zoning district development regulations, including
but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements and
Town of Thatcher
Page 18.8 Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities
other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control,
even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels
within such lot.
2. Any equipment cabinet or building constructed for the WCF use shall
comply with the required minimum setbacks for the Zoning District in
which it is located. Towers shall be set back a distance equal to at least
one hundred percent (100%) of the height of the tower from any
adjoining lot line. Facilities that are located on street lights, traffic signal
poles, sixty-nine (69) kilovolt or above, and existing electrical utility poles,
are exempt from setback requirements.
3. The Council may waive or reduce setback requirements for monopoles
or replacement WCF electricity poles located on electric substation sites,
subject to the following conditions:
a. Permittee shall plant and maintain landscaping per approved
landscape plan on such site, and the site shall meet landscaping
design and maintenance standards of the Town of Thatcher.
b. Monopoles shall be setback from adjacent residential properties
to the maximum extent feasible.
E. Screening and Aesthetics.
1. A building-mounted WCF shall be screened from residential views and
public rights-of-way in a manner architecturally compatible with the
building.
2. A WCF mounted on an existing verticality, alternative WCF/Recreational
ball field light pole, alternative WCF/Other light pole, or replacement
WCF electric utility pole shall be camouflaged from residential views and
public rights-of-way in a manner architecturally compatible with the
structure.
3. The design, screening or camouflaging of an alternative WCF/Building
element or alternative WCF/Stealth structure, shall be subject to review
and approval by the Zoning Administrator.
4. A WCF, including all components thereof, shall be painted when this
would serve the purposes of architectural compatibility or camouflage.
The Zoning Administrator shall approve the paint colors, which must be
non-reflective.
5. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall use
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them
into the natural setting and surrounding development.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities Page 18.9
6. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna
and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be painted or
treated such that they match the color and/or texture of the supporting
structure.
7. Rooftop mounted equipment shall be screened from off-site views to the
extent possible by solid screen walls or the building parapet. Screening
shall be integrated into and architecturally compatible with the building
design.
8. Building mounted antennas shall be mounted a minimum of one (1) foot
below the top of the building wall, shall not be extended more than
twelve (12) inches from the face of the building, and shall be either
treated or painted to match the color and texture of the building.
9. Artificial lighting of a WCF, including its components, is prohibited,
unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other
applicable authority. A motion-sensor light may be used for security
purposes, if the beam is directed downwards, shielded from adjacent
properties and kept off when personnel are present at night.
10. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna, on a tower or on any portion of
the premises leased for wireless communication use except that each
WCF shall be identified by a permanently installed plaque or marker, no
larger than 4" by 6", clearly identifying the providers name, address and
emergency phone number.
F. Equipment Cabinets and Buildings.
1. Equipment cabinets shall be located within the building or structure
upon which antennae are placed, if technically feasible. Otherwise,
equipment cabinets and associated equipment such as air conditioning
units and emergency generators shall be completely screened from view
by a wall or landscaping, as approved by the Town. Any wall shall be
architecturally compatible with the building or immediate surrounding
area.
2. An equipment cabinet shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and a
building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
a. An equipment cabinet or building may contain an area of up to
three hundred (300) square feet for a single provider or six
hundred (600) square feet for multiple wireless providers.
b. An equipment cabinet or building for servicing a public safety
communications tower may exceed the size limitations set forth
Town of Thatcher
Page 18.10 Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities
herein.
3. All equipment shall be unmanned. Equipment storage buildings or
cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes.
G. Building Codes and Safety Standards. A WCF shall be constructed and maintained
in a structurally sound manner and comply with applicable local building codes
and standards of the Electronic Industries Association. If, upon inspection, the
Town determines that a WCF fails to comply with said codes and standards, the
Town shall provide a notice to the owner, and the owner shall have thirty (30)
days to bring such facility into compliance. If the owner fails to bring the facility
into compliance the Town may terminate the permit and remove the facility at
the owners expense.
H. Noise. WCF and any related equipment, including backup generators and air
conditioning units, shall not generate continuous noise in excess of forty (40)
decibels (DBA) measured at the property line of any adjacent residential
property, and shall not generate continuous noise in excess of fifty (50) DBA
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and forty (40) DBA during the hours
of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. measured at the property line of any non-residential
adjacent property. Backup generators shall only be operated during power
outages and for testing and maintenance purposes.
I. Co-Location. The applicant and owner of any site on which a WCF is located
shall cooperate and exercise good faith in co-locating a WCF on the same
support structures or site. Good faith shall include sharing technical information
to evaluate the feasibility of co-location, and may include negotiations for
erection of a replacement support structure to accommodate co-location. A
competitive conflict to co-location or financial burden caused by sharing
information normally will not be considered as an excuse to the duty of good
faith.
1. In the event a dispute arises as to whether a permittee has exercised good
faith in accommodating other users, the Town may require the applicant
to obtain a third party technical study at applicants expense. The Town
may review any information submitted by applicant and permittee(s) in
determining whether good faith has been exercised.
2. No co-location may be required where the shared use would or does
result in significant interference in the broadcast or reception capabilities
of the existing telecommunications facilities or failure of the existing
WCF(s) to meet federal standards for emissions.
3. Failure to comply with co-location requirements when feasible or
cooperate in good faith as provided for in this Article is grounds for
denial of a permit request or revocation of an existing permit.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities Page 18.11
Section 18.6 Specific Requirements for Satellite Dishes.
A. Satellite Earth Stations and large satellite dishes that are two (2) meters or larger,
in non-residential zoning districts, shall meet the following conditions:
1. If roof-mounted, it shall be screened behind a parapet wall or cornice
and shall not extend above the roofline of the building by more than five
(5) feet to preserve the character of the building.
2. If ground-mounted, it shall be installed in the rear of the lot and away
from street side yards and screened from view of adjacent properties and
streets by means of landscaping or fencing, to minimize visual clutter.
Any wall shall have a color and texture compatible with the primary
building on site.
3. Meet the district setback requirements for mechanical structures.
B. Large satellite dish antennas, two (2) meters and less in size, and OTARDs, one
(1) meter and less in size, located in residential zoning districts shall meet the
following conditions:
1. The antenna shall be no larger than that required by current technology
to receive or transmit desired communications, and shall not exceed a
diameter of two (2) meters.
2. In single residence zoning districts, no more than one (1) dish may be
located on any lot.
3. In multiple residence zoning districts, no more than one (1) large satellite
dish antenna may be located on a lot with less than ten (10) units, and no
more than two (2) large satellite dish antennas may be located on any lot
with ten (10) or more units.
4. Meet the district setback requirements for mechanical structures.
5. Screened or camouflaged to the extent feasible, and installed in the rear
of the residence or building.
6. Large satellite dish antennas shall only be ground mounted. Roofmounted
OTARDs one (1) meter or less in size may be roof-mounted
provided that the height is the minimum necessary to receive an
acceptable quality signal.
(End of Article)
Town of Thatcher
Page 18.12 Article 18: Wireless Communication Facilities
(This Page Left Blank Intentionally)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 19: Nonconforming Provisions Page 19.1
CHAPTER 153, ARTICLE 19: Nonconforming Provisions
Section 19.0 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation and limit the
development and continued existence of nonconforming buildings, uses, lots,
and signs. These regulations are designed to protect the rights of legally existing
nonconforming buildings, uses, lots, and signs under specific conditions and
within certain parameters. It is also the intent of this article to curtail substantial
investment in non-conformities and to bring about their eventual improvement
or elimination in order to preserve the integrity of this Ordinance, promote
adopted plans and policies, and enhance the character of the Town.
B. Any use or activity lawfully conducted under County zoning regulations at the
effective date of annexation or under previous zoning regulations in effect at the
adoption of this Ordinance, or any amendment, shall be considered a legal
nonconforming use under this Ordinance.
Section 19.1 Limitation on Buildings. A legal nonconforming building (which
shall also include structures or fences) may continue only in the manner and to
the extent that it existed at the time of such enactment, amendment, or
annexation, subject to the following provisions:
A. Routine repairs or maintenance of legal nonconforming buildings is permitted.
B. Any legal nonconforming building which has been damaged by fire, windstorm,
flood, or some similar abnormal and identifiable event or decay may be
reconstructed and used as before provided that a building permit is secured,
reconstruction is started within six (6) months from the date of damage, and
such reconstruction is diligently pursued to completion. Such restoration shall
not increase the floor space over that which existed at the time the building
became nonconforming. The Zoning Administrator may determine that such
delay in reconstruction was caused by unforeseen circumstances beyond the
control of the owner of the premises and permit a reasonable extension of time
for reconstruction.
C. A legal nonconforming building which ceases to be used for a period of one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall lose all nonconforming status and
shall be retrofitted to comply with all applicable building codes and this Zoning
Ordinance.
D. Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit therefor, no building which becomes
nonconforming upon the passage of this Ordinance or which becomes
nonconforming due to amendment to this Ordinance shall be built unless
construction has taken place thereon to the extent of at least five hundred dollars
($500) in replaceable value by the date on which this Ordinance or said
Town of Thatcher
Page 19.2 Article 19: Nonconforming Provisions
amendment becomes effective. Replaceable value means the expenditure
necessary to duplicate the materials and labor at market prices.
Section 19.2 Limitation on Uses. A legal nonconforming use may continue only
in the manner and to the extent that it existed at the time of such enactment,
amendment, or annexation, subject to the following provisions:
A. A legal nonconforming use which ceases to be used for a period of one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days, or is replaced by a conforming use, shall lose all
nonconforming status.
B. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to a different nonconforming use.
This shall not prevent a name change or change in ownership of the same
nonconforming use.
C. Nonconforming uses shall not be increased nor expanded except where a health
or safety official, acting in his official capacity, requires such increase or
expansion. Such expansion shall be no greater than that which is required to
comply with the minimum requirements as set forth by the health or safety
official.
Section 19.3 Limitation on Lots.
A. Routine maintenance of a legal nonconforming lot is permitted.
B. This Ordinance shall not prohibit the continued occupancy of a building that has
been legally constructed on a nonconforming lot.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, a single residence
dwelling may be constructed on any lot of record in any zoning district in which
dwellings are permitted, even though such lot fails to meet the area or width
requirements for single residence dwellings within the zone. Where two (2) or
more contiguous lots of record, having contiguous frontage, are owned by the
same person at the time of the passage of this Ordinance, the land included in
the lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel and no portion of said
parcel shall be used as a dwelling site or sold which does not meet the lot area
and lot width requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located.
Yard dimensions and other requirements not involving lot area or lot width shall
conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which the lot is located.
Section 19.4 Limitation on Signs.
A. Legal Nonconforming Signs:
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Article 19: Nonconforming Provisions Page 19.3
1. Legal nonconforming sign(s) shall mean a sign that lawfully exists at the
time of the enactment of this Ordinance which does not conform to the
regulations as specified in this Ordinance.
2. A legal nonconforming sign may continue to be utilized in perpetuity
only in the manner and to the extent that it existed at the time of the
adoption of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto.
3. A legal nonconforming sign may not be altered in any manner not in
conformance with this Ordinance. This does not apply to the normal
repair, maintenance or changing of copy on the sign provided that
structural alterations are not required as part of the repairs, maintenance,
or changing of copy.
4. Any sign that becomes nonconforming subsequent to the effective date
of this Ordinance, either by reason of annexation to the Town or
amendment to this Ordinance, shall be subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, legal nonconforming
signs that are located on a parcel of property which is severed from a
larger parcel of property and acquired by a public entity for public use by
condemnation, purchase or dedication may be relocated on the remaining
parcel without extinguishing the legal nonconforming status of that sign
provided that the nonconforming sign:
a. Is not increased in area or height;
b. Remains structurally unchanged except for reasonable repairs or
alterations;
c. Is placed in the same relative position on the remaining property
that it occupied prior to the relocation; and
d. Is relocated in a manner so as to comply with all applicable safety
requirements.
B. Signs For a Legal Nonconforming Use:
1. New or additional signs for a nonconforming use shall not be permitted.
2. A nonconforming sign for a nonconforming use which ceases to be used
for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or is
suspended by a conforming use, shall be considered a prohibited sign and
shall be removed or brought into conformance upon establishment of a
conforming use.
C. Alteration or Removal of Nonconforming Signs:
Town of Thatcher
Page 19.4 Article 19: Nonconforming Provisions
1. A nonconforming sign structure shall not be re-erected, relocated or
replaced unless it is brought into compliance with the requirements of
this Ordinance; except as provided for in the above Sec 17.4 A(5).
2. Any construction permit which invokes Certificate of Occupancy
requirements shall specify and require that any nonconforming sign
located within the boundaries of the development site authorized by said
permit shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, provided that if the nonconforming sign is a type of sign
prohibited under Article 15 of this Ordinance, it shall be removed.
(End of Article)
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.1
Glossary
A. General Terms. For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Zoning Ordinance,
certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
1. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and
derivative forms; words used in the singular include the plural; and words in the
plural include the singular.
2. The word shall is mandatory.
3. The word may is permissive.
4. The word person includes an individual, tenant, lessee, firm, co-partnership,
joint venture, corporations, associations, estate, trust, receiver, or and any other
group or combination acting as a singular entity, including the federal
government, another Town, county, or school district, except as exempt by law.
5. The following words or terms when applied in this Ordinance may be used
interchangeably unless contrary to the circumstances: lot, plat, parcel or premise;
and building applies to the word structure.
B. Specific Terms. The following additional words and phrases shall, for the purpose of
this Ordinance, have the following meanings:
Abandoned or Junk Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle or any major portion thereof that is
unlicensed and is incapable of movement under its own power and will remain so without major
repair, including but not limited to repair of the differential, transmission, head, engine block, or
oil pan.
Abandonment of Use. The relinquishment of a property or the cessation of a use or activity
by the owner or tenant for a period of one year, except for the purpose of remodeling,
maintaining or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility.
Abut. To physically touch or border upon or to share a common boundary, property line, or
right-of-way. Parcels having only one common corner are not considered as abutting parcels.
Access or Access Way. The place, means, or ways by which pedestrians, vehicles, or both shall
have safe, adequate, and usable ingress/egress to a property or use. A private access is an access
not in public ownership and controlled by means of deed, dedication, or easement.
Accessory Structure or Dwelling. A detached subordinate structure or building, situated on
the same lot or building site, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of a principal use
of the main building or premise.
A
Page A.2 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Accessory Use. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and is conducted on the same lot with
the principal use or building.
Acre. A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet.
Addition. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
Adjoining Lot or Land. A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line
with another lot or parcel of land.
Administrative Decision. Any decision on a development application made by the Zoning
Administrator or his/her authorized representative pursuant to this Ordinance.
Adult Oriented Business. This term is synonymous with sexually oriented business" and
means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult novelty store, adult
theater, adult motion picture theater, adult video store, escort agency, nude model studio, or
sexual encounter center.
1. Adult Arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are
regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any
one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis upon matters depicting, describing or exhibiting specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
2. Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store. A commercial
establishment that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade,
or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a
significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or
maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for sale or rental for
any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
a. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures, video
reproductions, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations,
which are characterized by their emphasis upon the depiction,
description, exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
b. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.
3. Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment
that regularly features:
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.3
a. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or
b. Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
c. Films, motion pictures, computer simulations, holograms, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which are
characterized by the depiction, description, exhibition or display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
4. Adult Motel. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that:
a. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the
depiction, description, exhibition or display of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public
right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; and, either
b. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten
(10) hours; or
c. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
5. Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, holograms, computer simulations, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
6. Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features persons who appear nude or semi-nude, or
in live performances characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or by specified sexual activities.
7. Adult Video Store. See Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Store.
8. Escort. A person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees or
offers to act as a companion, guide, date or to privately model lingerie or to
privately perform a striptease.
9. Escort Agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes
for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Page A.4 Appendix A: (insert document name)
10. Nude, Nudity or a State of Nudity. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque
covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
11. Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person (or persons) who appears seminude,
in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas and is provided
to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. A nude
model studio does not mean a modeling class, or the facility for such class,
operated:
a. By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Arizona; a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
b. By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
c. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for
viewing.
12. Semi-Nude or in a Semi-Nude Condition. The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the
showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire
lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of
the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt,
leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed
in whole or in part.
13. Sexual Encounter Center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: a place where
two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of
"specified sexual activities". The definition of sexual encounter center or any
sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by
the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
14. Specified Anatomical Areas. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
a. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered; or
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.5
b. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
15. Specified Sexual Activities. Any of the following:
a. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
anus, or female breasts;
b. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
c. Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities
set forth in subdivisions (1) through (2) above.
Agricultural Animals. The following animals, other than household pets, are considered
accessory agricultural animals to an agricultural use, whether kept and maintained for production
and sale, family food production, education or for personal enjoyment. Agricultural animals are
classified as large and small animals. Examples of the types of animals in the different categories
include, but are not limited to:
1. Large animals: horses, burros, donkeys and mules, miniature horses, cattle, sheep,
goats, and ratites.
2. Small animals: rabbits, chinchillas, and poultry.
Agricultural Building. A structure designed and constructed to house farm implements, hay,
grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products. This structure shall not be a place of
human habitation or a place used by the public.
Agricultural Facility. An open field or enclosed building with transparent walls or roof
whether publicly or privately owned including, but not limited to, greenhouses used for the
production of horticultural products, and the pasturing of animals.
Airport. An area of land that is used, or intended to be used, for aircraft to land on or take-off
from, including its buildings and facilities, if any.
Alley. A dedicated right-of-way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
Alteration. Any architectural, structural, or use change to a building that requires a permit
under the Building Code of the Town.
Alternative WC/Recreational Ball Field Light Pole. A light pole that is constructed and
used to provide a useful and appropriate recreational ball field lighting function as well as a
wireless communications facilities (WCF) function.
Page A.6 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Alternative WC/Other Light Pole. A Light pole that is constructed and used to provide a
useful and appropriate lighting function, other than a recreational ball field lighting function, as
well as a wireless communications facilities (WCF) function. Examples include streetlight,
parking and security light poles.
Alternative WCF/Stealth Structure. A structure designed to conceal and/or camouflage
wireless communications facilities (WCF), such as an artificial saguaro, artificial tree, or
sculpture. An alternative WCF stealth structure does not include a monopole with an attached
flag or other minimal design feature.
Alternative WCF/Building Element. A building element designed to conceal and/or
camouflage wireless communications facilities (WCF), such as a clock tower, cupola, or
church steeple.
Amateur Radio Tower. A free standing or building-mounted structure, including any base,
tower or pole, antenna and appurtenances, intended for airway communication purposes by a
person holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) License issued by a Federal Communications
Commission.
Amendment. A change in the wording, application, or substance of this Ordinance, or any
change, deletion, or addition in the zoning district boundaries or classifications of the zoning
map.
Animal Hospital. The place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and
the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care related to medical or surgical treatment.
Antenna. Any device on a tower, building, or structure that radiates or captures
electromagnetic waves for the purpose of communicating information.
1. Panel Antenna. A relatively flat rectangular device that transmits or receives
communications signals in directional pattern of less than 360 degrees.
2. Parabolic Antenna. A dish shaped device that transmits or receives
communications signals in a specific directional pattern.
3. Whip Antenna. A long thin device that transmits or receives communications
signals in a 360 degree radial pattern and is minimally viewable.
Antique Shop. A retail business specializing in the sale of merchandise made in, or typical of, a
previous era. Typical merchandise includes, but is not limited to, furniture, silverware, glassware,
and other collectibles. Items shall not be donated for resale, but may be displayed on
consignment.
Apartment Unit. One (1) or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities comprising
an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a building containing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
Applicant. A person submitting an application for development, rezoning or other action.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.7
A.R.S. The abbreviation for the Arizona Revised Statutes.
Assisted Living Facility. A facility consisting of independent and semi-independent dwelling
units, each occupied by not more than two (2) residents per dwelling unit, at least one of whom
is 55 years of age or older and providing assisted-living services to deal with the activities of daily
living including congregate meals program in a common dining area, recreational facilities, and
personal service facilities; but excludes institutional care such as medical or nursing care.
Attached Building. Any structure sealed from the elements with a permanent slab foundation
and architecturally integrated with the main structure.
Auto Body Shop. The general repair, alteration, rebuilding, or reconditioning of vehicles body,
frame, upholstery, interior or paint work.
Automobile Repair (general). Servicing of motor vehicles including tire repair, battery
changing, engine rebuilding and transmission repair, storage of merchandise and supplies related
to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of lubricants, automobile washing and lubrication, but
excluding body work and painting of vehicles, or other similar activities.
Automobile Service Station. A convenience use having pumps and storage tanks or other
facilities from which gasoline, diesel or alternative fuels are dispensed into motor vehicles.
Automobile Wrecking Yard. See Junkyard.
Awning. An architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration
and is wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. An awning is comprised of a
lightweight, rigid skeleton structure over which a covering is attached.
Baby-sitting. Any residential dwelling in which child care is regularly provided for
compensation for no more than four (4) children who do not reside in the home.
Bar. An establishment including, but not limited to, a cocktail lounge, discotheque, nightclub or
tavern, the main use of which is to serve alcoholic beverages to the public for on-site
consumption; meeting all requirements for certification and licensing by the proper State
agencies and Town departments. Such a facility may serve food, provide dancing and
entertainment.
Bed & Breakfast Establishment. A dwelling in which the occupants of the dwelling provide,
for compensation, the short term lodging and meals for guests, occupying not more than four
(4) guest rooms, located within the same principal dwelling. Any dwelling in which more than
four (4) guest rooms are provided shall be deemed a hotel.
Board. The Town of Thatcher Board of Adjustment.
B
Page A.8 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Boarding House. A dwelling in which three (3), four (4), or five (5) rooms are occupied as
guest rooms and in which food may be served to the occupants thereof. Any dwelling in which
more than five (5) rooms are occupied as guest rooms shall be deemed to be a motel or hotel. A
boarding house shall not include buildings for persons requiring physical or mental care by
reasons of age, infirmity, or disease.
Buildable Area. The portion of a lot, that is within the envelope formed by the required
setbacks. See Yard, Required.
Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns
or walls for the shelter, use, occupancy, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of
any kind, with the exception of dog houses, playhouses and similar structures.
Building Area. The total areas taken on a horizontal plane at the mean grade level of the
principal buildings and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, steps, roof
overhangs, and balconies.
Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from natural grade or the
average elevation of the finished grade within (20) twenty feet of the structure to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the highest point of a mansard roof, or to the highest
gable of a pitch or hip roof.
Building Official. An employee of the Town authorized to issue building permits and
Certificates of Occupancy, to administer all applicable construction codes, and enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance.
Building Permit. An authorization to construct, repair, alter, or add on to a building or
structure as issued by the Building Official and authorized by the Zoning Administrator.
Building, Principal. A building or structure in which the principal or dominant use of the
property is conducted.
Building Setback Line. See Setback.
Cargo Container. A standardized, reusable shipping vessel that is or appears to be originally,
specifically or formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or
transportation of freight articles, goods or commodities. Also frequently referred to as a sea
container.
Carport. A roofed structure that may be attached or unattached to the principal structure
providing space for the parking or storage of motor vehicles and entirely open on two (2) or
more sides. Enclosed storage facilities may be provided as part of a carport.
C
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.9
Carport, Portable. A non-permanent structure designed as a shelter for motor vehicles, boats
and similar personal property.
Certificate of Occupancy. A document issued by the Building Official allowing the occupancy
or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used
in compliance with all the applicable codes of the Town of Thatcher.
Ceiling Height. Clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling.
Child Care, Home Based. Any single residence dwelling in which childcare is regularly
provided for compensation for no more than six (6) children who do not reside in the home
provided there shall be no more than a total of ten (10) children. The home-based child care
center shall meet all requirements for certification by the appropriate State agencies and Town
departments.
Child Care Center (DHS Licensed Child Care Center). Any facility in which the care,
supervision and guidance of a child or children are regularly provided for compensation for
eleven (11) or more children. The child care center shall meet all requirements for certification
by the appropriate State agencies and Town departments.
Clinic. An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one or
more medical practitioners typically physicians, dentists, psychologists, or social workers and
where patients are not usually lodged overnight.
Club. A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interest,
and activities, and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees
and dues, regular meetings, and constitutions and bylaws. Does not refer to and is not
associated with an establishment or a physical building.
Cluster Development / Cluster
Residential. A development design
technique that concentrates
development/buildings in specific areas on
a site, rather than distributing them evenly,
thereby allowing the remaining land to be
retained as natural open space for the
preservation of sensitive lands, parks, and
public open space areas.
Co-Location. The use of a single support structure and/or site by more than one
telecommunications provider.
Commission. The Town of Thatcher Planning and Zoning Commission.
Common Ownership. Ownership by one or more individuals in any form of ownership.
24 Clustered Lots
50% Open Space
24 Conventional Lots
No Open Space
Page A.10 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Common Access. A commonly shared or used pedestrian or vehicular way that connects or
serves two (2) or more properties.
Conditional Use. A conditional use is a use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and
standards for the location or operation of such use as specified in this Ordinance.
Condominium. Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership with the
remainder designated for common ownership by the owners of the separate portions. Real
estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested
in the unit owners.
Contiguous. See Abut.
Convenience Market. A small-scale (less than 5,000 square feet) retail establishment the
primary purpose of which is the sale of fresh or packaged food, dry goods, and nonprescription
medicine primarily to customers from the immediate neighborhood.
Corral. The fenced area for the confinement of large agricultural animals.
Courtyard. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot
and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
Dedication. The conveyance of land by its owner to the Town for any general or public use.
Density. A ratio expressing the number of dwelling units, lots or spaces per acre.
Density Transfer. Permitted unused allowable densities in one area to be used in another area
of the same development. (Example: within a subdivision clustering of homes on smaller lots to
retain larger open space areas.).
Detention Basin. A stormwater storage facility that temporarily stores surface runoff and
releases it at a controlled rate through a positive outlet.
Developer. A person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or entity that
desires to improve or otherwise engage in any development of property within the Town of
Thatcher, including the owner of the property and any agents acting on behalf of the owner.
Development Project. Any residential, commercial, industrial, or mixed-use project, or
development plan, that is submitted to the Town of Thatcher for approval or for permit.
Display Lot or Area. Outdoor areas where active sales and display activity occurs.
Drainage Way. Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, swale, or similar depression
into which surface water flows.
D
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.11
Driveway. A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling,
or other structure.
Duplex. A building designed as a single structure, on a single lot and under one (1) ownership,
containing two (2) separate living units, each of which is designed to be occupied as a separate
residence for one (1) family totally separated from the other and with its own separate, private
means of ingress.
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building or buildings designed exclusively for occupancy by two
(2) or more families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Single Family. A building containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
Dwelling Unit. A room or group of rooms within a building providing permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation that is designed to be occupied exclusively by
a single housekeeping unit.
Easement. A grant by a property owner of the use of land by the general public, a corporation,
or a certain person or persons for the specific uses and purposes designated.
Elevation.
1. A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level.
2. A flat scale drawing of the front, rear, or side of a building.
Excavation. Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil, rocks, minerals, mineral
substances, or organic substances other than vegetation from water or land on or beneath the
surface thereof or beneath the land surface whether exposed or submerged.
Exhibit. Any graphic representation noted as Exhibit within this Ordinance that is used to
illustrate and exemplify certain standards and regulations contained within the language of this
Ordinance. If an exhibit and text of the Ordinance conflict, the written text of the Ordinance
shall control.
Existing Verticality. Any existing monopole, public safety communications tower, recreational
light pole, street light pole, traffic signal pole, electric utility pole or tower, water tower, lattice
tower, or exhaust stack. Existing verticality does not include a building.
Exterior Wall. Any wall that defines the exterior boundaries of a building or structure.
E
F
Page A.12 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Facade. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons
not within the building.
Factory-built Building. A residential or nonresidential building including a dwelling unit or
habitable room thereof that is either wholly or in substantial part manufactured at an off-site
location to be assembled on-site, except that it does not include a manufactured home,
recreational vehicle or mobile home as defined elsewhere in this Glossary.
Family. A family is:
1. An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, or
2. A group of not more than five (5) persons, who need not be related, living
together as a single, housekeeping unit within a dwelling.
3. Functional Family (as defined in this Glossary).
Farm/Agriculture. An agricultural use, and all accessory structures customarily associated with
such use, where the growing and harvesting of field, tree or bush crops including flowers takes
place, which may or may not be owner-occupied but may utilize employees who are not owners
or family of the owners. Does not include: dairies, concentrated animal feeding operations
(CAFO), slaughter and meat packing plants, or fertilizer yards.
FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, metal or combination of
materials erected to enclose, screen or separate areas but not including hedges, shrubs trees or
other natural growth.
Findings. A written statement of facts, conclusions and determinations based on the evidence
presented in relation to the approval criteria and prepared by the approval authority in support
of a decision.
Flood (terms specifically related to floods/flooding).
1. Base Flood. The flood having a one-percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
2. Flood or Flooding. A temporary inundation of land not normally covered by
water due to unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source, or a rise in flow or stage of any stream or watercourse that result in
water overtopping its banks and adjacent areas that are not normally covered by
water.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.13
3. Flood Hazard Zone. Any land area partially or wholly within a delineated
floodplain susceptible to flood related damage as designated on the Flood
Management Maps. Such flood hazard zones may include, but not be limited to,
areas highly susceptible to erosion, stream meander sensitivity, moveable bed,
scour, wave action, and subsidence.
4. Floodplain. The relatively flat areas or low lands adjoining the channel of a
watercourse, or areas where drainage is or may be restricted by man-made
structures which have been or may be covered partially or wholly by flood water,
but shall compose an area not less than that area confined by the Fifty (50) Year
Flood and shall not exceed that area confined by the One hundred (100) Year
Flood.
5. Floodplain Administrator. The Graham County Floodplain Administrator.
6. Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas necessary in order to discharge the one-hundred (100) year flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
Fowl. Domesticated birds to include only chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, peacocks
and peahens.
Fraternal Organization. A group of people formally organized for a common interest, usually
cultural, religious or entertainment, with regular meetings, rituals and formal written membership
requirements.
Frontage. The length of any one-property line that abuts a legally accessible street right-of-way.
Functional Family. Not more than five (5) persons, plus their offspring, adopted and/or
foster children who have a relationship functionally equivalent to a family. The relationship
must be of a permanent nature and demonstrate a bonded, cohesive unit. A functional family
will be presumed to exist where the group shares the whole house, prepares and eats meals
together, and shares household chores and household expenses. The presumption may be
rebutted. Functional family does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association,
lodge, organization or group of students or other individuals where the common living
arrangement or basis for the establishment of the housekeeping unit is temporary.
Garage, Private. A building, or portion thereof, in which only motor vehicles used by the
tenants of the building, or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
Garage, Public. A building, other than a private garage, designed and used for the short term
parking of motor vehicles and is available for use by the general public.
G
Page A.14 Appendix A: (insert document name)
General Plan. A comprehensive plan pursuant to A.R.S. ?9-461.05, providing for the future
growth and improvement of the Town of Thatcher and for the general location of streets,
schools and recreation areas, public building sites, and other physical development, and
including any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan, or parts
thereof.
Grade, Finished. The final elevation of the ground surface after development in conformance
with the approved grading plans.
Grade, Natural. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before man-made
alterations.
Group Home. A single dwelling unit shared as their primary residence by handicapped and/or
elderly persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in which staff persons provide onsite
care, meals, supervision, and other support services for the residents. Group homes shall
not include assisted living facilities, nursing homes, shelter care facilities, recovery homes,
community correctional facilities, or homes for the developmentally disabled as regulated by the
Arizona Revised Statutes.
Guest Quarters. A permanent accessory structure used for the temporary housing of family
members and non-paying guests.
Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this
Ordinance, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
Home Occupation. A business activity conducted as an accessory use to a dwelling unit by the
permanent residents thereof, in compliance with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance.
Hospital. An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to
persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other
abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution,
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
Hotel. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and in which
ingress and egress to and from all guest rooms are made through an inside lobby or office.
Hotels may provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation
facilities.
Housekeeping Unit. Any number of related persons living together within a single dwelling
unit; provided, however, that it shall not include a group of more than five (5) persons who are
unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption.
H
I
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.15
Impervious Surface. Impervious surfaces are those that do not absorb water. They consist of
all buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas of concrete of asphalt. In
the case of lumberyards, areas of stored lumber constitute impervious surfaces.
Junk. Scrap metals and their alloys and bones, used cloth, rubber, rope, tinfoil, bottles, old or
machinery, tools, appliances, fixtures, utensils, lumber, boxes or crates, pipe or pipe fittings,
tires, and other manufactured goods that are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them
unusable in their existing condition, but are subject to being dismantled.
Junk Automobile. See Abandoned or Junk Motor Vehicle.
Junkyard. Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for the storage,
collection, processing, purchase, sale, keeping, baling, packing, disassembly, exchange, or
abandonment of junk, waste paper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods,
materials, machinery or two (2) or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other type of
junk but does not include uses confined entirely within enclosed buildings.
Kennel. Any establishment, pursuant to Town Code or A.R.S., at which dogs, cats, or other
small animals are either privately or commercially cared for, bred, boarded, or trained; does not
include veterinary hospitals or humane societies.
Landscaping. Shall consist of any of the following or combinations thereof: material such as,
but not limited to, organic and inorganic ground covers, vegetation and irrigation, hardscape,
walls or fences that may be calculated as open space but excluding paving (refer to the definition of
Open Space ).
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED). An independent certification
program that provides voluntary guidelines for developing high-performance, sustainable
buildings. Created by the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC), the program awards varying
levels of certification to buildings that meet LEED rating standards in five major categories:
sustainable site development, water savings, energy efficiency, materials selection, and indoor
environmental quality.
Livestock. See Agricultural Animals.
Live/Work Unit. An integrated housing unit and place of business within a building that has
been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work
J
K
L
Page A.16 Appendix A: (insert document name)
activity. It differs from a Home Occupation in that it allows for outside employees and
signage for the business.
Loading Space. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to
a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
Lodging House. Any building or portion thereof, containing not more than five (5) guest
rooms that are used by no more than five (5) guests, where rent is paid in money, goods, labor
or otherwise.
Lot. A single piece of property located in a recorded subdivision. A lot also includes a parcel of
land, shown in the records of the Graham County Assessors Office, divided to be used
separately from other parcels of property by description, as on a recorded survey map, or by
metes and bounds, for purposes of sale, lease, or separate use in a legal manner pursuant to all
state, county, and Town requirements for the development and proposed use of that property.
Lot Area. The total area within the boundary lines of a lot.
Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
Lot Coverage. The percentage of the area of a lot that is occupied by all buildings or other
covered structures using the roof outline for all outer dimensions.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot, with frontage only on one (1) street.
Lot, Key. A lot adjacent to a corner lot having its side lot line in common with the rear lot line
of the corner lot and fronting on the street that forms the side boundary of the corner lot.
Lot Line. A line of record bounding a lot that divides one (1) lot from another lot or from a
public or private street or any other public space.
Lot Line, Front.
1. Corner Lot. The front lot line shall be the narrowest of the two lines adjoining a
street right-of-way. Where lines are equal, the front lines shall be that line that is
obviously the front by reason of the prevailing frontage of the other lots on the
block. If such front is not evident, then either may be considered the front of the
lot but not both.
2. Interior Lot. The front lot line shall be the line separating the lot from the street
right-of-way.
3. Through Lot. The front lot line shall be that line that is obviously the front by
reason of the prevailing frontage of the other buildings on the block.
4. Combined Lots. Where two (2) or more lots are used as a building site and where
the main building crosses lot lines, then the entire area shall be considered as one
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.17
(1) lot, except that the front of the parcel shall be determined to be the front of
the individual lots as originally platted or laid out.
Lot Line, Rear. A lot line that is opposite to and most distant from the front lot line. In the
case of a corner lot, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the rear lot line. In the case of an
irregular or triangular shaped lot, a lot line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to and at
the maximum distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot, Through. A lot that fronts upon two (2) parallel streets, or that fronts upon two (2) streets
that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot (also known as a double frontage lot). On
such lot, both lot lines are front, except that where a non-access easement has been established
on such a lot, the front lot line shall be considered as that lot line most distant from the lot line
containing the non-access easement.
Lot Width.
1. For rectangular lots, lots having side lot lines not parallel, and
lots on the outside of the curve of a street, the distance between
side lot lines measured at the required minimum front yard
setback line on a line parallel to the street or street chord.
2. For lots on the inside of the curve of a street,
the distance between side lot lines measured
at the required minimum front yard setback
line on a line parallel to the street or street
chord.
Low Impact Development (LID). An alternative site design strategy that uses natural and
engineered infiltration and storage techniques to control storm water where it is generated. LID
combines conservation practices with distributed storm water source controls and pollution
prevention to maintain or restore watershed functions.
Maintain. To cause or allow to continue in existence; when the context indicates, maintain
shall mean to preserve and care for a structure, improvement, conditions or area so that it
remains attractive, safe and presentable and caries out the purposes for which it was installed,
constructed or required.
Manufactured Home or Housing. A residential dwelling built in accordance with and
certified as a manufactured home under the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976, and the laws of the State of
Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing.
M
chord
setback line
lot width
Lot B
Lot A
lot width
setback line
chord
Page A.18 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Manufactured Home Park (land lease) Development. A residential development, typified
by single ownership of the land within the development, approved pursuant to this Ordinance
for placement of manufactured homes used for residential purposes.
Manufactured Home Space. A plot of ground within a manufactured home park (land lease)
development designed for the accommodation of one (1) manufactured home with an annual
lease.
Manufactured Home Subdivision Development. A development that meets the
requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance and this Ordinance for the placement of a
manufactured home on an individual lot.
Medical Marijuana. Means of all parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, and the
seed of such plants that may be administered to treat or alleviate a qualifying patients debilitating
medical condition or symptoms associated with the patients debilitating medical condition.
Medical Marijuana Cultivation. The process by which a person grows a marijuana plant. A
facility shall mean a building, structure or premises used for the cultivation or storage of medical
marijuana that is physically separate and off-site from a medical marijuana dispensary.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary. A non-profit entity as defined in A.R.S.36-2801(11), that
sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses, or otherwise provide medical marijuana to
qualifying patients.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location. The one (1) additional
location, if any, duly identified pursuant to A.R.S.36-2806(E) during the process of registering a
nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary, where marijuana will be cultivated for sale at a
nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary duly registered and certified pursuant to A.R.S. 36-
2804.
Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient. A person who has been diagnosed by a physician as
having a debilitating medical condition as defined in A.R.S.36-2801.13.
Mixed-use Structure. A single building containing more than one (1) type of land use or a
single development of more than one (1) building and use, where the different types of land uses
are in close proximity, planned as a unified complementary whole, and functionally integrated to
the use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas.
Mobile Home. A residential dwelling that was fabricated or built prior to enactment of the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards.
Mobile Home Park. A plot of land divided into spaces for exclusive mobile home use on a
short-term or rental basis. (Grandfathered land use/development under the previous Zoning
Ordinance and old Zoning Districts C-MH and/or MHS).
Mobile Home Subdivision. A plot of land subdivided into lots to be sold for mobile home
use exclusively. Expressly prohibited for residential purposes are buses, recreational vehicles,
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.19
motor homes, campers, trailers and other similar vehicles. (Grandfathered land
use/development under the previous Zoning Ordinance and old Zoning Districts C-MH
and/or MHS).
Modular Home. A structure intended for residential use and manufactured off-site in accord
with the Uniform Building Code (UBC) and/or International Building Code (IBC) as adopted by
the Town of Thatcher. (See Factory-built Building).
Monopole. A facility used exclusively for WCF mounts and is self-supporting with a single
shaft of steel, concrete or wood.
Motel. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or rooming units, each of
which maintains a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building. Such
building or group of buildings being designed, intended, or used primarily for the
accommodation of automobile travelers, and provide automobile parking conveniently located
on the premises. Motels include motor courts, motor lodges and tourist courts, but not mobile
home parks or recreational vehicle parks.
Motor Home. Any vehicular type unit thirty-five (35) feet or less in length and eight (8) feet or
less in width, primarily designed as temporary living quarters for camping or travel use.
Net Acres. The total acreage of a tract or parcel of land exclusive of the area existing or
required for arterial or collector street right-of-way dedications and school/public site
reservations. When calculating residential net acres within a Traditional Neighborhood
Development (TND) any commercial and industrial zoned land must be excluded in addition to
those uses listed above.
Nonconforming Lot. A parcel of land having less area, frontage or dimensions than required
in the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Structures. A building or structure, or portion thereof, lawfully erected or
altered that, no longer conforms to a subsequently established district or district regulation for
which the building or structure is located.
Nonconforming Uses. (see Article 19) A use of land that:
1. Legally existed before its current zoning or land use category designation; and
2. Has been maintained continuously since the time the applicable regulations
governing the land changed; and
3. Because of subsequent changes, does not conform to this Ordinance or General
Plan provisions that now govern the land.
N
Page A.20 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Nurseries, Retail. The use of the land, buildings, or structures for the retail sales of plant
materials, landscape materials, gardening supplies and fertilizer, excluding growth and
production of plant materials and wholesaling of nursery materials.
Nursery School. A school or the use of a site or a portion of a site for an organized program
devoted to the education or day care of five (5) or more children of elementary school age or
younger, and not related to the proprietor, for periods of more than one (1) hour but less than
twenty-four (24) hours per day for compensation. This includes child care centers.
Nursing Home. A nursing home is an extended health care facility licensed by the State of
Arizona that provides lodging, meals, personal services, and skilled nursing and medical care on
a long term basis to individuals who, because of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are
unable to care for themselves.
Occupancy or Occupied. The residing of an individual or individuals overnight in a dwelling
unit, or the installation, storage or use of equipment, merchandise or machinery in any public,
commercial or industrial building.
Occupant. The individual or individuals in actual possession of a premise.
Office. A place where a particular kind of business is transacted or a service is supplied,
excluding retailing, according to the following:
1. A place in which functions, such as consulting, record keeping, or clerical work
are performed, or
2. A place in which a professional person (e.g. a physician or lawyer) conducts
professional services.
Off-Street Parking Space. A parking space designed for a motor vehicle that is directly
accessible to an access aisle, and is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
Open Space. Any parcel or area of land or water unimproved or improved and set aside,
dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and
enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
Open Space, Common. Land within or related to a development, and such area is owned in
common by all property owners in that development, which is designed and intended for the
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and may include such
complimentary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate.
Open Space, Private. Common open space held in private ownership, the use of which is
normally limited to the occupants of a single dwelling or building.
O
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.21
Open Space, Public. An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a municipality,
municipal agency, school district, state or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
Open Space, Usable. Land that can be actively used by people. This could include landscaped
or hardscaped plazas, paseos and promenades, fountains and sitting areas meant to provide an
open park like atmosphere. Also playgrounds, golf courses, bicycle trails (but not bike lanes),
pedestrian trails (not residential sidewalks), and trail heads. Usable open space does not include
parking areas and vacant or undeveloped lots.
Outdoor Lighting.
1. Candela. A unit of luminous intensity equal to one-sixtieth (1/16) of the
luminous intensity of one (1) square centimeter of a black body surface at the
solidification temperature of platinum.
2. Class 1 Lighting. All outdoor lighting used for, but not limited to: outdoor
sales or eating areas; entrance canopies on retail buildings; assembly or repair
areas; advertising and other signs; recreational facilities; amphitheaters and other
similar applications where color rendition is important to preserve the
effectiveness of the activity.
3. Class 2 Lighting. All outdoor lighting used where general illumination for
safety or security of the premises is the primary concern. Used for, but not
limited to: illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking lots,
outdoor security.
4. Class 3 Lighting. Any outdoor lighting used for decorative effects including,
but not limited to: architectural illumination; flag and monument lighting;
illumination of landscaping.
5. Class 4 Lighting. Lighting used for horticultural activities (also called
assimilation lighting).
6. Direct Illumination. Illumination resulting from light emitted directly from a
lamp or luminaire, not light diffused through translucent signs or reflected from
other surfaces (such as the ground or building faces).
7. Full Cut-Off Light Fixture. A fixture constructed (or shielded with an opaque
material) so that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or
indirectly from the fixture, are projected only below a horizontal plane running
through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.
8. Installed Lighting. The attachment or assembly fixed in place, whether or not
connected, to a power source of any outdoor light fixture.
9. Lighting Areas. All lighting areas as defined on the Graham County Lighting
Area Map, that is, hereby made a part of this Ordinance by reference.
Page A.22 Appendix A: (insert document name)
10. Lumen. The unit of luminous flux equal to the light emitted in a unit solid angle
by a uniform point source of one (1) candle intensity.
11. Luminaire. A luminaire consists of the complete lighting assembly, less the
support assembly. For purposes of determining total light output from a
luminaire lighting assembly that includes multiple unshielded or full cut-off
lamps on a single pole or standard, the multiple assembly shall be considered as a
single unit. Two (2) or more units with lamps less than three (3) feet apart shall
be considered a single luminaire.
12. Multi-Class Lighting. Any outdoor lighting used for more than one purpose
(such as security and decoration) such that its use falls under the definition of
two (2) or more classes as defined for Class 1, 2, 3 and 4 lighting.
13. Opaque. Impervious to the passage of light and not reflecting light.
14. Outdoor Light Fixture. An outdoor illuminating device, outdoor lighting or
reflective surface, lamp or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used
for illumination or advertisement including the complete lighting unit consisting
of a lamp or lamps and ballast(s) (when applicable) together with the parts
designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps and to connect
the lamps to the power supply.
15. Temporary Lighting. Lighting that does not conform to the provisions of this
Ordinance and that will not be used for more than one (1) thirty (30) day period
within a calendar year with one (1) thirty (30) day extension. Temporary lighting
is intended for uses that, by their nature are of limited duration, e.g. holiday
decorations, civic events or construction projects.
16. Total Outdoor Light Output. The total amount of light measured in lumens
from all lamps installed in outdoor lighting fixtures.
Outdoor Sales. The display of products or services that are intended for retail or wholesale
purchase not within a completely enclosed building.
Outdoor Storage. The location of any goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, junk, debris,
or any other item outside of a completely enclosed building for a continuous period longer than
twenty-four (24) hours.
Over-The-Air Reception Device. An antenna: 1) Designed to receive direct broadcast satellite
service, including direct-to-home satellite services, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals
via satellite and that is one meter (39.37 Inches) or less in diameter, or 2) Used to receive video
programming services via multipoint distribution services, including multi-channel multipoint
distribution services, instructional television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution
services, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other than via satellite and that is one
meter (39.37 Inches) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement, or 3) Designed to receive
television broadcast signals. For purposes of this definition, Fixed Wireless Signals means any
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.23
commercial non-broadcast communications signals transmitted via wireless technology to
and/or from a fixed customer location, but shall not include among other things, AM radio, FM
radio, amateur (Ham) radio, citizens band (CB) radio, and digital audio radio service
(DARS) signals.
Parapet. That part of any wall extending above the roof line.
Parking Aisle. The travel way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
Parking Lot. An off-street, ground-level area, surfaced and improved for the temporary
storage of more than four (4) motor vehicles.
Parking Space. An unobstructed space or area other than an street or alley for the parking of
one (1) motor vehicle.
Plan, General. The Thatcher General Plan together with any supplements thereto.
Plant Nurseries and Greenhouses. The use of the land, buildings, or structures for the
growth and production of flowers, plants and trees for transplanting or wholesale. It may also
include, as accessory to the above activities, the sale of materials commonly used for landscaping
purposes, such as soil, rock, bark, mulch and other materials determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be landscaping materials.
Plat. A map that provides for changes in land use or ownership.
Plat, Final. A final map of all of a subdivision, including supporting data, in substantial
conformance to an approved preliminary plat and all conditions placed upon it by the
Commission or Council, prepared by a registered land surveyor, in accordance with this
Ordinance and the Arizona Revised Statutes.
Plat, Preliminary. A preliminary map, including supporting data, indicating a proposed
subdivision design, prepared by a registered civil engineer and a registered land surveyor, in
accordance with this Ordinance and the Arizona Revised Statutes. A preliminary site plan for a
condominium development shall be considered a preliminary plat.
Principal Use. The main or primary use on any lot or parcel that establishes the basic land use
characteristics of the property, as opposed to an accessory use. In some instances, a property
may have more than one (1) principal use.
Produce Stand (Farmers Market). A temporary open-air stand or place for the seasonal
selling of agricultural produce. A produce stand must be portable and capable of being
dismantled or removed from the sales site.
Protected Development Right. The right to undertake and complete the development and
use of property under the terms and conditions of a Protected Development Right Plan, without
P
Page A.24 Appendix A: (insert document name)
compliance with subsequent changes in zoning regulations and development standards during
the term of the Protected Development Right, except as provided by A.R.S.?9-1204.
Protected Development Right Plan. A development plan identified as a Protected
Development Right Plan at the time of the Landowners submission, that, if approved by the
Council, grants to the Landowner a Protected Development Right to undertake and complete
development and use of the property as shown thereon for a specified period of time.
Recreational Facilities, Indoor. Establishments providing indoor amusement or recreation.
Typical uses include: martial arts studios, billiard and pool halls, electronic and coin-operated
game rooms, bowling alleys, skating rinks, and health and fitness establishments.
Recreational Facilities, Outdoor. Long term facilities designed for providing outdoor
amusement, entertainment and active recreation whether publicly or privately owned including
but not limited to baseball including batting cages, soccer, football, golf including miniature golf,
tennis, swimming pools, skateboard parks, amusement parks, and racetracks of any sort.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicular type unit eight (8) feet or less in width and forty (40) feet or
less in length, primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel
use and not designed for permanent residential or commercial purposes that:
1. Contains its own motive power as in the case of motor homes, mini-motor
homes, or recreational vans;
2. Is drawn by another vehicle as in the case of travel trailers, tent trailers, camper
trailers, or water craft on boat trailers; or
3. Is mounted on another vehicle as in the case of truck campers.
Recreational Vehicle Park. An integrated land-lease development, in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance, where recreational vehicles are used for temporary residential
purposes.
Recreational Vehicle Space. A parcel of land that is designated and intended for the
accommodation of one (1) recreational vehicle on a short-term basis.
Rental Unit. Any housing unit that, is occupied pursuant to a lawful rental agreement, oral or
written, express or implied, which was not owned as a condominium unit or cooperative unit on
the effective date of this Ordinance.
Religious Institution. A permanently located building or group of buildings or structure
wherein people regularly assemble for religious worship and that is maintained and controlled by
a religious body to sustain public worship and religious uses.
R
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.25
Replacement WCF Electric Utility Pole. A pole erected in place of an existing electric utility
pole, to be used for both wireless communications facilities (WCF) and electric utility
purposes.
Resort. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms providing outdoor
recreational activities such as golf, tennis, horseback riding or swimming for guests. A resort
may provide services customarily furnished by a hotel including restaurant, bar and convention
facilities. A resort may contain dwelling units in conjunction with guest rooms
Restaurant. An establishment where meals are prepared and served to the public for
consumption on the premises entirely.
Retention Basin. A stormwater storage facility that stores surface runoff.
Right-of-Way. The area between boundary lines of street or other dedicated area.
Roadway. That portion of a road or alley right-of-way that is improved for vehicular traffic and
is narrower in width than the right-of-way.
Roof. A continuous solid sheathing top covering on a structure that provides protection from
rain, wind, sun or other natural elements.
Satellite Dish Antenna. An antenna circular or parabolic in shape designed to receive or
transmit electromagnetic transmissions from or to an earth satellite.
Satellite Dish Antenna, Large. Satellite dish antennas two meters (6 Feet, 7 Inches) in
diameter, not otherwise classified as satellite earth stations shall be defined as Large Satellite
Dish Antennas for purposes of this Ordinance.
Satellite Earth Station. A station equipped with transmitters, receivers, antennas, and other
equipment for receiving and transmitting communications from satellites, and for processing
communications over a terrestrial distribution system.
School, Elementary, Junior High, High School, College, or Junior College. Public and
other non-profit institutions conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten,
elementary, secondary, and tertiary levels. Such institutions shall offer general academic
instructions equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education or the State
Board of Regents.
School, Private or Parochial. An institution conducting regular academic instruction at
kindergarten, elementary, secondary, and tertiary levels operated by a nongovernmental
organization.
S
Page A.26 Appendix A: (insert document name)
School, Trade. Schools offering instruction in the technical, commercial or trade skills, such as
real estate schools, business colleges, electronic schools, automotive and aircraft technician
schools and similar commercial establishments operated by a nongovernmental organization.
Screen Wall. A barrier that functions to shield, protect, or conceal.
Service Station. See Automobile Service Station.
Setback. The required minimum distance between a structure and a property line(s) of a parcel
of land or other established reference point. When the property abuts a dedicated right-of-way,
the distance shall be measured from the dedicated right-of-way line. When the property abuts a
private street, the distance shall be measured from the back of the tract or easement used for the
private access way. When the property abuts a street which is shown on the General Plan Street
Classification Map, but for which right-of-way does not yet exist, the setback shall be measured
from the future right-of-way, as determined by using the street classification shown in the
General Plan and the typical street sections of the Subdivision Ordinance. In such cases, the
Zoning Administrator will determine the setback requirement(s).
Sight Triangle. A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street or alley intersections
in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or
obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
Sign. Any object, display, structure, or devise (including but not limited to letters, words,
numerals, figures, symbols, pictures, outline, character, trademark, logo, or any part or
combination) used for visual communication that is intended to attract the attention of the
public by providing identification, advertising or directional information for a specific business,
service, product, person, organization, place or building and is visible from the public rights-ofway
or other properties.
The term sign shall also mean and include any trademark or logo displayed for the purpose of
commercial identification or attraction.
The term sign shall not include any national or state flags, window displays, athletic score
boards or the official announcement or signs of government.
1. Sign, Abandoned. A sign that no longer identifies or advertises bona fide
business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity, and/or for which no legal
sign owner can be found.
2. Sign, Animated. Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position by
any movement, rotation or undulation or by the movement of any light used in
conjunction with a sign such as blinking, traveling, flashing or changing degree of
intensity of any light movement other than burning continuously.
3. Sign, Awning/Canopy. A sign on a traditional canvas awning and/or a sign on
the edge of a structural canopy that is otherwise permitted by this Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.27
4. Sign, Balloons/Inflatable Device. One (1) or more balloons or a lighter than
air or gas filled inflatable object attached by a tether to a fixed place used as a
temporary sign or as a means of directing attention to: any business or
profession; a commodity or service sold, offered, or manufactured; or to any
entertainment.
5. Sign, Banner. Any sign consisting of fabric, plastic, paper, or other light pliable
material not enclosed in a rigid frame.
6. Sign, Billboard. Same as Off-Site, sign.
7. Sign, Business. A sign that attracts attention to a business or profession
conducted on-site, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured
on-site, or to an entertainment offered on-site.
8. Sign, Community. The Town of Thatcher Welcome Signs and the integrated
public service club(s) sign/panels.
9. Sign, Construction. A temporary sign, limited to the period of construction,
erected on a premises of an existing construction project, and designating the
architect, contractor, designer, engineer, financier, or name and nature of the
project.
10. Sign, Directional. Signs limited to directional messages that, do not contain
identification or advertising copy, which aid the flow of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic as well as providing directional information relating to points of interest,
institutions, facilities and districts.
11. Sign, Electronic Message. A variable-message sign that utilizes computergenerated
messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These
signs include displays using incandescent lamps. LEDs, LCDs or a flipper matrix.
12. Sign, Freestanding Monument. A sign that includes, as copy, only the name
of the business, place, facility, organization, building, or person it identifies.
13. Sign, Illuminated. A sign with the surface artificially lighted; either internally or
externally.
14. Sign, Marquee. A sign that is usually defined as any movie-type marquee with
changeable copy. Marquee signs are considered permanent signs. A marquee is
defined as a permanent canopy structure constructed of rigid materials that are
attached to and supported by the building and that projects over the entrance to
a building.
15. Sign, Menu Board. A sign displaying the bill of fare of a restaurant.
Page A.28 Appendix A: (insert document name)
16. Sign, Nonconforming. A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the
adoption of this Ordinance that does not conform with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
17. Sign, Off-Site. A sign that directs attention for a commercial purpose to a
business, commodity, a service, entertainment, product or attraction that is not
sold, offered, or existing on the property where the sign is located.
18. Sign, Parapet. A sign attached to that portion of a buildings exterior wall that
projects above the plate line of the building.
19. Sign, Pole. A sign that is supported by a pole and otherwise separated from the
ground by air. Like monument signs, pole signs are separate from a building.
20. Sign, Political. A temporary sign that supports any candidate for public office
or urges action for or against any matter on the ballot of primary, general or
special elections.
21. Sign, Portable. A temporary sign not affixed to a structure or ground mounted
on a site. It rests on the ground and consists of two (2) sign faces.
22. Sign, Projecting. A sign attached to a building or other structure and extending
in whole or in part more than fourteen (14) inches beyond the building or other
structure.
23. Sign, Reader Panel. A sign designed to permit immediate change of copy using
individual letters, not electronic or digital in nature, for use only by churches,
schools and municipalities.
24. Sign, Roof. A sign erected on, above, or over the roof of a building so that it
projects above the highest point of the roofline, parapet, or fascia.
25. Sign, Shingle. A sign suspended from, and located entirely under a covered
porch, covered walkway, or an awning and is anchored or rigidly hung to prevent
the sign from swinging due to wind movement.
26. Sign, Wall. A sign fastened to or painted on the exterior wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or
forms the background surface of the sign.
27. Sign, Window. Any poster, cut-out letters, painted text or graphic, or other text
or visual presentation affixed to the interior or exterior of a window, or placed
within six (6) feet behind a window pane, and is placed to be read from the
exterior of a building. This does not include any item of merchandise normally
displayed within a show window of a merchant.
Site. The land area designated for development, exclusive of any right-of-way. The land area
may be a portion of a lot, a single lot, or consist of more than one (1) lot.
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.29
Site Built Dwelling. A structure or dwelling constructed on the site by craftsmen utilizing
materials delivered to the site. Said structure shall consist of footings and foundations poured in
place and solidly attached to the walls. Roofing materials, interior and exterior finishes shall be
applied on the site. All construction shall be in conformance with all building codes in force at
the time of construction. This definition does not include relocated site built homes.
Site Plan. The development plan for one (1) or more lots on which is shown the existing and
proposed conditions of the lot including: topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains, marshes
and waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping,
structures and signs, lighting and screening devices; any other information that reasonably may
be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
Slope. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or
degrees, or as a ratio.
Street. Any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, bridge,
viaduct, or easement for public vehicular access, or a street shown in a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law, or a street in a plat duly filed and recorded in the Graham County Recorder's
Office. Street includes all land within the street right-of-way, whether improved or unimproved,
and includes such improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking
spaces, bridges and viaducts, bike lanes, pedestrian facilities, utility areas, and other such design
features.
Street, Arterial. A street so designated on the Traffic Circulation Plan as a principal arterial
street or minor arterial street as classified in the Thatcher General Plan whose primary function
is to carry traffic between and through major traffic generators, have signalized intersections and
restricted parking.
Street, Collector. A street so designated on the Traffic Circulation Plan in the Thatcher
General Plan whose primary function is to carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets and
whose secondary function is to provide access to abutting properties.
Street, Frontage. A local street parallel and adjacent to an arterial street that provides access to
abutting property, intercepts other local streets and controls access to the arterial street.
Street, Local. A local street permits direct access to abutting lands, traffic movements within
neighborhoods, and connections to the collector and arterial street system.
Street, Major. A principal traffic route for contiguous streets that is also a means of access to
arterial streets.
Streetscape. A design term referring to all the elements between the buildings on either side of
the street that, as a group, define its character, including building frontage/faade, street paving,
landscaping (including trees and other plantings), sidewalks, street furniture (benches, kiosks,
trash receptacles, fountains etc.) signs, awnings and colonnades, and street lighting.
Page A.30 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached
to something having location on the ground.
Temporary Structure. A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed
when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected
has ceased. Except for temporary structures permitted pursuant to this Ordinance, a structure
intended to be used or actually used for longer than six (6) months is not a temporary structure.
Temporary Wireless Communications Facility. Any type WCF utilized on a temporary
basis, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days, and may include a vehicle- or trailermounted
facility.
Tenant. Any person who occupies or has a leasehold interest in a rental unit under a lawful
rental agreement whether oral or written, express or implied (per A.R.S. 33-1310).
Theater. A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic,
musical or live performances.
Theater, Drive-In. An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing
of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid-admission basis to patrons seated in
automobiles.
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting
one (1) or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including
monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, and digital and/or cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and the like. The term also includes the structure and any support thereto. Latticetype
structures or structures that require the use of guy wires are strongly discouraged.
Town. The Town of Thatcher.
Town Council. The Town of Thatcher Town Council.
Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND). A development in which flexibility can be
permitted in the zoning standards, in order to encourage more creativity, a mix of land uses and
densities, and sustainable design, and thereby providing usable open spaces within and about the
development and enhancing the overall character of the Town.
Transmitting Facilities. Buildings, structures or land used for the above-ground transmission
or reception of airborne radio or television signals include all transmitting or receiving towers,
dishes, and antennae, but not including accessory antennae or dishes. Transmitting facilities
shall not include wireless communications facilities.
Truck Terminal. A location or facility for the receipt, transfer, short-term storage, and
dispatching of goods transported by truck. Included in the use type would be express or other
T
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.31
mail and package distribution facilities, including such facilities operated by the U.S. Post Office
and includes related administrative offices, fueling facilities, dispatch operations and loading
facilities.
Truck Yard. A location where commercial vehicles such as semi-tractors and trailers are stored
when not in use and may include related administrative offices, repair facilities, fueling facilities,
dispatch operations but does not include the transshipment of cargo. Commercial vehicles
include any vehicles over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle rating and/or having more than two (2)
axles.
Use. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or
for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained.
Use Permit. A permit required of this Ordinance for uses that may be permissible under the
circumstances of a specific case, but where the use in general may not be permitted.
Use, Principal. The main or primary purpose for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Use, Temporary. A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue
such use upon the expiration of the time period as regulated by this Ordinance.
Utility Facilities. Buildings, structures, or land used by a utility, railroad, or governmental
agency for uses such as, but not necessarily limited to, water or sewerage treatment plants or
pumping stations, substations, telephone exchanges, and resource recovery facilities, but not
including land, buildings, or structures used solely for storage and maintenance of equipment
and materials. Utility Facilities shall not include wireless communications facilities.
Utility, Public. Any agency under public franchise or ownership, or under certificate of
convenience and necessity that provides the public with electric, gas, heat, communication, rail
transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service.
Utility Services. Service to the public of water, sewer, electric, gas, communications, cable
television, drainage, flood control, or other facilities, owned and operated by any person, firm,
corporation, municipal department or board, duly authorized by State or Municipal regulations.
The foregoing shall be deemed to include facilities and appurtenances to the above uses but shall
not include public utility treatment and generating plants or offices.
Vehicle Sales. The use of any building, land area, or other premises for the display and sale of
new or used automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreational vehicles and including any
warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use.
U
V
Page A.32 Appendix A: (insert document name)
Wholesale. The bulk sale of goods generally for resale to a person other than the direct
consumer.
Wireless Communications Facility (WCF). An unstaffed facility for the transmission and
reception of personal wireless services radio or microwave signals as defined and regulated by
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and any amendments thereto. Personal wireless services
includes commercial mobile services, common carrier wireless exchange access services, and
unlicensed wireless services, but not direct-to-home satellite services wireless communications
facilities are composed of two or more of the following components:
1. Antenna
2. Support Structure
3. Equipment Cabinet or Building
4. Fencing or Security Barrier.
Yard. An open area at grade level between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied
and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided in this Ordinance.
Yard, Front. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the
full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the building
projected to the side lines of the lot.
Yard, Rear. An open space on the same lot with a main building between the rear line of the
building and the rear line of the lot extending the full width of the lot. The rear yard shall always
be opposite the front yard.
Yard, Side. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building situated between
the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any
lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side lot line. An interior side yard is
defined as the side yard adjacent to a common lot line.
Zoning. The dividing of the Town into districts or zones and the establishment of regulations
of governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings within each zone or
district.
W
Y
Z
Zoning Ordinance  June 2013
Appendix A: (inset document name) Page A.33
Zoning Administrator. The staff/official responsible for the administration and interpretation
of the Zoning Ordinance.
Zoning Clearance. The approval by the Zoning Administrator of a plan that is in
conformance with this Ordinance.
Zoning District. A portion of the Town within which certain uniform regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Code
Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Thatcher.
(End of Glossary)